39
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
batch-release procedure ensures alignment on the data to be reviewed and ensures clarity for any unique 
aspects associated with the TT process and RU site, such as use tests or electronic batch records. 
In this stage, the Quality function also should establish role requirements for product release to deter-
mine if a qualified person or a responsible person with a specific knowledge base will be needed.
Working with Regulatory, the Quality function also develops a PAI readiness plan, which may be 
revised as additional relevant information becomes available during the Execution stage. This should 
include a strategy to respond to any observations found during mock inspections. 
The Quality function will qualify new vendors and audit high-risk and critical material suppliers in 
preparation for PPQ. 
5.4.9	 Sourcing/Supply Chain
The Sourcing/Supply Chain function orders all materials needed for the TT that have not yet been 
purchased. Materials, storage, and testing requirements are set up in the RU systems to ensure release 
by Quality for use when needed. Equipment and material needs should align with the overall project 
plan and the lead times and risks established during the Planning stage (see Section 5.2.9). 
5.4.10	 Best Practices and Additional Suggestions
Table 5.4.10-1 describes additional ideas for consideration as well as best practices for the Readiness stage.
Table 5.4.10-1	 Best Practices and Additional Suggestions for the Readiness Stage
Topic
Details
Use a risk 
management plan for 
risk mitigation
• Use a risk register to ensure all potential risks are addressed and/or a mitigation plan is in place before 
proceeding to Execution 
• Systematically address process risks based on lab or manufacturing data
Use a checklist
• Use a checklist detailing all key requirements to ensure overall process readiness
• Create and share a regulatory submission tracker
Ensure all documents 
are ready and 
approved 
• Plan adequate time to draft, review, resolve comments on, and approve documents within the project 
timeline and before each due date. Consider all plant-level documentation and quality/regulatory submission 
documentation, such as SOPs, batch records, protocols, process descriptions, specifications for product release, 
and stability documents
• Use templates where possible for consistency, and make sure authors, reviewers, and approvers are aware of 
timing expectations
Ensure all materials are 
ready and approved 
for qualification in 
next stage
• Ensure that material shipment lead times, site systems setups, tests, and release timelines meet project needs
• Identify lead times early and make receiving parties aware of timelines to test, receive, release, and set up 
ahead of Execution activities. Include adequate buffer 
• Check in with vendors regularly to eliminate surprises in shipments and receiving
Ensure all equipment 
is ready and validated 
for qualification in 
next stage
• Ensure that equipment shipment lead times, installation, and validation timelines meet project needs
• If facility modifications or equipment installation are needed, plan and coordinate use of shared resources 
(personnel and equipment) and anticipate potential impact on other processes 
• Identify lead times early and make receiving parties aware of timeline, with an adequate buffer included, 
before activities will be executed 
• Check in with vendors regularly to eliminate surprises in shipments and receiving
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

40
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
(Table 5.4.10-1 Continued)
Topic
Details
Identify all parameters 
of final recommended 
process for verification 
during next stage 
• Ensure that the final process being recommended is ready for the Execution stage, including all batch record 
instructions, SOPs, training needs, and parameters for primary, secondary, and support manufacturing systems
• Ensure that process development studies are adequate and that testing and equipment qualification meet the 
requirements of intended process, risk assessment, and procedures
• Produce a data map for process data that shows all parameters requiring control, the means of control (e.g., 
batch record, automated control, in-process test), and the means of recording
• Use the data map to enable process monitoring and to assess whether access to data in a timely manner will 
present challenges during the next stage
Perform engineering 
run on final 
commercial process
• If any final changes are made to the process, or development was not performed on the final intended 
commercial equipment, perform an engineering batch to verify the final intended process prior to proceeding 
to the next stage 
Establish a plan for 
successful regulatory 
filing 
• Plan to draft, review, and approve filing for on-time submission within the project’s timeline and launch 
requirements. This plan should be detailed in the submission tracker and regulatory strategy documents
• Plan early initiation of section authoring. Ensure that the parties responsible for authoring allow plenty of 
time for review and approval, aligned with overall project timeline
Minimize hand-offs 
between functions 
and keep personnel 
on the project 
throughout
• Ensure that personnel are adequate to proceed to the next stage and that loss of personnel in a later stage 
will not result in a gap in expertise or a hand-off between functions (e.g., different functions qualifying 
equipment, developing process, and performing qualification) 
• Avoid reliance on contractors for all project activities. If contractors are necessary, use a mix of full-time 
employees and contractors to ensure sufficient internalization of key process information within the RU 
organization
• Maintain key staffing throughout project. Use the same production personnel throughout development, 
process verification, and commercial stage, if possible
Take sufficient time at 
each stage to identify 
key requirements
• Use stage gate, risk management tools or gap analysis, and checklists to plan for all requirements and ensure 
tasks are completed prior to proceeding to the next stage 
• Formally assess risks of any open or incomplete actions within the TT Team and steering committee to 
understand the potential impact if proceeding to next stage with open items
• Fully investigate any process failures or results operating on the edge of process design and, as a team, 
identify if development needs to be revisited prior to proceeding 
Ensure supporting 
systems are ready for 
new process 
• Troubleshoot, test, and qualify key equipment for readiness to begin executing activities to ensure that 
software, change management, spare parts, cleaning, maintenance, calibration, supporting functions, and 
resources are ready for the new process 
• Test supporting systems (e.g., batch reports, release process, validated electronic systems such as SAP, and 
other inventory management controls) during engineering batches to avoid PPQ surprises
• Ensure that testing facilities have qualified or validated the analytical methods as required and will be able to 
test according to the agreed-upon schedule
Hire personnel soon 
enough to train before 
they are needed
• Ensure that functional managers and the steering committee understand the needs for resource approval, 
hiring, and training early in the project
• Hire personnel in advance of actual need to ensure time for adequate training
• Involve manufacturing operators in automation-testing, SOP preparation, batch record, and automation-
development to promote learning and allow them to gain valuable experience
Conduct operations 
training
• Finalize work instructions for the start of batch manufacturing. This activity is typically on the critical path
• Ensure operators have sufficient time to train on work instructions 
Establish batch release 
process
• Ensure alignment among Process, Quality, and Manufacturing functions on the batch release process
• Address such questions as: What batch reports will be reviewed? Will intermediates be released or processed 
straight through? Will batch records be reviewed on the floor as completed? What forms need to be approved 
and how are all requirements of the change control satisfied? Are trucks scheduled if outside normal hours?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

41
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.5	
Execution Stage
PPQ is performed in the Execution stage, during which all operational readiness and compliance require-
ments are completed to allow for manufacture at the RU. Materials are tested and released to perform 
the engineering batch and PPQ batches, as defined in the project plan and process VMP. With multiple 
execution activities taking place in this stage, the team may decide to perform several stage gates, rather 
than just one, to continually assess the results from Execution stage activities (see Section 5.5.1). 
Table 5.5-1 shows the activities and deliverables for the Execution stage, as excerpted from the Ref-
erence Guide (Figure 5.0-1). One major deliverable of the Execution stage is the submission of the 
regulatory filing. After the PPQ batches are complete, the TT Team usually will provide support for 
both the regulatory filing and the expected regulatory inspections.
5.5.1	 Business
The MAH Business function is actively engaged in defining the launch strategy, anticipating comple-
tion of PPQ batches, regulatory submission, and PAI. Business will work closely with the Sourcing/
Supply Chain function to define the use of the PPQ batches and estimated market demand. 
For the Execution stage, multiple stage gates may be used. A stage gate may be performed prior to the 
engineering run to verify readiness. Another may be conducted before PPQ to verify results of all en-
gineering and process readiness activities. Stage gates also may be executed after the engineering batch 
and PPQ if any changes to the process occur, risks are identified that must be mitigated, or additional 
studies are required. After the steering committee approves the regulatory filing, the Business function 
can proceed to the Handover stage.
5.5.2	 Technology Transfer Project Manager 
During the Execution stage, the TT PM supports the team to remove any remaining obstacles for the 
engineering and PPQ batches. The TT PM ensures that all documentation is approved and complies 
with all operational readiness requirements. All relevant change controls and deviations should be 
closed, and training should be completed.
As part of Execution, the TT PM ensures that all compliance and operational requirements have been 
met to perform PPQ with the highest probability of success. Continual communication across all 
organizational levels is essential. The TT PM also guides the SU and RU teams to define and execute 
a person-in-plant program in which SU personnel are present to support RU execution activities and 
associated training.
A key deliverable for the TT PM in the Execution stage is approval of the TT report documenting 
completion of the TT requirements defined in the TT protocol.
5.5.3	 Process
The RU Process function oversees qualification exercises including shipping validation and PPQ runs. 
Their responsibilities include investigation of process-related deviations, execution of supporting stud-
ies as defined in the process VMP, and troubleshooting. During this stage, the Process function will 
provide process expertise and technical support for equipment to ensure the process is performing 
according to planned expectations, evaluating the effectiveness of the control strategy. Throughout the 
PPQ, having at least one Process staff person present for each shift of operation is recommended. Prior 
to starting the PPQ, the Process function ensures that the knowledge gained during the Readiness 
stage is incorporated clearly into the production batch records, procedures, and personnel training. 
During this stage, the SU and RU Process functions should analyze data obtained during PPQ to 
confirm that the outcomes meet expectations. Any significant differences, as defined in the acceptance 
criteria and plan, should be investigated. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

42
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Table 5.5-1		
Activities and Deliverables in the Execution Stage
STAGE
Business
TT PM
Process
Analytical
Engineering
Manufacturing
Regulatory
Quality
Sourcing/Supply Chain
Execution
Activities
Develop Launch 
Strategy  
Ensure All Good 
Manufacturing 
Practices 
Documentation Is 
Complete
Oversee Production 
Runs 
Perform Materials 
Testing
Support Process 
Performance 
Qualification (PPQ)
Perform Demo/
Engineering Batch
Coordinate 
Regulatory Filing
Assess Deviations/
CAPAs
Manage 
Product Storage 
Requirements Prior 
To Release
Participate in PAI 
Audit
Investigate 
Deviations
Perform In-Process 
Testing
Write Deviations
Execute PPQ Batches
Review Materials 
Data
Gather/Analyze 
Process Data
Perform Batch 
Release Testing
Execute Cleaning 
from PPQ
Review Batch Data
Perform Shipping 
Validation 
Perform Cleaning 
Testing
Review 
Documentation 
Package Stability 
Samples
Lead Execution of PAI 
Readiness Plan
Test Demo/
Engineering Batch
Deliverables
Stage Gate Approval 
Equivalency Study
Process Validation 
Report, VMP Closure
Approved Test 
Results
Deviation Reports/
CAPAs
Executed Batch 
Records
Submit Regulatory 
Filing
Materials Release
Prepare Release & 
Distribution Plan
Approval for 
Regulatory Filing
TT Report
Cleaning Validation 
Report
Stability Program
Clean Equipment
Product Release
Launch Strategy  
Deviation Reports/
CAPAs
Store Product
Deviation/CAPA 
Resolution
Cycle Time, Yield
Validation 
Documents Approval
Shipping Validation 
Report
Close Change 
Controls
PAI Approval
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

43
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
If possible, investigations of process deviations should include members of both the SU and RU across 
multiple functional areas. For example, Analytical may be needed to determine whether a deviation 
of an in-process sample result is due to analytical performance or an issue relating to the Manufactur-
ing function. Where genuine process failures are identified, Process and Quality should consult with 
Regulatory to evaluate the impact of the failure on the status of the PPQ, including parameters under 
which the PPQ can proceed. The TT PM should immediately communicate any failures to the steer-
ing committee.
Any necessary improvements to the process following the Execution stage should be identified before 
the handover to the RU post-transfer operations team. The case study in Section 8.9 illustrates the 
importance of implementing process improvements during the Execution stage, prior to Handover, 
and the potential consequences of failing to do so. 
After completion of PPQ, the Process function closes all deviations, gathers required data, and issues 
the process, shipping, and cleaning validation reports. Process also may be a lead author of the CMC 
sections of the regulatory filing. 
5.5.4	 Analytical
In the Execution stage, the Analytical function is in full operation, performing testing on all materials 
for release, in-process samples, finished products, and cleaning samples. Utilities and environmental 
testing may be required as well. Typically, PPQ requires more testing than is necessary during routine 
commercial production where a reduced testing program may be implemented provided all PPQ re-
quirements defined in the VMPs have been met.
The Analytical function also has oversight of the packaging of stability samples as defined in the stabil-
ity protocol.
5.5.5	 Engineering
Having completed all qualification requirements for the facility and equipment, the Engineering func-
tion acts in a supporting role in addressing any issues that occur during the engineering and PPQ runs. 
Engineering will investigate deviations and issue change controls related to the equipment or facili-
ties. Engineering may support validation-related sampling, data analysis, and reporting to satisfy all 
requirements of the PPQ and VMP and to ensure all requirements of the PPQ have been met. 
5.5.6	 Manufacturing
A major deliverable of the Execution stage for the Manufacturing function is execution of the engi-
neering and PPQ batches. At a minimum, the SU team should participate with the RU team during 
the engineering batch if possible. Knowledge gained from the engineering batch commonly leads to 
process adjustments and improvements, prompting updates to SOPs and the master batch record. The 
engineering run should use materials from the suppliers that will be used for PPQ. 
The engineering batch may be produced under GMP or non-GMP conditions. If conducted under 
GMP requirements, the engineering batch may be used to produce product for continued clinical sup-
ply. If allowed by both the process VMP and the PPQ protocol, both of which have been approved in 
advance, an engineering batch run under GMP conditions also may serve as a PPQ batch, particularly 
when the raw material supply is limited.
The Manufacturing function is a major contributor of feedback on operations, training effectiveness, 
and batch records following completion of the qualification activities. This feedback should be incor-
porated into lessons learned prior to handover to the RU post-transfer operations team. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

44
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
5.5.7	 Regulatory
During the Execution stage, the Regulatory function is actively drafting the regulatory submission 
and, based on the submission tracker, actively managing the authoring, reviewing, and finalizing of 
documents. The submission timing and content should be aligned with the regulatory strategy that 
was finalized in the Readiness stage. The RU should provide frequent updates to the MAH Regulatory 
function to ensure that new and evolving information discovered during Execution can be incorpo-
rated into the submission. The RU should inform the MAH Regulatory function of the assumptions 
being made and of their evaluation of regulatory risks.
At the end of the Execution stage, after ensuring that the CMC content has been extensively reviewed 
cross-functionally, the steering committee will authorize filing of the submission. The steering com-
mittee should be apprised of risks and assumptions before authorizing filing.
The Regulatory function also works with Quality on PAI preparation. This may include suggesting high-
risk items to include in storyboard development as well as ensuring alignment of the key claims made 
in the dossier, plant-level documentation, and storyboards. High-risk items and topics likely to arise 
during PAI include activities associated with deviations during PPQ and subjects that the inspectorate 
has historically identified as focus areas for the site, manufacturing process, product class, or company. 
5.5.8	 Quality
The Quality function is integral throughout the Execution stage as it releases materials for use. Quality 
is responsible for product release, including batch record review and overall batch disposition, in accor-
dance with site quality procedures. Quality also is responsible for supporting the review and approval 
of all documentation for the PPQ, including protocols, reports, batch records, forms, results, change 
controls, and deviation and investigation close-outs. The Quality function would be expected to close 
out the quality risk assessment associated with the TT at the end of the PPQ.
At this point in the TT, Quality performs the final inspection readiness activities in anticipation of the 
regulatory filing which, depending on TT type, may trigger a PAI. A mock inspection (in-depth audit) 
of the RU performed in anticipation of a PAI may be used to identify issues that should be addressed 
prior to filing a submission. 
Completion of the PAI may be an endpoint to the Execution stage depending on the overall business 
and regulatory strategies.
5.5.9	 Sourcing/Supply Chain
During the Execution stage, the Sourcing/Supply Chain function will work closely with the Business 
function to finalize shipping requirements. The Sourcing/Supply Chain function also will work with 
the Manufacturing and Engineering functions on PPQ requirements, including scheduling, material, 
and storage needs as well as logistics. As outputs of the Execution stage, Sourcing/Supply Chain will 
have established suppliers, a clear supply chain, and defined standards for production planning in 
order to move forward to commercial manufacture.
5.5.10	 Best Practices and Additional Suggestions
Table 5.5.10-1 describes best practices and additional ideas that may be considered for the Execu-
tion stage.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

45
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.5.10-1	 Best Practices and Additional Suggestions for the Execution Stage
Topic 
Details
Create a technical 
support plan for 
qualification
• Ensure SMEs are on the floor prior to Execution to provide training, to support personnel should any 
technical challenges arise, to ensure KT from SU to RU, and to provide quick availability to resolve issues or 
escalations in a timely manner to prevent delay to schedule
• Involve technical personnel during qualification for technical support of new equipment if issues arise and 
to monitor for future improvements
Ensure the team involved 
in qualification is trained 
adequately prior to the 
first engineering run
• Ensure that technical representatives and SMEs from the TT Team provide formal training on any new 
equipment and processes to the production personnel who will execute qualification batches
• Ensure sufficient time to train personnel if technology or process steps are new or otherwise present a high 
risk for human error
Perform a trial run
• Conduct a mock or trial run with a water batch or rejected material to ensure equipment readiness and 
adequacy of operations training
• Ensure the production team has sufficient time to practice using new equipment, parameters, batch 
record, and process steps before using qualification material
• Provide opportunities to ask questions, improve training, incorporate process improvements and lessons 
learned, and reduce any human error on new process
Call a readiness 
meeting before running 
qualification batches
• Ensure the production team is clear on process requirements prior to execution
• Review and/or update the control strategy
• Avoid introducing new variables not challenged in previous stages
• Plan ahead and reference best practices on the engineering run, in pre-batch readiness meetings, and 
during operator training
• Use risk assessment to address any new variables that cannot be avoided
Prepare filing and plan 
for questions from 
regulatory authorities
• Provide Regulatory with documents that support the filing as they become available, in alignment with 
the submission tracker
• Begin rolling review of drafted sections of regulatory filings as sections are (nearly) completed to manage 
resources and avoid unexpected delays due to reviewer availability 
• Identify and prepare SMEs to address questions received from regulatory authorities after initial submission
Ensure adequate 
development testing 
from the previous stage
• Provide robust supporting data and rationale from the previous stage through adequate testing to support 
recommended parameters, process, and instructions
• Ensure a repeatable process that is controlled within its recommended operating parameters
Provide adequate batch 
record instructions 
• Ensure all requirements and expectations are clearly defined in the batch record, and that training has 
been conducted and documented
• Use the engineering batch to help identify any missing instructions that can be incorporated prior to the 
start of qualification
Ensure adequate training 
of production personnel 
• Ensure hands-on training of personnel on the post-transfer operations team. Operator qualification is 
recommended over read-only training
Ensure process performs 
as expected within 
requirements and control 
strategy
• Ensure no changes are made to the final process prior to qualification without first revisiting the Readiness 
stage or performing an engineering run 
• Reference best practices for risk management and use the stage gate to review any uncertainties in final 
intended process to determine if process is ready for qualification 
• Review the control strategy and ensure all variables are adequately controlled with sufficient monitoring, 
sampling, and other mechanisms 
• Monitor data from engineering and PPQ batches and assess against the control strategy. At a minimum, 
this review should include critical parameters. Consider reviewing all parameters that meet the risk 
threshold
• Reduce sources of variability where possible, e.g., people, materials, components 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

46
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Topic 
Details
Hold stage gates before 
proceeding to next phase
• Hold a stage gate meeting with the TT Team upon completion of qualification to verify the Execution stage 
meets all requirements and expectations, and to verify readiness to proceed to the next stage (handover to 
post-transfer operations team)
• Ensure that all functions are aligned and that the process meets all requirements, is well controlled and 
repeatable, and is ready for Handover 
• Review any process improvements/learnings from qualification before Handover
• Review risk management plan and appropriateness of mitigations
5.6	
Handover Stage
The Handover stage comprises the transition of the product from the TT Team to the RU post-transfer 
operations team, covering routine production of marketed products. Because the risk assessment is 
a living document, risk identification and risk mitigation strategies should be constantly reviewed 
throughout the TT project. The Handover stage includes multiple activities across several functions at 
the RU site to ensure it is ready to work independently for commercial production or for the next stage 
of product development. Requirements for a smooth transition will vary depending on the type of TT 
and the endpoints established in the TT charter. For instance, the extent of Sourcing/Supply Chain 
requirements will vary based on how quickly the Business function is able to establish the customer 
base and volume requirements.
Ensuring that all lessons learned from the TT are incorporated into the existing documentation for 
improved commercial production is a key element of the Handover stage. (This technical report does 
not address such standard post-transfer requirements as equipment/facility maintenance, APR, life-
cycle validation, complaint handling, or CPV programs.) 
Table 5.6-1 shows the activities and deliverables described in the Reference Guide for the Handover 
stage. A stage gate is held with the steering committee and RU site management to approve formal 
handover of the process to the RU for routine operations.
5.6.1	 Business
Once the PPQ is completed, the Business function typically performs a review of the business contract 
with the RU. The Business function ensures estimated commercial volumes can be produced and develops 
a resource plan for any changes needed to accommodate the product and its associated requirements.
5.6.2	 Technology Transfer Project Manager
The TT PM ensures that the TT charter elements have been addressed in executing the TT. As part of 
the Handover stage, the TT PM documents all lessons learned and may help the RU incorporate key 
improvements prior to the final transfer. The TT PM also will ensure that the project is formally closed 
out and that all project requirements have been met. Section 8.7 presents a case study of the benefits 
of planning ahead for commercial readiness and conducting the handover. 
5.6.3	 Process
The Process function of the TT Team may continue to support the product following qualification 
during routine post-transfer production, as Process personnel are critical to KT during the Handover 
stage. The Process function also may take the lead in executing process improvements identified from 
the PPQ, including associated change controls. 
5.6.4	 Analytical
Besides identifying lessons learned related to analytical activities, the Analytical function ensures that 
the new product is set up in the RU’s stability-testing program with oversight and execution of the 
(Table 5.5.10-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

47
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Table 5.6-1		
Activities and Deliverables in the Handover Stage
STAGE
Business
TT PM
Process
Analytical
Engineering
Manufacturing
Regulatory
Quality
Sourcing/Supply Chain
Handover
Activities
Determine 
Changes Needed 
for Commercial 
Production
Coordinate 
Knowledge Transfer 
to Post-Transfer 
Operations Team
Set up Continued 
Process Validation 
(CPV)
Maintain Stability 
Program
Define Changeover 
Requirements for 
Future Production
Knowledge Transfer 
to Post-Transfer 
Operations Team
Obtain Regulatory 
Approval
Monitor Stability 
Data
Validation Batch 
Distribution
Document Lessons 
Learned in TT 
Document 
Potential Process 
Improvements
Maintain Validation 
Batch Storage
Consider Post-
Approval Changes
Set up Quality 
Management Review 
Requirements
Coordinate 
Transportation 
Strategy
Deliverables
Commercial 
Resourcing to 
Implement Changes
Full Handover of 
Product
CPV Program, 
Report Template (or 
initial report when 
sufficient batches 
produced)
Stability Results/
Report
Product Changeover 
Plan
Trained Personnel
Regulatory Approval
Commercial QMS
Stage Gate Approval
Lead Quality 
Management 
Reviews
Commercial Quality 
Agreement
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

48
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
stability protocol. Analytical also investigates out-of-specification events and deviations that may arise 
from stability testing. 
5.6.5	 Engineering
During the Handover stage, the Engineering function should consider any lessons learned relating 
to equipment operation during qualification. Engineering may identify process improvements, up-
grades, or replacements of equipment associated with the new process. These changes will be evalu-
ated against the site change control and filing requirements for impact prior to incorporating ahead 
of commercial start.
5.6.6	 Manufacturing
The Manufacturing function is key to providing feedback for lessons learned and potential improve-
ment areas following qualification. This feedback typically focuses on training, equipment operation, 
and the manufacturing batch record. Manufacturing will ensure all personnel supporting the ongoing 
commercial needs are trained adequately and are ready to support commercial demand. 
Manufacturing may support and/or take ownership of CAPAs resulting from qualification that need 
to be addressed ahead of commercial production, such as deviations resulting from unclear instruc-
tions. The RU Manufacturing function should verify that it is ready to take on all responsibilities for 
commercial start, including cleaning, product changeovers, sample pulling and submission, media 
fills, change control, maintenance activities, and batch operations.
The case study in Section 8.12 describes what could go wrong during commercial production if the 
Handover process with the Manufacturing and Sourcing/Supply Chain functions is inadequate to 
ensure readiness for post-transfer production. 
5.6.7	 Regulatory
The Regulatory function communicates expected timing for regulatory approval. Any potential delays 
should be communicated to the TT Team in a timely manner. Regulatory also contributes to the 
launch of products, reviewing promotional materials and medical information for consistency with 
product labeling.
The MAH Regulatory function will need to identify the RU personnel who will be responsible for 
ongoing communications on regulatory matters.
The TT Team may review opportunities for efficiencies or cost reductions that may result in post-
approval submissions. 
5.6.8	 Quality
As part of the Handover stage, the MAH Quality function establishes the quality management review 
process, which should involve both the RU and the SU. The quality agreement may need to be up-
dated to address everything associated with commercial manufacture. 
Quality will ensure the closure of all documentation from the TT, including change controls, valida-
tion reports, deviations, and CAPAs. It also may play a role in identifying lessons learned from the 
Execution stage that should be incorporated in future training for the post-transfer operations team to 
improve process quality. 
5.6.9	 Sourcing/Supply Chain
The Sourcing/Supply Chain function continues to perform production planning and material sourc-
ing activities similar to those conducted during the TT process, incorporating any improvements 
identified from the Execution stage. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

49
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Following qualification, any lessons learned should be implemented prior to handover to the RU post-
transfer operations team. These might include equipment and personnel standards used in schedule 
planning, procurement lead times and quantities, and resource planning. The supply plan and pro-
curement plan should take into consideration commercial requirements and release expectations in 
accordance with business needs following qualification activities. 
5.6.10	 Best Practices and Additional Suggestions
Table 5.6.10-1 describes additional ideas for consideration as well as best practices for the Handover 
stage.
Table 5.6.10-1	 Best Practices and Additional Suggestions for the Handover Stage
Topic 
Details
Host a formal 
Handover meeting
• Hold formal a meeting between the TT Team and the post-transfer operations team to ensure overall 
readiness of process
• Provide a Handover package including key documents, process understanding, and learnings 
• Provide the regulatory dossier and any critical knowledge to the commercial regulatory group and 
communicate any post-marketing commitments made to regulatory authorities
• Have the TT Team provide an overview of new equipment, unique requirements, launch timeline, commercial 
forecast, labor requirements, procurement needs, open actions from risk assessment, process improvement, 
and lessons learned
• If applicable, have the TT Team provide customer introductions 
• Be aware of potential issues: Without an adequate handover, additional risks may arise if the post-transfer 
operations team is unable to execute production effectively 
Create a formal long-
term training plan for 
production
• Prior to Handover, assess whether the production team needs additional training on the process and 
equipment 
• Use final lessons learned to revise and maintain the training program, which should include adequate hands-
on training with batch records and SOPs, not only classroom presentation 
• Consider use of demonstrated hands-on training to verify understanding
• Be aware of potential issues: Without proper training, the team runs the risk of requiring additional technical 
support or potentially experiencing human error, deviations, downtime, or delays upon commercial start
Perform a lessons-
learned meeting
• Set up a formal meeting to discuss lessons learned at project closure, inviting the entire TT Team and 
involving key supporting team members (e.g., production, labs) 
• Discuss successes as well as opportunities for improvement, considering such areas as processes, people, 
communication, and documentation
• Determine root causes of any challenging areas, obstacles, failures, scope changes, and deviations and discuss 
how to prevent them in the future 
• Capture a summary of lessons learned that the TT PM can drive to the rest of the team. The SU, RU, and MAH 
should incorporate these learnings into future projects where possible 
Ensure all commercial 
needs are planned and 
ready for commercial 
start
• Verify that the post-transfer operations team has everything needed to begin commercial production
• Work with the key functions at the RU site prior to closure of the project to ensure that key systems of the 
post-transfer production plan are in place and needs are met
• Include such key functions as site software systems, inventory, procurement plan, resource/labor needs, 
scheduling standards and equipment capacity needs, spare parts, preventive maintenance, equipment 
requalification and routine monitoring, vendor/supplier needs, and forecasting per the commercial needs 
• Ensure all key aspects are ready, including procurement of materials, spare parts, lead times, scheduling, and 
third-party planning 
Transfer knowledge 
from TT Team to  
post-transfer 
operations team
• Ensure formal training, robust batch-record updates, SOP instruction revisions, and simulation runs as needed 
are completed prior to commercial start 
• Ensure that knowledge has been effectively transferred through experience gained during the TT process, 
through lessons learned, and through Handover meetings 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

50
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Topic 
Details
Ensure capacity meets 
commercial needs
• Throughout the project, monitor the commercial forecast and actual cycle times on equipment, including 
commercial, laboratory, and any support systems at the RU site, to ensure the final process can meet the 
intended project and commercial requirements 
• If this product shares personnel and/or equipment with other products at the site, consider the impacts on 
equipment capacity, labor capacity, or support (e.g., lab testing, materials) 
• Ensure that the TT Team assesses the product’s long-term needs throughout the project, involves appropriate 
commercial personnel and leadership early, and evaluates the commercial forecast to verify requirements are 
met in the lead-up to launch and Handover
• Ensure all lessons learned from the project are considered in planning for commercial needs 
Ensure process turned 
over performs as 
expected and is well 
controlled within 
specifications/QTPP 
• Ensure an adequate process qualification that meets all acceptance criteria is well controlled within the 
operating ranges specified in the control strategy and is supported by sufficient data 
• Ensure that robust monitoring and a control plan are in place to monitor for any out-of-control events that 
may occur and require attention 
6.0  References
1.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q8(R2): Pharmaceutical 
Development; ICH Geneva, 2009.
2.	 Lipa, M, et al. Effective Knowledge Transfer 
During Biopharmaceutical Technology Transfer. 
Journal of Validation Technology 2019, 25 (4).
3.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical 
Quality System; ICH: Geneva, 2008.
4.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality 
Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and 
Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations; 
PDA, Inc.: Bethesda, Md., 2012.
5.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 60: Process Validation, A Lifecycle 
Approach; PDA, Inc.: Bethesda, Md., 2013
7.0  Additional Reading
• European Medicines Agency. Draft: Reflection Paper on Good Manufacturing Practice and Market-
ing Authorisation Holders (EMA/457570/2019); EMA: London, 2020. 
• International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q1A(R2): Stability Testing of New 
Drug Substances and Products; ICH: Geneva, 2003.
• International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q2(R1): Validation of Analytical 
Procedures: Text and Methodology; ICH: Geneva, 2005.
• International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q6A: Specifications: Test Procedures and Accep-
tance Criteria for New Drug Substances and New Drug Products: Chemical Substances; ICH: Geneva, 1999.
• International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q7: Good Manufacturing Practice 
Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients; ICH: Geneva, 2000.
• International Council for Harmonisation, Quality Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Management. ICH: 
Geneva, 2005.
(Table 5.6.10-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

