6
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
• 
Product developed at a CDMO will be manufactured at an internal site.
• 
Commercialization was performed internally and transferred to an external company after receiv-
ing regulatory approval, or vice versa.
• 
Use of multiple manufacturing facilities will better meet demand and/or provide risk mitigation 
for supply. 
• 
Expansion of a product to a new market requires alternate global manufacturing capability.
• 
A corporate acquisition or merger results in manufacturing consolidation.
In these types of scenarios, the TT project manager (PM) has the additional challenge of managing the 
TT activities across multiple sites, organizations, and cultures.
Unlike internal-internal transfers, any transfer to or from an external site may involve differences in 
organization, quality systems, and specific procedures. In some cases, the external organization may 
have competing priorities, which can be difficult to discern. Defining the differences in organizational 
structure, quality systems, and business priorities early can facilitate alignment on the TT boundaries 
and success factors. Agreements on the presence of SU subject matter experts (SMEs) at the external 
site during the TT process to ensure a successful knowledge transfer is an important point that cannot 
be overlooked and should be documented in the appropriate agreements.
3.2.3	 External-External Technology Transfers
Often, the MAH must manage a transfer between two external sites, which may also involve two dif-
ferent companies. This type of TT can present the greatest challenge, particularly if the two external 
parties are not known to each other (e.g., the result of a business strategy). If the external parties cannot 
interact, the MAH will need to act as the SU for the TT and facilitate the knowledge transfer to the 
RU. Agreements on the presence of MAH and SU SMEs at the external site during the TT process to 
ensure a successful knowledge transfer is an important point that cannot be overlooked and should be 
documented in the appropriate agreements. 
4.0  Technology Transfer Process and Oversight
Regulatory authorities expect companies to have a documented TT process that describes the steps to 
be taken and the compliance requirements for each step. 
Figure 4.0-1 illustrates a TT process using six stages and stage gates. These six stages and stage gates, 
outlined briefly in this section, are discussed in more detail in Section 5.0, and their use is described 
in the “Reference Guide to Technology Transfer Activities and Deliverables” (Figure 5.0-1). 
Each stage of a TT serves a purpose and has identifiable outcomes. At each stage, stage gates allow 
a steering committee to determine whether those outcomes have been met and to decide if the TT 
should proceed (see Section 4.2). 
Figure 4.0-1 The Six-Stage Technology Transfer Process
Initiation
Planning
Knowledge 
Transfer
Readiness
Execution
Handover
Stage Gate 1
Stage Gate 2
Stage Gate 3
Stage Gate 4
Stage Gate 5
Stage Gate 6
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

7
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
In the Initiation stage, potential RUs are evaluated to identify a site with a risk profile that meets the 
business objectives. Once a suitable RU is selected, a TT Team is formed at the RU site. In the Plan-
ning stage, the TT Team assesses the TT risks and identifies elements critical to the knowledge transfer 
and overall timing. In the Knowledge Transfer stage, the formal transfer of the detailed requirements 
specific to the TT begins. Once the knowledge transfer elements are obtained, the TT Team works 
in the Readiness stage to perform the activities and achieve the deliverables required to achieve full 
operational readiness. In the Execution stage, the RU demonstrates and qualifies the process at scale, 
culminating in a regulatory submission. The final Handover stage closes the TT with regulatory ap-
provals and allows normal operations to begin.
Each TT involves unique technical, business, and regulatory requirements that should be considered 
in structuring the project. Each company may choose to add or consolidate stage gates and TT process 
steps to fit the type of TT being undertaken, the company’s organizational structure, and its level of 
risk tolerance. 
In every TT, assessing and managing risks is essential. A mature quality risk management program, like 
that described in PDA TR 54, should be in place prior to starting a TT project.
4.1	
Cross-Functional Roles and the Project Manager 
A successful TT requires the engagement of experts from cross-functional areas as well as strong project 
management. Table 4.1-1 outlines the basic functional roles that maintain responsibilities throughout 
a TT and should be represented on a TT team. Because each company is organized differently, the 
labels for these functions may differ from one organization to the next. 
More detailed information about these roles is provided in Section 5.0, and the “Reference Guide to 
Technology Transfer Activities and Deliverables” (Figure 5.0-1) offers an overview of the roles of each 
function at each stage of the TT.
Table 4.1-1	 	
TT Cross-Functional Roles
Function
Description
Business
Strategy, marketing, finance, legal, sales
TT PM
Leads the overall TT effort. There also should be PMs at each involved site to support the TT
Process
Process chemistry and engineering, process performance qualification, validation1
Analytical
Raw material, in-process controls, product, stability (development and quality control)
Engineering
Capital installation and qualification, equipment maintenance
Manufacturing
Plant operations and EHS (environment, health, and safety regulations)
Regulatory
Health authority strategy and filing
Quality
QMS requirements, inspection readiness (i.e., PAI)
Sourcing/Supply Chain
Material sourcing, production planning, logistics
1	 Some companies have a standalone group for validation, but this technical report discusses validation within the identified functions.
Once the decision has been made to proceed with the TT, all involved sites should document expecta-
tions, roles, and responsibilities in a formal TT agreement. The TT agreement also should specify the 
measuring units to be used during the TT (e.g., for mass, temperature, and volume). If the transfer is 
internal-internal, a shared procedure may be developed in place of a TT agreement. This TT agree-
ment or shared procedure provides information about the level of involvement of each functional role 
at the SU and RU that will allow each site to resource a TT team.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

8
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Each site involved in the TT should develop a cross-functional team to execute the TT. Each team 
should include a lead person who is an SME for each functional role described in Table 4.1-1. A 
single person may serve as lead for more than one functional area. While each site should have a 
team, references to the “TT Team” in this document mean the team at the RU unless otherwise 
indicated.
Team composition may vary slightly for each TT and at each involved site. In some cases, a single TT 
Team may be formed at the RU, with the MAH or SU also assigning staff for each functional area to 
provide oversight and facilitate accurate and efficient knowledge transfer. In other cases, parallel teams 
may be established at each site. In an external-external TT, each external location should have its own 
cross-functional TT team. Roles also will vary at each site. For example, the MAH and RU Regulatory 
functions may have more significant roles than the SU Regulatory function.
The TT team at each site should be involved at nearly every stage throughout the process. The TT 
team at the MAH and/or SU will play a significant role during the Initiation, Planning, and Knowl-
edge Transfer stages, but should be engaged through to the Handover stage. This TT team will ensure 
the RU has the information necessary to manufacture the product and will provide expertise and learn-
ings throughout the TT process. 
The TT Team at the RU will have primary responsibility for implementing the TT. This team should 
be involved from the Planning stage, although their role will become more significant as the TT pro-
gresses. The TT Team at the RU is responsible for ensuring that their facility meets the project scope, 
business needs, and site requirements to manufacture the new product.
Each site involved in the TT should assign an individual to serve as team lead or PM for the site. 
This role requires basic technical knowledge across the functional areas as well as knowledge of CMC 
requirements. The person serving as team lead may or may not have a “project manager” job title 
but serves as a primary point of contact and facilitates communication, knowledge transfer, and task 
completion. In internal-internal TTs, where the SU and RU are located in the same facility (i.e., the 
product is being transferred from one production line to another), a single team lead may be adequate. 
The team lead may be chosen from one of the functional areas involved in the TT, could be in manage-
ment, or could be a contractor.
One PM must be the primary coordinator for the project. This technical report refers to this primary 
coordinator as the TT PM. Often, the PM at the RU will serve as the TT PM. In an external-external 
TT, however, an individual from the MAH may act as the TT PM to ensure a smooth and continuous 
flow of knowledge transfer. In large, complex TTs, the TT PM may be someone different from the site 
PMs. Wherever the TT PM is located, this role is critical in facilitating constant communication and 
should be the primary contact point for changes, decisions, and team alignment.
4.2	
TT Management Oversight
The organizational structure supporting a TT requires clarity and definition to ensure the TT Team 
can maintain focus, manage resourcing, and resolve issues. A defined structure for the TT allows for 
improved communication and clear definition of priorities among team members and management. 
A TT is usually considered a special project with a fixed scope and defined goals. As such, members 
of the TT Team may not be permanently assigned to the TT and may continue to report functionally 
outside of the team. TT Team members typically are assigned to the team under the direction of the 
TT PM for the duration of the project. 
Figure 4.2-1 depicts a structure for a TT project that aligns with the TT process described in this 
technical report.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

9
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
As the key stakeholder accountable for the product with regulatory authorities, the MAH determines 
the goals for the TT and is the contract giver. 
Once the decision has been made to proceed with the TT, a steering committee is formed. Each site 
involved in the TT should assign steering committee members who will be accountable for achieving 
the TT goals. Typically, steering committee members are one management level above the TT team for 
each of the functional areas working on the TT and have decision-making authority. The steering com-
mittee is empowered to remove roadblocks, assume risk, provide resources, and determine whether the 
requirements of each stage have been fulfilled.
Upper management may identify a Project Sponsor to oversee the TT. The person in this role typically 
is the single point of contact between the TT and upper management and has overall accountability to 
ensure the TT is delivered as required by the business. The Project Sponsor may be part of the steering 
committee, but the steering committee is accountable to the Project Sponsor. 
Stage gates at each of the six stages allow the steering committee to determine whether a TT is ready 
to proceed to the next stage. Often TT activities will be performed across stages in parallel rather than 
sequentially due to business needs. Each stage gate, however, allows the steering committee to ensure 
that all necessary activities and deliverables for that stage have been satisfactorily completed and that 
the TT charter, as described in Section 4.3, can be accomplished. When a TT Team finds information 
during a stage that may change the TT boundaries and/or assumptions, it should be communicated 
immediately to the steering committee rather than waiting for the stage gate review. 
4.3	
TT Charter and Success Factors
The overall framework of a TT should be documented in a charter. The charter should be developed by 
the TT Team and must be approved by the steering committee and, if applicable, the Project Sponsor. 
Approval by the steering committee establishes that the sites have reached the alignment necessary to 
proceed.
Figure 4.2-1	
Typical TT Project Structure
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

10
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
The charter typically includes the following information:
• 
Definition of TT completion and success factors for the TT
• 
Business assumptions, major risks, and decisions
• 
Target markets and market volumes
• 
Regulatory strategy
• 
Steering committee members
• 
Relevant stakeholders and how they are involved and connected to the project
• 
PMs and functional points of contact at SU and RU, if needed
• 
Communication plan
• 
Timeline with critical path objectives
• 
Lead SMEs for each cross-functional area
• 
Estimate of resource requirements
The success factors defined in the charter will serve as the boundaries within which the TT Teams will 
work (see Section 5.1.2 for more details). These success factors should be developed by the TT PM 
with agreement and input from the steering committee. Often based on business and regulatory strate-
gic objectives, some typical success factors that would be documented in the TT charter might include:
• 
Right-first-time execution of process validation batches
• 
Demonstration of comparability
• 
Regulatory filing submitted
• 
Preapproval inspection (PAI) authorized
• 
Budget goals achieved
• 
Time-to-market requirements met 
• 
Handover to the RU post-transfer operations team
• 
Process improvements impacting production efficiency or cost
Any changes to the requirements for TT success or the business assumptions defined in the charter 
should prompt the steering committee to revisit the Initiation and Planning stages to assess the poten-
tial impact of the changes.
Any changes to the charter after the Planning stage should be approved by the steering committee and 
documented. 
5.0  Using the Reference Guide to TT Activities and Deliverables
The “Reference Guide to Technology Transfer Activities and Deliverables,” provided in its complete 
form in Figure 5.0-1, uses a matrix approach to show the recommended activities and deliverables 
for which each functional area is responsible at each stage of the TT. To ensure effective knowledge 
management of the CMC requirements for the product being transferred, each stage of the TT process 
will have defined deliverables for each of the functional areas. While the Reference Guide recommends 
a specific functional area to lead each activity and deliverable, all functional areas must intersect and 
work in parallel to ensure success of the TT. 
The sections below discuss the key elements of the Reference Guide for each TT stage and summarizes 
common activities and deliverables for each stage, organized by functional area. A table of key consid-
erations is provided at the end of the discussion for each stage, and case studies demonstrating the use 
of the process and the Reference Guide are provided in Section 8.0 (Appendix). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

