1
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
1.0  Introduction
Technology transfers play an increasingly important role in the regulated pharmaceutical and biophar-
maceutical industries. The expanded use of contract development and manufacturing organizations, 
advances in manufacturing flexibility, increase in corporate mergers and acquisitions, and enhanced 
regulatory complexity all contribute to the need for technology transfers to maintain the continuity of 
drug supply. In order to replicate systems safely, maintain high-quality standards, and meet regulatory 
requirements, manufacturers have established approaches to successfully transfer manufacturing and 
analytical technology and knowledge from one site to another. 
Pharmaceutical technology transfer (TT) uses a systematic approach to ensure the knowledge required 
to execute the manufacturing process and product testing performed at one site can be incorporated at a 
new site, while maintaining understanding and product characteristics. This results in the same safe, ef-
fective, and consistent pharmaceutical product being manufactured at both locations. TTs can occur at 
all stages of the product lifecycle, from drug development through clinical trials to commercial release. 
The information in this technical report can be used to guide TT of both small- and large-molecule 
drug substances (biologics) as well as sterile and nonsterile drug and biological products. This docu-
ment describes the steps for a single TT event. For large, complex TTs, these tools can be implemented 
in separate parallel processes, with a TT team established and a procedure executed for each discrete 
aspect being transferred. For instance, separate TT teams could be established for the transfer of drug 
substance manufacturing, drug product manufacturing, and packaging, with a management oversight 
committee ensuring the interconnectivity of the overall TT program across the supply chain.
The product realization requirements outlined in this technical report follow the guidelines of the 
International Council for Harmonization of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human 
Use (ICH) and should be documented in the chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC) section 
of the regulatory filing. 
1.1	
Purpose
This technical report aims to provide a standardized approach to the TT process by supplying a ma-
trixed “Reference Guide to Technology Transfer Activities and Deliverables,” which can be used to 
coordinate cross-functional TT activities that help achieve operational readiness and culminate in 
regulatory approval. As specific details around each TT differ greatly, based on the type and complexity 
of the manufacturing process or analytical method being transferred, only a certain level of detail could 
be covered in a single technical report. This technical report is intended to provide a level of detail and 
approaches that can be applied across TT types. 
1.2	
Scope
This technical report covers the full range of requirements needed for TTs, such as new product in-
troductions and the transfer of products that are being manufactured for phase III clinical trials or 
commercial release, which are the most comprehensive in nature. In transfers of products at an earlier 
stage of development, when process and product knowledge is less understood and therefore CMC 
requirements are less detailed, certain steps described in this technical report will not be necessary. This 
report does not detail those differences. 
While this information was not developed specifically for medical devices, combination products, and 
advanced therapy medicinal products due to their unique requirements, many of the fundamentals 
expressed here can be applied to those products.
For this technical report, it is assumed that all involved parties have established systems for commercial 
production. Thus, standard requirements such as equipment and facility maintenance, annual product 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

2
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
reports, lifecycle validation, complaint handling, and continued process verification (CPV) programs 
are not addressed. For purposes of this technical report, the TT ends with the handover to operations 
upon regulatory approval.
2.0  Glossary and Abbreviations
Definitions have been provided to help clarify the concepts discussed in this technical report. While 
some of the definitions vary among companies and regulatory agencies, the definitions described be-
low are consistent for use within this document. Where a definition is taken verbatim from another 
source, the source is cited.
Consumables
Items (e.g., storage bags, tubing, filters, dia-
phragms, flasks) that form or are a part of pro-
cess equipment and are replaced regularly.
Critical Process Parameter
A process parameter whose variability has an im-
pact on a critical quality attribute and therefore 
should be monitored or controlled to ensure the 
process produces the desired quality (1). 
Engineering Batch
A manufacturing run performed to demon-
strate the transfer of a manufacturing process 
and confirm the suitability of qualified equip-
ment, controls, and analytical methods that 
are appropriate to the lifecycle phase of the 
product. This may also be referred to as an 
engineering run, demonstration batch, or dem-
onstration run.
Facility Fit Assessment 
An assessment performed on the manufactur-
ing capabilities of the receiving unit during a 
TT. This assessment will consider equipment, 
design, capacity, and risks associated with 
manufacturing the product being transferred to 
the receiving unit’s facility. 
Handover 
The stage of a TT in which the TT team transi-
tions the product’s manufacturing process to 
the post-transfer operations team who will be 
responsible for the ongoing manufacturing of 
the product at the receiving unit. This stage 
may also be referred to as commercial or project 
turnover or hand-off. 
Knowledge Transfer
A practical, systematic approach to transfer 
the body of knowledge available for a specific 
product and process, including critical-to-qual-
ity product attributes, process parameters and 
control strategy, process capability, testing, and 
manufacturing within a quality system’s infra-
structure between two locations. 
Knowledge Management
A systematic approach to acquiring, analyzing, 
storing, and disseminating information related 
to products, manufacturing processes, and 
components (2).
Quality Target Product Profile
A prospective summary of the quality characteris-
tics of a drug product that ideally will be achieved 
to ensure the desired quality, taking into account 
safety and efficacy of the drug product (1).
Stage Gate
A review meeting conducted during the process of 
TT to verify that the requirements for the current 
stage have been completed and that the team is 
ready to move into the next stage of the TT proj-
ect. The meeting typically is led by the TT team 
and TT project manager, who present findings, 
results, and potential and identified risks with 
proposed mitigation strategies, decisions, and next 
steps to the steering committee for the TT. If risks 
are not acceptable or certain requirements have 
not been met, the steering committee may iden-
tify additional actions that must be performed be-
fore proceeding to the next stage. A stage gate also 
may include a review of lessons learned. This may 
also be referred to as a milestone review meeting.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

3
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
User Requirements Specification (URS)
The set of owner, user and engineering re-
quirements necessary and sufficient to create a 
feasible design meeting the intended purpose of 
the system.
2.1	
Abbreviations
APR	
Annual product report
CAR	
Capital appropriation request
CDMO	 Contract development and 
manufacturing organization
CMC	
Chemical, manufacturing, and controls
CMO	
Contract manufacturing organization
EHS	
Environment, health, and safety
FAT	
Factory acceptance test
GMP	
Good manufacturing practices
KM	
Knowledge management
KT	
Knowledge transfer
MAH	
Marketing authorization holder
PAI	
Preapproval inspection
PM	
Project manager
PPQ	
Process performance qualification
QTPP	 Quality target product profile
RU	
Receiving unit
SAT	
Site acceptance test
SME	
Subject matter expert
SU	
Sending unit
TT	
Technology transfer
URS	
User requirements specification
VMP	
Validation master plan
3.0  Types of Technology Transfers
ICH Quality Guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical Quality Systems describes TTs as new product transfers 
during development through manufacturing and transfers within or between manufacturing and test-
ing sites for marketed products (3). This broadly encompasses all transfers, including analytical meth-
od transfers to an alternate laboratory, transfers to scale up a development product, and transfers from 
the laboratory to a current good manufacturing practices (GMP) production environment. When 
establishing a TT program, it is important to understand the impact of the product lifecycle phase, the 
type of sites involved, and the associated CMC requirements.
Although this section describes all types of TTs, this technical report focuses on the fundamental 
activities necessary for introduction of a new product to a manufacturing site when the product is 
moving from clinical phase III to commercial manufacturing or from one commercial manufacturing 
site to another.
3.1	
Product Lifecycle 
During its lifecycle, a product typically progresses through discovery and development, culminating 
in commercial readiness and regulatory approval as depicted in Figure 3.1-1. TTs are a key part of 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

4
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
the lifecycle as a new drug product and its corresponding drug substance move from clinical phase I 
through to commercial manufacturing, often at different production scales and different manufactur-
ing sites. While TTs may occur at any point throughout the product lifecycle, each TT should have its 
own purpose (see Section 4.3) and will have a discrete beginning and end.
With the aim of driving reproducibility, elements of TT are performed at each phase of the product 
lifecycle as knowledge of the process, product, and testing increases. TTs can be described based on 
product lifecycle phase: transfers within the clinical phases (clinical-clinical); transfers from the devel-
opment phase, which may be clinical phase III, to the commercial phase (development-commercial); 
and transfers within the commercial phase (commercial-commercial). This section further describes 
each of the lifecycle phase groups and their influence on TT requirements. 
3.1.1	 Clinical-Clinical Technology Transfers
While this technical report does not describe the requirements for clinical-clinical TTs, TTs at clinical 
stages should be developed, reviewed, and executed with thoughtful consideration and should be phase-
appropriate from a CMC perspective. TTs during these phases should address clinical patient safety and 
begin building the foundation for future commercial production including the development of the TPP. 
During early clinical phases, the involved sites should constantly consider future needs related to scaling 
up and validating the manufacturing process, determining the type of facility required, and defining 
the product, process, and analytical characteristics necessary to ensure the quality, safety, and efficacy 
of the product being transferred. Clinical phase TTs often are complicated by small material demands 
and by extended pauses for site inspections and regulatory approvals as clinical data is gathered, making 
knowledge management throughout the early clinical phases especially important.
3.1.2	 Development-Commercial Technology Transfers
Development-commercial TTs, which often begin when the product is in clinical phase III, involve 
the transfer of the full scope of CMC requirements. By clinical phase III, the product, process, and 
analytical development should progress in parallel with the TT program to define the final CMC 
requirements for commercial readiness and process and analytical validation. For instance, the final 
dosage form and dosage should be known; the drug substance manufacturing process should be es-
tablished such that there are minimal changes in the impurity profile from clinical phase III to pro-
cess validation; process parameters and critical quality attributes (CQA) should be defined, including 
characterization of critical components and materials; and initial stability for both drug substance and 
drug product should have been evaluated. Risk assessments should be performed throughout final 
development to determine the impact areas for commercial manufacture. PDA Technical Report No. 
Figure 3.1-1	
Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

5
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
54: Implementation of Quality Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing 
Operations provides more information on quality risk management and the performance of risk as-
sessments (4). The objective of the TT activity is to establish comparability between the SU and RU 
processes or methods and, as a result, provide the regulatory authorities the assurance needed to allow 
the use of the RU to supply clinical material or commercial inventory into their market.
3.1.3	 Commercial-Commercial Technology Transfers
In commercial-commercial TTs, the product is already being marketed and produced at an existing facility, 
yet business may dictate the need to move or expand production of the drug substance or drug product to 
another facility. This may require an operational scale-up or scale-down. The addition of a new market may 
require the business to use alternate packaging facilities, which would require TT of the packaging operations. 
Alternate laboratories also may be used, requiring transfer of the analytical methods to the new location. 
In TTs involving a marketed product, the original or current manufacturing location should provide the 
full CMC requirements, with historical product and process knowledge, that demonstrate manufacturing 
robustness. These types of TTs may be an opportunity to implement process improvements at the receiving 
unit, provided that those improvements align with the business and regulatory strategies for the TT.
3.2	
Site Types 
Typically, two types of sites are involved in a TT: the sending unit (SU) and the receiving unit (RU). 
The SU is the site with the current knowledge of the product, process, and analytical methods, while 
the RU is the location where the product will be manufactured or tested in the future. The use of 
contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) and contract development and manufacturing organi-
zations (CDMOs), the advent of the virtual company business model, and the rise of global manufac-
turing supply chains have expanded the variations of SU and RU sites involved in TTs. 
Both the SU and RU sites can be classified as internal or external. Internal sites include any facility for 
which the existing or future marketing authorization holder (MAH) has ownership or complete con-
trol, while external sites are separate from the MAH and include CMOs, CDMOs, business partners, 
and external laboratories. The type of site and its relationship to the MAH impacts the effectiveness of 
knowledge transfer as well as the overall TT team and governance framework described in Section 4.0.
3.2.1	 Internal-Internal Technology Transfers
A TT performed between locations of the same company or facility is considered the most manageable 
in terms of knowledge transfer between the SU and RU sites for several reasons. Most likely, these sites 
are governed by the same quality management system (QMS), have integrated document management 
systems, and employ a standardized TT process. If the company is transferring technology for an exist-
ing commercial product, historical data on process or test performance also should be readily available. 
Even with use of the same site, however, a complex process or an analytical method that draws on 
unique knowledge held by the SU can still present challenges. 
If the internal SU and RU sites are in different geographical locations, an initial evaluation will be 
needed to determine the potential impact of language, local implementation of the global QMS, im-
port and export requirements, and regulatory requirements. These TTs typically will require additional 
budget for site-to-site interactions that allow the SU to share knowledge with the RU and participate 
in initial manufacturing at the new location.
3.2.2	 Internal-External or External-Internal Technology Transfers 
The MAH may choose to work with an external company in many different scenarios, such as:
• 
Product developed internally will be manufactured at commercial scale at an external company, 
such as a CMO or CDMO, for cost or time-to-market purposes or due to limited capability in 
internal facilities.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

6
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
• 
Product developed at a CDMO will be manufactured at an internal site.
• 
Commercialization was performed internally and transferred to an external company after receiv-
ing regulatory approval, or vice versa.
• 
Use of multiple manufacturing facilities will better meet demand and/or provide risk mitigation 
for supply. 
• 
Expansion of a product to a new market requires alternate global manufacturing capability.
• 
A corporate acquisition or merger results in manufacturing consolidation.
In these types of scenarios, the TT project manager (PM) has the additional challenge of managing the 
TT activities across multiple sites, organizations, and cultures.
Unlike internal-internal transfers, any transfer to or from an external site may involve differences in 
organization, quality systems, and specific procedures. In some cases, the external organization may 
have competing priorities, which can be difficult to discern. Defining the differences in organizational 
structure, quality systems, and business priorities early can facilitate alignment on the TT boundaries 
and success factors. Agreements on the presence of SU subject matter experts (SMEs) at the external 
site during the TT process to ensure a successful knowledge transfer is an important point that cannot 
be overlooked and should be documented in the appropriate agreements.
3.2.3	 External-External Technology Transfers
Often, the MAH must manage a transfer between two external sites, which may also involve two dif-
ferent companies. This type of TT can present the greatest challenge, particularly if the two external 
parties are not known to each other (e.g., the result of a business strategy). If the external parties cannot 
interact, the MAH will need to act as the SU for the TT and facilitate the knowledge transfer to the 
RU. Agreements on the presence of MAH and SU SMEs at the external site during the TT process to 
ensure a successful knowledge transfer is an important point that cannot be overlooked and should be 
documented in the appropriate agreements. 
4.0  Technology Transfer Process and Oversight
Regulatory authorities expect companies to have a documented TT process that describes the steps to 
be taken and the compliance requirements for each step. 
Figure 4.0-1 illustrates a TT process using six stages and stage gates. These six stages and stage gates, 
outlined briefly in this section, are discussed in more detail in Section 5.0, and their use is described 
in the “Reference Guide to Technology Transfer Activities and Deliverables” (Figure 5.0-1). 
Each stage of a TT serves a purpose and has identifiable outcomes. At each stage, stage gates allow 
a steering committee to determine whether those outcomes have been met and to decide if the TT 
should proceed (see Section 4.2). 
Figure 4.0-1 The Six-Stage Technology Transfer Process
Initiation
Planning
Knowledge 
Transfer
Readiness
Execution
Handover
Stage Gate 1
Stage Gate 2
Stage Gate 3
Stage Gate 4
Stage Gate 5
Stage Gate 6
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

