50
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Topic 
Details
Ensure capacity meets 
commercial needs
• Throughout the project, monitor the commercial forecast and actual cycle times on equipment, including 
commercial, laboratory, and any support systems at the RU site, to ensure the final process can meet the 
intended project and commercial requirements 
• If this product shares personnel and/or equipment with other products at the site, consider the impacts on 
equipment capacity, labor capacity, or support (e.g., lab testing, materials) 
• Ensure that the TT Team assesses the product’s long-term needs throughout the project, involves appropriate 
commercial personnel and leadership early, and evaluates the commercial forecast to verify requirements are 
met in the lead-up to launch and Handover
• Ensure all lessons learned from the project are considered in planning for commercial needs 
Ensure process turned 
over performs as 
expected and is well 
controlled within 
specifications/QTPP 
• Ensure an adequate process qualification that meets all acceptance criteria is well controlled within the 
operating ranges specified in the control strategy and is supported by sufficient data 
• Ensure that robust monitoring and a control plan are in place to monitor for any out-of-control events that 
may occur and require attention 
6.0  References
1.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q8(R2): Pharmaceutical 
Development; ICH Geneva, 2009.
2.	 Lipa, M, et al. Effective Knowledge Transfer 
During Biopharmaceutical Technology Transfer. 
Journal of Validation Technology 2019, 25 (4).
3.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical 
Quality System; ICH: Geneva, 2008.
4.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality 
Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and 
Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations; 
PDA, Inc.: Bethesda, Md., 2012.
5.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 60: Process Validation, A Lifecycle 
Approach; PDA, Inc.: Bethesda, Md., 2013
7.0  Additional Reading
• European Medicines Agency. Draft: Reflection Paper on Good Manufacturing Practice and Market-
ing Authorisation Holders (EMA/457570/2019); EMA: London, 2020. 
• International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q1A(R2): Stability Testing of New 
Drug Substances and Products; ICH: Geneva, 2003.
• International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q2(R1): Validation of Analytical 
Procedures: Text and Methodology; ICH: Geneva, 2005.
• International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q6A: Specifications: Test Procedures and Accep-
tance Criteria for New Drug Substances and New Drug Products: Chemical Substances; ICH: Geneva, 1999.
• International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q7: Good Manufacturing Practice 
Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients; ICH: Geneva, 2000.
• International Council for Harmonisation, Quality Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Management. ICH: 
Geneva, 2005.
(Table 5.6.10-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

51
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
• International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q11: Development and Manufacture of 
Drug Substances (Chemical Entities and Biotechnological/Biological Entities); ICH: Geneva, 2012.
• International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q12: Technical and Regulatory Con-
siderations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle Management; ICH: Geneva, 2019.
• International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. Good Practice Guide: Technology Transfer, 3rd 
Edition; ISPE: Bethesda, Md., 2018.
• Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 57: Analytical Method Validation and Transfer 
for Biotechnology Products; PDA, Inc.: Bethesda, Md., 2012
• Technology and Knowledge Transfer: Keys to Successful Implementation and Management. Gibson, 
M; Schmitt, S, Eds. Parenteral Drug Association: Bethesda, Md., 2015.
• U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: SUPAC-IR: Immediate Release Solid 
Oral Dosage Forms; Scale-Up and Postapproval Changes: Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls, In 
Vitro Dissolution Testing, and In Vivo Bioequivalence Documentation; U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Resources: Rockville, Md., 1995.
• U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: SUPAC-IR Questions and Answers 
about SUPAC-IR; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Rockville, Md., 1997.
• U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: SUPAC-MR: Modified Release Solid 
Dosage Forms, Scale-Up and Postapproval Changes; Center for Drug Evaluation and Research 
(CDER). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 1997.
• U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: SUPAC-SS: Nonsterile Semisolid 
Dosage Forms Manufacturing Equipment Addendum; U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services: Silver Spring, Md., 1997.
• U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Process Validation: General Principles 
and Practices, Revision 1; Center for Drug Evaluation and Research; Center for Biologics Evalu-
ation and Research; Center for Veterinary Medicine. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2011.
• U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: SUPAC: Manufacturing Equipment 
Addendum; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2014.
• U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Contract Manufacturing Arrangements for 
Drugs: Quality Agreements; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2016.
• World Health Organization. Annex 7: WHO Guidelines on Transfer of Technology in Pharmaceuti-
cal Manufacturing, TRS No. 961; WHO: Geneva, 2011.
• World Health Organization. Draft Working Document for Comments: WHO Guidelines on Transfer 
of Technology in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing; WHO: Geneva, 2021.
Note: Specific information related to Quality Risk Management for Technical Transfers is being devel-
oped as part of the Technical Report QRM series. Additional information on this topic presented in the 
original, now retired, version of Technical Report No. 65 can be found at PDA.org. After the issuance 
of the QRM series TR on this topic the retired version of Technical Report. No. 65 will be removed. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

52
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
8.0  Appendix: Case Studies
The case studies in this appendix illustrate how the technology transfer (TT) process presented in 
PDA Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2021) can be used and how the “Reference Guide to Technol-
ogy Transfer Activities and Deliverables” can be helpful in preparing for TTs. These examples of events 
that occurred in real TTs illustrate the benefits of using the Reference Guide and best practices. Each 
case study notes the relevant product lifecycle phase, TT stage, and site type. Specific regulations men-
tioned in individual case studies may have been updated since this TR was written. Current regulations 
should be consulted before undertaking any TT activity.
8.1	 Technology Transfer Charter, Technology Transfer Governance,  
and Communication Plan
Product Lifecycle Phase: Commercial-Commercial
TT Process Stage: Planning
Site Types: Internal-External, External-External
To reduce costs, Company A made a business decision to consolidate outsourcing of drug product 
packaging, expecting to achieve savings quickly. Company A awarded a multiproduct bundle to a con-
tract manufacturing organization (CMO), Company B, transferring packaging for 15 drug products 
from other contract providers. These products were new to the facility of Company B, the receiving 
unit (RU). This external-external TT was performed over a two-year period. The TT goal was to 
complete the transfer of the first product in seven months, with a new product in place each month 
thereafter, requiring all TTs to occur in parallel.
As Company B worked to achieve the TT goals, Company A continuously changed knowledge re-
quirements, including labels, component design, preferred vendors and suppliers, and the qualifica-
tion of backup sources. In addition, Company A asked the TT team to change the planned order of 
products being transferred. These changes prevented Company B’s TT Team from meeting project 
timelines, a situation Company A escalated to senior management in both companies. 
With senior leadership from both companies involved, a formal process for the TT was implemented. 
This process included steering committee and governance oversight, a communication plan, additional 
staffing, and improved TT project manager (PM) tools to allow greater visibility of the project’s prog-
ress and risks. The changes specifically included the following:
• 
Additional resources were provided to enable key functions to focus on their specific workstream 
for a cluster of products based on process similarities and timeline. 
• 
Following an all-day workshop, workstream meetings were held weekly to allow each function from 
both Company A and Company B to maintain alignment of their activities across the entire portfolio. 
• 
The TT PM implemented a weekly progress meeting across workstreams during which the 
project timeline, needs, and risks were discussed and reported to Company A. The use of 
improved visual tools for these updates allowed for better alignment with project goals. 
• 
A steering committee of one-level-higher management from both companies was formed. A 
weekly steering committee meeting allowed timely feedback, risk management, and escalation 
support from both Company A and Company B. 
• 
Using input from the steering committee, the senior management of both companies met monthly and 
held face-to-face meetings on a quarterly basis throughout the project to provide overall governance. 
Company B learned the value of establishing a TT charter and of ensuring that Planning stage activi-
ties were completed before moving to the next stage. After implementing the governance structure and 
a communication plan, Company B encountered significantly fewer change requests from Company 
A, allowing the TT Team to complete knowledge transfer (KT). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

