52
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
8.0  Appendix: Case Studies
The case studies in this appendix illustrate how the technology transfer (TT) process presented in 
PDA Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2021) can be used and how the “Reference Guide to Technol-
ogy Transfer Activities and Deliverables” can be helpful in preparing for TTs. These examples of events 
that occurred in real TTs illustrate the benefits of using the Reference Guide and best practices. Each 
case study notes the relevant product lifecycle phase, TT stage, and site type. Specific regulations men-
tioned in individual case studies may have been updated since this TR was written. Current regulations 
should be consulted before undertaking any TT activity.
8.1	 Technology Transfer Charter, Technology Transfer Governance,  
and Communication Plan
Product Lifecycle Phase: Commercial-Commercial
TT Process Stage: Planning
Site Types: Internal-External, External-External
To reduce costs, Company A made a business decision to consolidate outsourcing of drug product 
packaging, expecting to achieve savings quickly. Company A awarded a multiproduct bundle to a con-
tract manufacturing organization (CMO), Company B, transferring packaging for 15 drug products 
from other contract providers. These products were new to the facility of Company B, the receiving 
unit (RU). This external-external TT was performed over a two-year period. The TT goal was to 
complete the transfer of the first product in seven months, with a new product in place each month 
thereafter, requiring all TTs to occur in parallel.
As Company B worked to achieve the TT goals, Company A continuously changed knowledge re-
quirements, including labels, component design, preferred vendors and suppliers, and the qualifica-
tion of backup sources. In addition, Company A asked the TT team to change the planned order of 
products being transferred. These changes prevented Company B’s TT Team from meeting project 
timelines, a situation Company A escalated to senior management in both companies. 
With senior leadership from both companies involved, a formal process for the TT was implemented. 
This process included steering committee and governance oversight, a communication plan, additional 
staffing, and improved TT project manager (PM) tools to allow greater visibility of the project’s prog-
ress and risks. The changes specifically included the following:
• 
Additional resources were provided to enable key functions to focus on their specific workstream 
for a cluster of products based on process similarities and timeline. 
• 
Following an all-day workshop, workstream meetings were held weekly to allow each function from 
both Company A and Company B to maintain alignment of their activities across the entire portfolio. 
• 
The TT PM implemented a weekly progress meeting across workstreams during which the 
project timeline, needs, and risks were discussed and reported to Company A. The use of 
improved visual tools for these updates allowed for better alignment with project goals. 
• 
A steering committee of one-level-higher management from both companies was formed. A 
weekly steering committee meeting allowed timely feedback, risk management, and escalation 
support from both Company A and Company B. 
• 
Using input from the steering committee, the senior management of both companies met monthly and 
held face-to-face meetings on a quarterly basis throughout the project to provide overall governance. 
Company B learned the value of establishing a TT charter and of ensuring that Planning stage activi-
ties were completed before moving to the next stage. After implementing the governance structure and 
a communication plan, Company B encountered significantly fewer change requests from Company 
A, allowing the TT Team to complete knowledge transfer (KT). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

53
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Two events jeopardized the TT timeline, but the new timeline risks were quickly communicated to 
the steering committee for risk mitigation and the information relayed to the governance team. First, a 
vendor delay was resolved by negotiating a payment to the vendor to expedite the material. Second, a 
competing priority arose with another commercial activity using shared equipment. With the involve-
ment of the steering committee, the TT Team was able to reach alignment on managing changes to the 
project scope and ensure this project received priority in order to meet launch needs. 
8.2	 Selecting the Right Team to Ensure Success of the Technology Transfer 
Project 
Product Lifecycle Phase: Development-Commercial
TT Process Stages: Initiation, Planning
Site Types: Internal-External
Company A decided to transfer a new sterile drug product (Product X) to a CMO (Company B). 
Company A’s limited TT experience and limited internal expertise to address the cross-functional re-
quirements, comprising only two executive company leaders from the Quality and Supply functions, 
had caused problems with a previous TT. 
Company B assigned dedicated personnel from cross-functional disciplines including Project Man-
agement, Account Management, Quality, Validation, Process Engineering, Planning, and Analytical. 
Company A realized it was understaffed for this new project and could not support these functions 
adequately. In the early stages of the project, Company A relied heavily on Company B’s expertise to 
manage the project and make all decisions. 
After experiencing challenges due to its understaffing in the early stages of the TT of Product X, Com-
pany A took action during the Readiness stage. With the experience gained from both in-house and 
external manufacturing, Company A added staff to its TT Team. It added expertise from key functions 
that would be required to support the new process, with a TT Team at both the marketing authoriza-
tion holder (MAH) and the CMO. 
As a result of Company A restructuring its team with a subject matter expert (SME) from each key 
function, matching each function of Company B, the project was executed more efficiently, knowl-
edge was transferred more effectively, and communications were improved. With the enhanced in-
ternal involvement, Company A’s executive team was able to provide much-needed governance and 
empower its TT Team to fully manage the project efficiently.
8.3	 Importance of the Initiation and Planning Stages to Technology Transfer 
Product Lifecycle Phase: Commercial-Commercial
TT Process Stages: Initiation, Planning
Site Types: Internal-Internal (Regional)
Company A needed to increase capacity for a drug substance (Product X). Since its sending unit (SU) 
site was unable to meet the full volume forecast of Product X, Company A made a business decision 
to transfer the process to another facility within its company network to serve as a second source of 
supply. Implementing a cloned process at the RU facility with minimal changes was critical to its regu-
latory strategy. To do this, the RU was instructed to purchase identical equipment (where possible) 
and replicate the existing process from the SU site. The SU shared full details of the equipment model 
and specifications, process documentation, and learnings with the RU to facilitate setup of the process. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

54
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Because of the process equivalency required and the ability to easily share knowledge between the sites, 
Company A assessed this TT to be of low risk and rapid execution, with minimal development and 
technical requirements. As a result, Company A underestimated both the budget and the amount of 
time needed for completion. Additionally, the project was staffed with only part-time internal support, 
primarily personnel from the RU site, that did not include the cross-functional expertise needed for 
the TT. 
Despite having almost identical equipment and process-operating history, Company A experienced 
multiple technical challenges. For one, Company A could not purchase the exact models from the 
same vendors and had to select newer models in their place, yet no risk assessment was performed 
to identify the impact of what seemed to be minor differences in the new equipment. As the process 
would be identical, a full gap assessment for the process impact at the RU was not performed. Also, a 
lack of resourcing for the TT at the SU site prevented a thorough KT from the SU to the RU. Subse-
quently, the RU could not leverage shared learnings, historical data, or expertise the SU site had gained 
over the years or from the original development and qualification. As a result, the process validation 
and operational robustness depended on dedicated SU resources to continue assistance with their 
historical knowledge of the process. 
Internal TT teams often fail to perform adequate due diligence of a TT in the Initiation and Planning 
stages of the process. This case study demonstrates the importance of following a TT process, resourc-
ing appropriately, and maintaining effective KT even for internal TTs.
8.4	 Use of Regulatory Strategy for Initiation Stage Decisions
Product Lifecycle Phase: Commercial-Commercial
TT Process Stage: Initiation 
Site Types: External-External
Company A used CMO C for manufacture of a veterinary drug product (Product Y) marketed only 
in the United States. When CMO C notified Company A that it no longer wanted to be a CMO, 
but would be manufacturing only for itself, Company A had to find a new CMO within a short time 
frame. Product Y is a sterile, lyophilized product with an approved indication only for the veterinary 
market. The TT was to include complete product and process transfer as well as analytical testing (re-
lease and stability) and stability storage. 
Finding a company that can manufacture a lyophilized product can be a challenge, but this case pre-
sented additional barriers. Many companies with lyophilization capabilities manufacture lyophilized 
products for the Brazilian market. At the time, the Brazilian agency, ANVISA, specified that if a drug 
substance had no approved human indication, the veterinary product must be manufactured on a 
separate production line in a separate building from products for human use. Therefore, Company A 
needed to find a CMO that could manufacture Product Y on a separate production line from human 
products. As many CMOs had only one or two lyophilization production lines, the available pool of 
CMOs for transfer was limited. 
Company A formed an initial TT Team comprising a PM and representatives from the Quality, Regu-
latory, and Supply Chain functions. The team reviewed the capabilities of multiple CMOs and found 
three companies (CMOs D, E, and F) that were able to manufacture Product Y in the U.S. in a 
manner that would be compliant with the current ANVISA requirements. The TT Team evaluated 
the CMOs based on their quality system and documentation, capability and expertise in lyophilized 
product manufacturing, equipment equivalence, analytical capabilities, costs, and projected timelines 
to commercial launch. Site evaluations revealed that CMO D was not interested due to the small 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

55
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
volume that is common for veterinary products. The remaining two sites estimated similar costs, but 
the projected timelines to launch differed by six months, with CMO F having the longer timeline. 
The TT Team further investigated the drastic difference and determined that the longer timeline was 
more realistic. CMO F had more experience and better understood the complexities of transferring a 
lyophilized product. The TT Team chose CMO F, despite the longer timeline, because it had consid-
ered in more detail what needed to be done and it employed a strong PM to help guide the process. 
8.5	 Knowledge Transfer to Ensure Process Qualification Success
Product Lifecycle Phase: Development-Commercial
TT Process Stage: Knowledge Transfer
Site Types: Internal-External
Company A decided to outsource production of a new vaccine drug product. The selected CMO, 
Company B, had significant experience performing TTs of new processes, working with dozens of 
customers each year at their facility. Company A was relatively new and had limited experience in 
the pharmaceutical industry; in fact, this would be its first experience taking a product in its pipeline 
through to commercialization.
Company B had implemented lessons learned from a previous project with a different company, Com-
pany C. Company B determined that multiple delays during the project with Company C had re-
sulted from added equipment requirements, lack of clearly established goals and boundaries, and lack 
of transparency during KT. Additionally, complex differences in operations had required alignment 
between Company B and Company C to ship and receive materials from each other, resolve unique 
labeling requirements, and enhance material inspection requirements. 
With these learnings in mind, Company B implemented significant improvements in its TT process 
to ensure a successful and proactive KT with Company A. Company B developed several tools and 
checklists to help with the KT upon project award, including: 
• 
Use of a handover form and checklist to establish all product requirements, TT boundaries, and goals.
• 
KT checklist and a prepared playbook to be shared with Company A immediately upon award, 
ahead of the kick-off, detailing the customer’s expectations, key next steps, and key data the RU 
would request. The materials included a questionnaire and checklist to help both companies ask 
the right questions and share key documents early in the process. 
• 
Break-out meetings for each function, held virtually prior to the TT kick-off, to ensure the kick-
off meeting focused on the most impactful topics.
• 
A face-to-face kick-off to formally start the project, align on requirements for each phase of the 
project, and align on any differences already discovered through the playbook, checklist, and 
questionnaire.
In addition:
• 
The team performed an in-depth technical risk assessment of the TT to aid in effective KT for 
implementation at Company B, using a tracking tool and risk management document during the 
Execution stage to capture all knowledge and risk mitigation.
• 
The team leveraged on-the-floor support from key experts at Company A to capture tacit knowl-
edge transfer between functions as the TT progressed to development personnel and again to 
commercial production personnel. 
Use of a detailed knowledge transfer process with transparent communications allowed the TT project 
to be completed on time with no delays. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

56
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
8.6	
Performing Process Fit Assessment to Facilitate Technology Transfer
Product Lifecycle Phase: Development-Commercial
TT Process Stage: Initiation, Planning
Site Types: Internal-Internal
Company X developed a multivalent vaccine (Product Alpha) and produced phase I and II clinical 
drug substance materials at pilot scale. Company X determined that it required a commercial facility 
to produce drug substance for phase III clinical trials and commercial supply. A review of the market 
requirements pointed to the need for a change in scale, and company policy encouraged an increase in 
the level of automation to improve digitization of process data, reduce reliance on paper records, and 
reduce potential for human error. 
In order to guide equipment specifications, process engineers assigned to the TT Team at Company X 
(the SU) developed scaling factors for the pilot-to-commercial volumes covering each unit operation. 
The fact that Product Alpha was multivalent presented complications, as some serotypes had differ-
ent volume requirements for the same unit operation. To avoid purchasing a piece of equipment for 
each serotype, process engineers grouped the serotypes according to maximum and minimum volume 
requirements and determined the minimum amount of process equipment required to cover all cases. 
An initial process fit assessment was conducted in the Initiation stage with a general idea of requirements, 
followed by a detailed assessment during the Knowledge Transfer stage. With yield information from the 
SU, and the previously mentioned scaling factor, the detailed process fit assessment was more accurate 
and complete. In it, ingredient additions, flowrates, maximum and minimum vessel volumes, and similar 
mass balance parameters were assessed to check the fit of the process in both new and existing equipment.
It was also necessary to determine what process development work, if any, would be required to support 
the process transfer to the new facility, especially since a change in scale was necessary. Residence and mix-
ing times were altered in equipment and piping in the larger facility. Such changes were considered as part 
of the TT risk assessment. In this case, the mixing for a key reaction step was studied using computational 
flow dynamics modeling and a model chemical reaction to ensure adequate mixing at the larger scale. 
The process fit assessment begun during the Initiation stage and revised during the Knowledge Trans-
fer stage was vital to ensuring that the right equipment was specified and procured and that the right 
process development work was conducted to ensure a successful TT of Product Alpha.
8.7	
Planning Ahead for On Time Commercial Launch
Product Lifecycle Phase: Commercial-Commercial
TT Process Stages: Initiation, Planning, Execution, Handover
Site Types: Internal-External
Business considerations are usually the driving factor for performing a TT, with identification of the 
RU being the first key deliverable. In this case study, Company A (the SU) wanted to consider transfer-
ring a sterile parenteral drug product to another facility. 
A small team of experts from Company A’s project management, business, quality, and manufactur-
ing functional areas performed due diligence in the choice of the RU (Company B). Once the RU 
was identified and a nondisclosure agreement was executed, the TT PM at the SU expanded the SU 
TT Team to include the Analytical, Regulatory, and Engineering functions. The RU also formed a 
TT Team of corresponding functional areas. These two TT teams established regular meetings to fa-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

57
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
cilitate KT and communication. Working together, the teams developed the project plan, defined the 
regulatory strategy for approval of the drug product, and executed a risk assessment of the knowledge 
elements needed to adapt the manufacturing process to the equipment at the RU in order to produce 
product to the quality target product profile and specifications required.
While completing the regulatory filing submission and health authority inspections, preparations be-
gan to hand over the product to manufacturing. The RU TT Team held meetings of increasing fre-
quency closer to the start date for commercial production. During these meetings, the RU TT Team 
shared all lessons learned from product performance, equipment and process knowledge, and supplier 
management, including component and material suppliers with lead times. Formal introduction to 
key contacts were made, and key commercial systems such as material and batch management, supply 
management, and equipment were set up and ready for the new product. The RU TT Team recom-
mended essential elements for the operator training, including lessons learned, that needed to be 
incorporated into the batch record. The RU TT Team also recommended changes to the production 
schedule to take into consideration learnings from run performance and resource needs. In addition, 
the RU TT Team ensured that spare parts and component needs were set up and ready for the antici-
pated forecast and ensured the production schedule maintained an up-to-date, 18-month forecast.
Changeover (cleaning validation) and validation of the aseptic manufacturing process at the vendor 
facility was on a critical timeline for manufacturing of regulatory batches, regulatory approval, and 
launch of commercial product from the vendor site. The TT was closed by the handover from the TT 
Team to a post-transfer operations team with complementary expertise and responsibilities for control 
of commercial production.
As a result of this successful planning and management of Handover activities, the site was ready to 
begin commercial production at the scheduled start without any delays.
8.8	
Navigating Process, Capital, & Ownership Changes During a Drug 
Product Transfer
Product Lifecycle Phase: Development-Commercial
TT Process Stage: All: Initiation, Planning, Knowledge Transfer, Readiness, Execution, Handover
Site Types: External-External
In today’s manufacturing, it is common when transferring technology from one manufacturing site 
to another manufacturing site for both sites to be external to the MAH. So-called “virtual companies” 
may start with one external supplier, then later add suppliers or switch suppliers for quality or pricing 
reasons. This case study, which involved the decision to switch manufacturers upon completion of 
clinical phase III, discusses the basics that should be considered for a seamless transfer.
Initiation: Following a capacity analysis aligned to the business strategy, the MAH decided to contin-
ue with external manufacturing. With regulatory considerations the driving factor, the MAH decided 
to transfer production from the external party manufacturing the clinical phase III supplies (Company 
A) to a different external party for commercial production. The MAH’s existing cross-functional TT 
Team remained with the product to facilitate this new TT, and a TT proposal was drafted.
Led by the TT PM, the TT Team visited the prospective commercial site (Company B) to evaluate 
the potential fit and identify the process, equipment, and analytical method gaps that would need 
to be addressed for a successful transfer. A material supply agreement and related quality agreement 
were reached. Because the MAH did not want Company A to know about the pending transfer to 
Company B, the material supply agreement remained confidential. In this case, the MAH acted as the 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

58
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
responsible SU and no communication was allowed between Company A and Company B. With the 
approval of the TT proposal, the steering committee made the decision to launch with Company B.
Planning: A detailed project plan that spelled out clear deliverables by phase and stage gate and de-
tailed the project governance that was created and approved by the SU and the RU (Company B).
The same raw material vendors would be used, though all vendors needed to be requalified. For qualifi-
cation, each vendor was required to supply three lots of raw materials used in manufacturing, followed 
by reissuing of all specifications, methods, and other supporting chemistry documents. The batch record 
was transferred, and the equipment was purchased to match as closely as possible the current process. 
In this case, the scale was to be increased, which resulted in a new registration batch followed by three 
validation batches. Based on process knowledge and guided by the process failure mode effects analysis, 
a process validation master plan was approved that defined the necessary protocols to be executed.
The MAH discussed scalable processes, engineering batches, and process sampling and controls. The decision 
was made to separate the batch record into two—one batch record for mixing and one for filling—as there 
was a significant hold time after mixing and a check was needed on the product before filling. The steering 
committee approved the stage gate, authorizing the TT Team to proceed to full-scale manufacturing.
Execution: Once new equipment was installed and validated, dynamic smoke studies were conducted, 
and Company B decided to perform media fills using their specific vial and equipment to demonstrate 
that aseptic conditions were maintained under the slightly changed conditions. Microbiological test-
ing of all personnel and the environment was performed throughout the process using touch plates, 
and a swab study was performed after a risk assessment to determine the appropriate environmental 
monitoring program.
According to the stability plan, stability studies were performed in both the upright and inverted 
positions for all batches. All the RU’s cleaning procedures, cleaning swab-testing, protocols, reports, 
training, and risk assessments were determined to be adequate as is and were used for the transfer. Se-
rialization, packaging, and labeling were agreed upon. Company B wanted the equipment to be able 
to label for unit-dosing before unit-dose labeling became mandatory.
Methods were successfully transferred and were qualified or validated per requirements.
Project Closure/Lessons Learned: The TT was successful but, in hindsight, the process could have 
been smoother had the MAH and Company B identified early on which party would be responsible 
for the purchase of the additional capital. In the end, the MAH and the RU agreed to share these costs, 
with the exception that the Company B agreed to purchase a couple of the more expensive items. An 
additional difficulty was that the MAH had not negotiated or retained the rights to the methods, batch 
records, and all documents necessary for the transfer that Company A was performing for them. Had 
the MAH preemptively ensured it owned those rights, the TT would have been easier to execute.
8.9	
Failed Process Qualification Due to Incomplete Process Readiness & 
Knowledge Transfer
Product Lifecycle Phase: Commercial-Commercial
TT Process Stage: Readiness, Execution
Site Types: External-External
Company A made a business decision to outsource its manufacturing and packaging process for Prod-
uct X, a new vaccine. At the time, Company A outsourced Product X with a CMO, Company B, but 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

59
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
was unhappy with their services. Based on cost savings and strategy, Company A decided to discon-
tinue business with Company B by the end of the year, and it awarded a TT project to a new CMO 
(Company C) with an aggressive timeline. Company A informed Company C that the product must 
be successfully launched within 12 months to ensure that commercial supply was not interrupted. 
Company A stressed this criticality, as they could not go back to Company B for additional commer-
cial business. 
Company A and Company C kicked off the project smoothly and progressed to Planning and Readiness 
activities. Upon execution of the engineering runs, however, results were suboptimal. Company C had 
several ideas to improve the process to better control the results, ensure higher yield, improve confidence 
in right-first-time process qualification and, from their experience, avoid longer-term out-of-specifica-
tion results during commercial production. These improvements would require additional, unbudgeted 
spending by Company A to perform additional batches, however, as well as additional time, which would 
push the overall timeline beyond the 12 months specified and make the target launch impossible. 
Company A and Company C were misaligned and escalated the issues to their managements, losing 
several weeks in the process. Company C felt strongly that it should not proceed with process qualifi-
cation with the current suboptimal results, and Company A wanted to proceed, at risk, to meet supply 
needs. Finally, a compromise was reached: Company C’s TT Team agreed to make minor improve-
ments to the current process with current equipment, capabilities, batch records, and trainings, and to 
conduct one additional engineering run to improve process understanding and verify improvements. 
If those steps went well, the team would move into process qualification. Assuming those batches 
passed all requirements, they would be commercially saleable. Following release of these initial launch 
batches, the Company C TT Team would revisit the proposed improvements. Company A accepted 
liability should the strategy of moving ahead with the qualification without implementing all identi-
fied improvements fail. 
Unfortunately, the process qualification batch did not pass. Three months were lost executing the ini-
tial improvements and engineering run, analyzing data and investigating the root cause of the failure, 
finalizing a recommended path forward to improve the process, and obtaining alignment on addi-
tional costs and an adjusted timeline. The team agreed on a path forward and Company C successfully 
launched the product by the middle of the following year, almost six months late. Company A was 
forced to consider extending business relations with Company B to supply their product in the interim 
or otherwise impact market supply.
8.10	 Effective Use of Knowledge Transfer 
Product Lifecycle Phase: Commercial-Commercial
TT Process Stage: Initiation, Planning, Execution
Site Types: External-Internal
In this case study, the technology of a commercialized sterile drug product (mAb-X) approved for 
commercial drug product manufacturing at an external site (Site A) was transferred to Site B, the RU. 
Site B was an internal site of the MAH for mAb-X (Company Y) and was new to commercial drug 
manufacturing. Site A and Site B did not communicate directly during the TT. The Manufacturing 
Science and Technology group of Company Y served as the SU and was responsible for the KT from 
Site A to the Site B.
Company Y had experience with TT for product mAb-X having previously transferred the product 
to Site A in a development-to-commercial phase TT. Therefore, Company Y already possessed infor-
mation important to the TT, such as the commercial manufacturing process, required equipment, 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

60
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
process parameters classification, risk assessment for the commercial process, and analytical methods 
for product quality testing. This information was used as a reference for the TT of the same product 
to Site B. 
The goal of the TT was to minimize the number of changes to the existing manufacturing process used 
by Site A while designing a process for commercial manufacture that fit within the constraints of Site 
B. To achieve this objective, a facility-fit and gap assessment was performed for Site B, which became 
the key to the success of the TT. The existing risk assessment information for mAb-X at Site A was 
used as the starting point for the risk assessment for site B. Also, since the RU was a new commercial 
drug product manufacturing site, the TT team worked with the on-site Validation group at Site B to 
map out the equipment validation activities required to support this TT (installation qualification, 
operational qualification, and performance qualification). An integrated project plan was drafted dur-
ing the Planning stage that included an overview of all TT activities needed for the successful TT and 
their interdependencies. 
The SU shared the information on analytical methods from the prior mAb-X TT with the RU. An 
evaluation for implementation of existing analytical methods for Site B was completed, and resources 
were allocated for the method transfer, training, and execution. Change controls and documentation 
procedures for manufacturing mAb-X were established before the TT activities to Site B were execut-
ed. All changes related to process, raw material specifications, equipment, and process parameters for 
the TT were captured under the central change control management system. 
As part of the Readiness stage, the sourcing of raw materials, components, and equipment was re-
viewed, and relevant information was included in the validated electronic system (in this case, SAP). 
The information for product, packaging, and component specifications was reviewed and approved by 
both the RU and the SU. In addition, upon request, vendors/suppliers supplied drawings and other 
required information. Suppliers also provided certificate of analysis information for all raw materials 
and components, which was reviewed. Inspection and acceptance criteria for receiving raw materials 
and components in a GMP facility were agreed upon by the RU and SU teams with input from the 
Quality function.
As part of process performance qualification (PPQ) readiness activities, the SU Engineering group, 
in collaboration with their RU counterparts, prepared process description documents capturing the 
commercial manufacturing process for mAb-X at Site B. Information from the process description 
document for mAb-X at Site A was used as a template, and appropriate changes were made to capture 
the differences in the process at Site B. Process characterization studies were carried out to support 
the changes in the commercial process for Site B based on the facility-fit and gap assessment exercise, 
which was critical for the success of this TT. Also, prior knowledge from the TT of mAb-X to Site A 
was leveraged for process characterization studies. 
Engineering runs were performed using surrogate and using mAb-X to understand the design space 
for the operation of process parameters and to determine the normal operating range and proven ac-
ceptable range for various unit operations. The required number of PPQ batches were manufactured 
using a matrix approach to bracket the batch size (minimum and maximum), and the rationale for 
the PPQ strategy was documented prior to execution. Post-PPQ, all deviations were closed and docu-
mented, and required CAPAs were identified and implemented. At this point, PPQ summary reports 
were written that captured the process parameter data for all PPQ batches, hold-time data for various 
process steps, product quality attribute results (in-process and lot-release testing results), and devia-
tions for the PPQ batches. In addition, at the end of the PPQ campaign, completed batch records and 
cleaning batch records were reviewed. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

61
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
8.11	 Use of Stage Gates to Address Process Readiness Challenges
Product Lifecycle Phase: Development-Commercial
TT Process Stage: Readiness
Site Types: Internal-Internal (Global)
Company A transferred a very complex process involving a new drug product from development 
(Product X) in this case study. The new molecular entity required new technologies for which limited 
industry expertise existed. The TT Team encountered significant delays, and they spent more than 
two years troubleshooting various problems with the new equipment and repeating developmental 
studies on the new equipment to finalize the process parameters and develop a robust process. The TT 
Team did not feel it was possible to meet the company leadership’s goals of both advancing Product X 
to PPQ to meet launch requirements and maintaining the project within the adjusted budget, which 
was well over the original budget. This misalignment prompted the TT Team to implement a steering 
committee and stage gates. 
The team designed the formal TT process to allow both functional management and senior leadership 
to review key project data, risks, accomplishments, and proposed options for each phase of the project 
for risk mitigation. By engaging senior leaders from elsewhere within the company, senior manage-
ment was able to provide additional expertise on the new technology and similar processes. These 
leaders also offered different perspectives on the suboptimal data. Following review of the data, and 
with support from management to improve the process, the TT team agreed on the next steps, tried 
the recommended strategies, and leveraged on-site support from proposed SMEs within the company. 
The improvements to the processes resulted in a product that met requirements. 
Before proceeding, the TT Team facilitated another stage gate meeting to review recent data and 
ensure alignment on next steps. The process was much improved, but given the unique process and 
requirements, new technologies, and limited expertise, the steering committee decided the TT Team 
should execute one more study to facilitate the learnings and gain additional experience. That study 
would be followed by a mock run (water batch) to improve the training and experience of the produc-
tion personnel prior to proceeding to PPQ. Ultimately, the team successfully executed their qualifica-
tion batches right first time. Although the added developmental studies and mock run took additional 
time, the TT Team agreed that by managing the previous misalignment, they had saved time by pre-
venting a failed qualification or Handover. 
8.12	 Importance of Handover Stage for a Successful Commercial Start 
Product Lifecycle Phase: Development-Commercial
TT Process Stage: Handover
Site Types: Internal-Internal
Company A had little experience with TT; however, with a new building and equipment, it had 
gained the technological capability to support a new sterile drug product transfer being planned 
(Product X). In addition, Company A hired personnel, bringing new functions into the facility in-
cluding TT PMs, scientists, regulatory affairs staff, and process engineers. Company A also brought 
in several experienced consultants to support the new equipment and its validation at the facility, 
who stayed on through the Product X launch. The TT Team was well supported with project staffing, 
regular stage gates, a steering committee, and engaged leadership. Due to their limited experience in 
TT and the risks associated with the new process, equipment, and technology, the company man-
agement also ensured that SMEs would be closely involved to monitor and support each step of the 
project.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

62
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
During development and process qualification, the TT Team used an “all hands on deck” approach, 
expecting the entire team to participate on the floor and oversee the process during execution of the 
studies and commercial batches. The team managed the checklists, oversaw the batch records, and led 
each step to ensure the production operators and area personnel were correctly executing the process 
requirements. Production personnel also incorporated interventions, adjustments, and recommen-
dations based on learnings from the TT Team’s experience. The team wanted to make sure that the 
expertise and learnings from their history with the project and equipment were leveraged to ensure 
the commercial batches would be completed right first time. As a result, the project was successful: the 
commercial batches were executed flawlessly and met all requirements for release. Following project 
closure, the TT Team personnel were repurposed to other positions within the company and the con-
sultant contracts were terminated. 
As the facility entered routine commercial operations for this product, however, the production per-
sonnel found the new process and product requirements very challenging. Without the expertise on 
the floor to oversee and guide them every step of the way, the batch records, SOPs, and training proved 
insufficient. Due to the production personnel’s lack of understanding on how to set up and operate 
the new equipment, the facility experienced significant downtime and eventually had to obtain on-
site vendor support to retrain and create training guides for the team. Because of the lost time, failed 
batches due to human error, investigations, and CAPAs, the manufacturing team decided to update 
the SOPs and batch records associated with the new process and retrain the personnel. After several 
months—and significant product losses and costs—the production personnel had obtained the nec-
essary knowledge on the process and had received adequate training through the updated SOPs and 
batch records to successfully and repeatably execute the processes without additional support. 
In hindsight, if the TT Reference Guide approach had been used, critical knowledge elements could 
have been identified in the KT stage, and risk mitigation strategies could have been developed to en-
sure the successful deployment of commercial operations.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

63
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
• Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an 
Authorized User 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
• Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other 
than an Authorized User 
• Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available 
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
• Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic 
Publication 
• Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA 
Electronic Publication 
• Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication 
or its content 
• Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or 
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose 
• Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any 
text or graphics 
• Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information 
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material 
To License or purchase Reprints
• Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a fee.  
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact: 
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, 
ext. 133. Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, 
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
• Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.  
To order reprints, please contact:  
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150, 
Bethesda, MD 20814.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

Technology Transfer
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside 
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are 
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. 
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the 
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a 
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s 
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Biotechnology Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality 
Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and deter-
mines whether to publish or not publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged 
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be 
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org. 
PDA Officers and Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Susan Schniepp, RCA
Chair-Elect: Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck 
Treasurer: Melissa Seymour, Biogen, Inc.
Secretary: Emma Ramnarine, Genentech/Roche
Immediate Past-Chair: Jette Christensen, Novo Nordisk A/S
President: Richard Johnson
Directors 
Barbara M. Allen, PhD, Eli Lilly and Company
Bettine Boltres, PhD, West Pharmaceutical Services
Tia Bush, Amgen, Inc.
Javier Camposano, Celltrion
Mirko Gabriele, PhD, Thermo Fisher Scientific
Ghada Haddad, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Andrew Hopkins, Abbvie
Stephan O. Krause, PhD, AstraZeneca Diagnostics
Amy McDaniel, BMS
Mary Oates, PhD, Emergent Biosolutions
Mathias Romacker
Osamu Shirokizawa, Life Scientia
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Glenn Wright, VP, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing and Press Relations
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer
Sanctioning Advisory Board: RAQAB
Anette Yan Marcussen, Novo Nordisk (Chair)	
Denyse Baker, AstraZeneca	
Jacqueline Veivia-Panter, Minaris Regenerative 
Medicine
Masahiro Akimoto, Heartseed Inc.
Cylia Chen-Ooi, Amgen
Marcello Colao, GSK Vaccines
Karolyn Gale, Emergent BioSolutions, Inc.
Rosane Guimarães, Bio-Manguinhos/FIOCRUZ
Kir Henrici, The Henrici Group, LLC
Frithjof Holtz, Merck KGaA
Dinesh Khokal, Amgen, Inc.	
Beth Kirschenheiter, BMS (Bristol Myers Squibb)
Demetra Macheras, AbbVie, Inc.
Amanda McFarland, ValSource, LLC	
Jeanne Moldenhauer, Excellent Pharma Consulting, Inc.
Catriona Murphy, 	Eli Lilly and Company Limited
Ajay Pazhayattil, Capcium Inc.
Lorianne Richter, Ultrageynx
Eva Urban, CSL Behring AG
Gopi Vudathala, Incyte Corporation
Kelly Waldron, ValSource, Inc.
Martin Wisher, MHW Biologics Consulting
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

