number of products. Most often, their size is that of a small portable cooler used mainly for delivering 
products to nursing homes, hospitals, clinics, or vaccination centers. Usually, these systems can only 
maintain a temperature of 10 °C to 20 °C below the ambient temperature. Like passive-thermal 
packages, active-thermal containers must follow the same process for qualification. Since these systems 
are designed to be used several times, an inspection process must be in place to ensure that they will 
perform the same each time. 
5.3.3 Sustainability in Packaging 
Pressure to be more sustainable has reached the last-mile segment. More countries and users are asking 
for greater environmental consideration in the usage of packaging for the last mile. Much passive-
thermal packaging is single-use and made of materials that can be difficult to recycle and are not 
biodegradable, including expanded polystyrene (EPS) and polyurethane. New materials are available 
that provide a more sustainable solution such as starch-based, paper, cotton, or wood-fiber packaging 
that is recyclable, biodegradable, or compostable. There are limitations to many of the new sustainable 
materials, however. Some are susceptible to water damage and may require the use of plastic wrapping. 
Additionally, some of the materials may have lower thermal properties compared to traditional 
materials and require thicker insulation or additional refrigerants to provide comparable thermal 
performance. Finally, the cost for these new sustainable solutions can be higher than traditional 
insulation materials.  
Another strategy to improve sustainability is to employ reusable solutions. Last-mile delivery provides 
an opportunity for reusable packages when end users can easily and cost-effectively return thermal 
solutions. Sustainability related to reusable solutions can sometimes be complex, as sometimes the 
carbon footprint of reverse logistics can be greater than a single-use solution with sustainable materials. 
When using a reusable solution, a documented assessment procedure for each solution must be done 
to ensure their performance in the last mile. For example, it is essential for packages made of vacuum 
insulation panels (VIP) to be inspected before use as the loss of the vacuum will significantly diminish 
the thermal performance of the shipping solution. Also, before reusing thermal solutions, sanitation 
procedures could be required. 
5.4 Transportation 
Various transportation methods are used within the last mile (e.g., air, truck, car, bike). Regardless of 
the method, temperature should be maintained to the label claim on the product’s outer packaging or 
the manufacturer’s instructions. Most transport within the last mile is national and each carrier may 
have different transportation methods. Wholesale distributors and local couriers, for example, typically 
use ground methods of transportation. Understanding the method of transportation is important to 
ensuring that proper storage conditions can be maintained throughout the delivery process. 
Considerations for any appropriate transportation method should include the staging process, weather, 
length of transit, and accessibility to the patient; likewise, qualification testing should include each of 
these considerations. It may be necessary to stop during certain weather conditions, e.g., certain months 
of the year, such as the rain season in Africa and Asia or low temperatures in Canada. Similarly, 
deliveries to countries where certain days are religious holidays or long weekends should be scheduled 
accordingly. For specific deliveries, even drones may be used. When using specific solutions like drones 
(e.g., to reach remote patient locations), it must be done in compliance with jurisdictional laws and 
regulations. Qualification testing for such specific solutions should include any stability issues that may 
arise from dropping the shipment to the ground.  
5.4.1 Road Transportation 
Depending on the product, distribution by road might require a temperature-controlled vehicle, like a 
van, truck, or motortruck with trailer (48). PDA TR 64 defines a temperature-controlled trailer as "a 
cargo box attached to a truck…that is equipped with a TCU [temperature-controlled unit] to provide 
active cooling or heating control inside the box…sometimes referred to as ‘reefers’” (44). Most 


temperature-controlled trailers are certified under the Agreement on the International Carriage of Perishable 
Foodstuffs and on the Special Equipment to be Used for such Carriage and have one TCU (mono-temp trailer) 
or have one TCU mounted at the front of the trailer and a second evaporator at the rear doors (bi-
temp trailer) (49). Bi-temp trailers are the most commonly used temperature-controlled road vehicles 
in domestic and international road transport to keep temperatures at 2 °C to 8 °C, 15 °C to 25 °C, or 
-15 °C to -25 °C. The bi-temp trailer has a movable split wall that can divide the front from the back
of the trailer where the evaporator at the rear doors controls the temperature in the rear section (48).
Bi-temp solutions are also available in the marketplace for vans.
5.4.2 Drones 
Drones may be an interesting alternative transport mode to deliver low-volume product(s) quickly in 
5 to 60 minutes over a distance up to 100 km to remote/rural areas, such as coastal islands, mountain 
areas, tropical forests, areas with poor infrastructure and infrequent logistics, and/or in case of 
emergency. Delivery drones can be piloted manually, highly automated, or fully automated under 
supervision of a qualified pilot, but will not take off in severe weather conditions (e.g., hail, snow, heavy 
rain, wind). Drone delivery recipients can be trained remotely in less than ten minutes to be familiar 
with drone unloading practices and/or refueling (e.g., exchange of batteries). In the near-term, drone 
transportation is relatively expensive, so routine drone flights would mainly be an option for high-value 
products. 
While drone transport is by definition air transport regulated by national and/or international aviation 
authorities, there are key differences versus shipping using conventional aircraft. A package sent via 
drone is exposed to ambient conditions in a way that a package in the cargo hold of an aircraft is not. 
For this reason, it is essential that the packaging provides any necessary temperature and weather 
protection. In addition, drone transportation has the potential to expose the contents to shock, drop, 
vibration and numerous other factors that could impact the product in a manner that may be very 
different from that experienced in the cargo hold of an aircraft. On the other hand, drones fly up to 
120 meters (about 400 feet) above the ground, which is not high enough to create the pressure concerns 
experienced with aircraft. As the use of drones for the last mile increases, it will be important to provide 
appropriately protective secondary and tertiary packaging for pharmaceuticals and vaccines transported 
via this mode. Specific protection should be considered based on the type of risk and qualification if 
the critical process parameters are met. 
5.4.3 Distribution from Point of Dispensing to End-Use in Mail 
Service Pharmacy 
The traditional dispensing role of pharmacists has shifted to include a clinical focus in monitoring the 
appropriateness of prescribing and in-patient care. Automated programs, including mail-service 
pharmacies, allow the time for these additional clinical responsibilities. Given the shift in dispensing 
trends, quality programs used throughout the pharmaceutical industry to transport medications must 
also be implemented at mail-order pharmacy facilities as well as at local pharmacies.  
When mailing pharmaceuticals for home delivery, temperature assurance should be maintained until 
the patient can return the product to its proper storage environment. When selecting the appropriate 
transport company, thermal solution, or theft protection, mail-order operations must especially focus 
on thermal conditions. The duration for the thermal qualification should start at the time the first 
package is packed until the end user opens it. For example, next-day shipping should have a qualified 
thermal solution for 36 hours that considers the time the first package is packed, delivered to the end 
user’s address (doorstep or mailbox), and opened by the patient at the end of the day (after working 
hours). This example, however, does not consider all the issues involved when the time frame of 
delivery is calculated; in many cases, significantly more time may be needed.  
Due to the expansion of mail-order pharmacies, many facilities must ship to multiple regions, which 
increases the complexity of selecting the appropriate thermal solutions. Many pharmacies currently 


choose thermal solutions using a dynamic weather system based on the weather conditions of the 
origin and final destination. Dynamic weather systems provide a more accurate estimate of what the 
package will experience but also require having multiple qualified thermal solutions for different 
weather scenarios, such as cold to warm and warm to cold. Pharmacies that do not use dynamic weather 
systems most often use a universal thermal solution.  
Strategies to improve delivery include but are not limited to: 
•
Minimize transport hours
•
Decrease the time packages are left outside, in a mailbox, or on a carrier’s truck
•
Use prequalified or validated passive-thermal solutions or active temperature control (e.g., reefer
unit)
•
Include temperature indicators or loggers on the product or packaging
•
Develop and maintain ongoing quality programs
5.5 Temperature-Monitoring During Transport 
Global regulations for the transport of temperature-sensitive pharmaceutical products specify that 
transportation is an extension of storage. Therefore, temperature should be maintained to the label 
claim on the product’s outer packaging or the manufacturer’s instructions during transportation 
throughout the entire supply chain, including the last mile.  
To achieve this, the shipper may use qualified temperature-controlled shipping systems such as active-
and/or passive-thermal solutions. Although these solutions may have been qualified to provide 
assurance that they will provide adequate thermal protection during shipping, unforeseen events may 
cause temperature excursions. The only way to provide absolute assurance that the required 
temperature range has been maintained is to include temperature monitors, data loggers, or indicators. 
5.5.1 Temperature-Monitoring or Data Loggers 
A wide variety of temperature-monitoring or data-logging solutions are available for the tracking of 
temperature during transportation. One option is “passive” USB data loggers which can be 
programmed with predefined settings (e.g., logging of internal temperature, a start-delay, alarm limits), 
started, and applied to the shipment. Upon receipt of the shipment, the data logger is retrieved, and 
the data downloaded and reviewed to support the decision about product disposition. There are also 
solutions that use near-field communication or Bluetooth, allowing for easier retrieval of the data upon 
receipt of the shipment. 
Near-real-time (“active”) data loggers are also available which use global positioning systems and 
cellular communication networks to transmit data “live.” They allow the shipper to view the 
temperature data mid-shipment, with the possibility of intervention should an event/issue occur which 
could affect product quality. 
Temperature data loggers (passive and active) provide a full set of temperature data for the shipment, 
including a temperature reading or recording at a set recording interval (e.g., every 10 minutes) as well 
as a detailed statistical analysis of the shipment (e.g., cumulative time outside a defined limit). Even in 
the event of an alarm triggered by the data logger, an analysis of the full data set may still allow the 
product to be released if the temperature excursion is found to be within the allowable limits based on 
stability data for the product. 
5.5.2 Temperature Indicators 
Temperature indicators come in the form of chemical or electronic indicators. These are a lower-cost 
alternative to data loggers but, whereas a data logger provides a full set of temperature data for 
shipment, including statistical analysis, an indicator will only confirm if the required temperature range 


was maintained. Temperature indicators do not generally show when the temperature excursion 
occurred, however, some electronic indicators will allow a cumulative alarm to be programmed into 
the indicator. 
5.5.3 Risk-Based Approach: Implementation and Management 
Implementing temperature-monitoring in transportation across the end-to-end supply-chain is highly 
recommended, however, it may not always be possible to use temperature-monitoring solutions within 
the last mile. A risk-based approach should be used to assess the suitability of using temperature-
monitoring solutions (50, 51). Where it is assessed as not suitable or practical (e.g., shipping directly to 
a patient who may struggle with the technology), time-based qualified shipping solutions may be 
implemented. 
As well as using an independent temperature-monitoring solution, if the product is being transported 
in an active thermal solution, it may be appropriate to use the vehicle temperature-monitoring system. 
Whatever system is used, it is vital to make sure the device is properly calibrated to ensure that the 
recorded data is accurate. The precision of the device should be at least ±0.5 °C. 
The location of the temperature-monitoring solution is also very important. The location should be 
based on the temperature-mapping or qualification of the shipping system and placed to represent the 
product temperature as accurately as possible. Poor placement could result in a true temperature 
excursion being missed and product being released when it should be discarded, or a temperature 
excursion being recorded due to measurement of air temperature when, in fact, the product quality is 
not affected. Best practice is to put the temperature sensor next to the product(s) shipped. 
Using reputable providers and solutions, executing an appropriate assessment and/or qualification, 
and assuring a robust implementation and ongoing management process will ensure product safety and 
efficacy. 
5.6 Security 
Security measures taken during the last mile are intended to ensure only the intended recipient receives 
the package. This may include signature-required, tamper-proof, and anonymous packaging. The cost 
of using these methods is balanced against the risk mitigation for each medication, transportation 
method, and consumer. The shipper needs to analyze the use of security methods consistently. 
6.0 Data and Knowledge Management 
Data is critical to manage and prove that products are delivered with the right quantity and quality at 
the right time and under the right conditions. Data can be product information, transport and storage 
conditions, track-and-trace or traceability data, serialization numbers, and other information such as 
supply-chain disruptions related to traffic jams, weather conditions, and inventory levels. Data can be 
static or dynamic. Static data does not change after being recorded and is a fixed data set, whereas 
dynamic data may change after it is recorded and must be continually updated (e.g., temperature data, 
location track-and-trace data of shipments). Sections 6.1–6.1.3 describe the management of data in 
relation to GDP and good documentation practices (GDocP), including the ALCOA+ data-integrity 
principles. 
6.1 Good Documentation Practices and Data Integrity 
Since 2015, regulatory bodies like the EMA, FDA, WHO, and Medicines & Healthcare products 
Regulatory Agency (MHRA) have had an enhanced interest in ensuring data integrity. Each has 
published data integrity guides to promote the transformation of the pharmaceutical industry to an 
elevated data integrity level. Initially, the main focus was on testing laboratories and manufacturing, 


but the guidelines also currently apply to distribution to ensure the quality, efficacy, and safety of the 
product is maintained according to local requirements (3, 9, 11, 52).  
6.1.1 Data Governance 
Data governance encompasses the people, processes, and technology arrangements required to achieve 
data integrity. Assuring data integrity requires appropriate quality and risk management systems, 
including adherence to GDocP and local regulations, such as General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) in Europe, that: 
• 
Address data ownership, access, and accountability for processes and risk management throughout 
the entire data lifecycle 
• 
Consider an adequate design, operation, and monitoring of processes and systems  
• 
Include controls over intentional and unintentional breaches of data integrity 
Data-governance design and controls must enable the detection of errors, lapses, and omissions of 
results and data during the data lifecycle. Controls can include procedural, organizational, and 
functional (technical) controls. 
The data governance system must include enough detail to allow accurate and complete reporting and 
interpretation of all data and must ensure data integrity. This system should include, but is not limited 
to, the following elements:  
• 
Validated computerized systems that are fit for their intended use, with special attention to any 
system used to create, process, and store data 
• 
Systems and procedures in place to ensure that records are reliable, complete, and accurate; these 
systems and procedures must also require that all test results that could affect the quality, safety, 
or efficacy of a drug are reported, reviewed, and assessed appropriately  
• 
Organization and storage of data in a way that is interpretable and traceable to the execution and 
purpose of distribution procedures  
• 
Controls in place to ensure that test data are not deleted and that changes to records are 
documented and justified, where required (e.g., audit trails should be enabled and reviewed) 
• 
Data retained in its original format; original records (or true copies), including electronic records, 
are subject to review by qualified personnel 
Risk management is an essential component of the data governance system. A risk-based approach to 
data management ensures that adequate resources are allocated and that control strategies for the 
assurance of the data integrity are commensurate with their potential impact on patient safety, product 
quality, and compliance with regulations. Where risks are identified, appropriate measures or safeguards 
should be implemented to ensure the integrity of critical data and records. 
6.1.2 Good Documentation Practices 
According to the FDA and other inspectorates, ensuring data integrity requires that data be attributable, 
legible, contemporaneous, original, accurate, complete, consistent, enduring, and available (ALCOA+). 
These general principles of GDocP apply to the management of records throughout its lifecycle, 
regardless of the medium (i.e., paper or electronic records), from the time data is first generated and 
any modifications made thereafter (52).  
The EU GDP provides guidance in Section 3.3.1 on how to manage data (53): 
• 
Data should only be entered into the computerised system or amended by persons authorised to 
do so.  


•
Data should be secured by physical or electronic means and protected against accidental or
unauthorised modifications.
•
Stored data should be checked periodically for accessibility.
•
Data should be protected by backing up at regular intervals. Back-up data should be retained for
the period stated in national legislation but at least five years at a separate and secure location.
•
Procedures to be followed if the system fails or breaks down should be defined. This should
include systems for the restoration of data.
The WHO guidance differs slightly from the EU GDP in the retention of the data, indicating that “all 
monitoring records should be kept for a minimum of the shelf-life of the product distributed plus one 
year, or as required by the national legislation” (11). However, national legislation may differ from 
either of the WHO or EU GDP guidances; for example the United Kingdom requires a two-year 
retention period, after which time records can be destroyed. 
Each paper and/or electronic record should be secured against modifications and/or deletions to the 
end of the retention time as defined by the applicable regulations. Therefore, a paper record should be 
traceable and stored in a secured environment (e.g., locked, fire-proof cabinet), whereas an electronic 
record should be secured in a computerized system which employs system access (segregation of 
duties), vulnerability scanning, security firewalls, antivirus applications, and security patches. In 
addition, risk assessment of the computerized system should provide requirements toward data 
business continuity management and recovery plan, data integrity, system weaknesses against human 
interactions, data manipulation, confidentiality, data privacy, and so on. In the procurement of new 
computer systems, consideration should be given to security, audit trails, data transfer, and data backup 
capability (53, 54). Using standalone systems should be avoided or mitigated where possible. Data 
management also requires a validation that secures the data, including training, risk assessment for 
outsourced activities (if applicable) such as use of cloud computing, system maintenance, backup 
system features, and data retirement. Cloud computing services are to be treated as a contracted service, 
with the risks identified and addressed, and the responsibilities of both parties clearly outlined in a 
suitable contract or service agreement. If storing electronic records in a PDF format, a risk assessment 
should be completed on the editability of the document. Some security settings for PDFs allow editing, 
which would not comply with requirements applicable to manufacturers in 21 CFR Part 11: Electronic 
Records; Electronic Signatures—Scope and Application and EU GDP Annex 11: Computerised Systems. 
6.1.3 Data Integrity and Quality Management 
There should be written procedure for a data-integrity and data-security assessment that identifies data 
integrity and data security risks and ensures that suitable procedural or technical controls have been 
applied. Any detected or potential data integrity or security breach must be documented as a deviation 
and investigated through the identification of the root cause and the determination of the resulting 
corrective and preventive action (CAPA) plan. Some examples of data integrity breaches include:  
•
Missing or untraceable data entries or archived paper documents
•
Missing a proof of delivery document
•
Missing temperature data logger
•
Data accidently or intentionally omitted or destroyed
•
Deficient electronic data backup or archive
•
Incorrect calculations impacting decisions
•
Unjustified alterations or manipulation of data (e.g., backdating)
•
Wrong access role used (e.g., administrator role used for routine tasks)


•
Data review not completed on a signed off report
•
Failure to comply with the ALCOA+ principles
•
Loss of data during data transfer or due to system failure
•
Sharing of user accounts or passwords
If the data-integrity breach may have an impact on product quality and/or patient safety, the violation 
must be escalated to management and communicated to customers (as applicable). An assessment of 
the breach must be conducted and the relevant regulatory or health authorities (e.g., country, local) 
must be notified, if required by local regulations. More information can be found in the FDA 21 CFR 
Part 11 and EU GMP Annex 11. 
6.2 Temperature Management 
Temperature is a critical process parameter that must be monitored and controlled in the supply chain 
during manufacturing, storage, and transportation to ensure that pharmaceutical products comply with 
the critical quality attributes to the end of their shelf life. To secure temperature control of 
pharmaceutical products in the supply chain, five basic principles should be applied by each supply-
chain stakeholder (41, 55): 
1.
Temperature specifications are set for products, processes, and systems.
2.
Temperature is controlled in an environment within the intended range using qualified active
and/or passive system(s).
3.
Temperature is measured by calibrated sensors at hot or cold spot location(s) based on
temperature-mapping studies.
4.
Temperature data is collected and securely stored in readable and retrievable electronic and/or
paper format according to ALCOA+ data integrity principles (53, 54).
5.
Temperature excursions are investigated and product dispositions are executed according to
current GDP (9, 51) and good pharmacy practices (56).
In event of temperature excursions, the product impact assessment and product disposition should be 
based on the generated data. However, additional non-GxP data (metadata) can be used by the business 
to gain a better understanding of the circumstances of the temperature excursion and to determine 
CAPAs for continuous improvement. In the end, temperature data storage, whether on paper or on a 
third-party client’s cloud solution, needs to comply with all relevant regulatory requirements for 
security and data integrity. This will ensure that all collected and recorded data is complete, consistent, 
and accurate throughout the data lifecycle.  
6.3 Other Critical Process Parameters 
In addition to verifying the shipment and receipt of products, monitoring devices may record 
temperature at other points in the supply chain. Other possible enhancements that may prove useful 
include detecting the opening and closing of packing containers and providing a geofence. A geofence 
is a virtual perimeter for a real-world geographic area; it could be dynamically generated or matched to 
a predefined set of boundaries. The degree to which these devices may replace or supplement 
temperature monitors and recorders remains to be determined. 
In the last mile, finished products are protected against humidity by the primary packaging and against 
light by the primary/secondary packaging. Therefore, removal of secondary packaging is not 
recommended as light may impact product quality, safety, and effectiveness. If a product is moved 


from a hot, humid environment to a cold environment, that product may get wet due to condensation 
which may impact readability of a batch number or expiry date.  
In the case of a mail-order pharmacy, most shipments use water-based cool bags, packs, or bricks 
(refrigerated or frozen) in “thermal pack-outs.” These bags may leak on occasion due to initial physical 
damage done while frozen (e.g., dropped, impacted); these leaks will generate a significant amount of 
water in the secondary packaging. It is important to use a sealed bag to protect both the pharmaceutical 
product as well as the pharmacy prescription label. The use of dunnage is also advised to prevent 
movement inside the outer package. Air pillows are not recommended because their volume will 
decrease significantly at lower temperature and will not provide significant protection. 
6.4 Serialization 
Serialization is the assigning of a unique serial number to each saleable unit of every prescription 
product. It provides the product’s origin, and other information in the form of a barcode or two-
dimensional (2D) data matrix. This also serves as a unit’s tracking or traceability system through the 
entire supply chain–from production, through distribution, to the point of dispensing to the patient. 
Serialization of pharmaceutical products has been introduced in recent years in many countries to 
protect the patient against counterfeit and falsified drugs. Counterfeit drugs can prove ineffective, 
harmful and, in some cases, fatal. Falsified medicines are often disguised as authentic medicines but 
may contain ingredients of poor or toxic quality or in the wrong dosage. 
6.4.1 Serialization in the European Union 
To address the threat of falsified medicines in the EU, Directive 2011/62/EU and its Delegated 
Regulation 2016/161 include measures aimed at preventing the entry of falsified medicinal products 
into the legal supply chain. The Directive introduces harmonized EU measures to fight medicine 
falsifications; it ensures that medicines are safe and that the trade in medicines is rigorously controlled 
including (57, 58): 
•
Obligatory safety features–a unique identifier and an antitampering device on the outer packaging
of all prescription medicines
•
A common, EU-wide logo to identify legal online pharmacies
•
Tougher rules on the import of active pharmaceutical ingredients
•
Strengthened record-keeping requirements for wholesale distributors
Since 2019, the EU has required manufacturers of prescription medicines to apply a 2D barcode for 
the serial numbers, which must be unique and must be randomly generated. In addition to the serial 
number, the data matrix code contains the product code, batch number, expiration date, and (if 
necessary) national reimbursement number. 
Once the manufacturer has sealed the medicine boxes with a tamper-evident seal and affixed the data 
matrix, the serial numbers are uploaded in the central database (EU hub) and downloaded to the 
databases of the member state where the boxes are being sent. It is possible for a consignment of 
medicines to go to another country, but that triggers an Intermarket Transaction. If the target market 
of a medicine changes, the batch's serial number is sent via the EU hub to the database of the correct 
country. 
Directive 2011/62/EU obliges pharmacists and healthcare professionals who supply medicines to the 
public to check that the tamper-evident seal of the medicine packages was not tampered with and, then 
to deregister the unique serial number on the medicine packaging before dispensing it to a patient (57). 
In addition, the unique serial numbers in the EU hub can be traced to all national medicines repository 
systems in which the package could be dispensed. 


Wholesale distributors must verify all packs of medicines they buy from other wholesalers as well as 
any packs returned to them. They must decommission products they export outside the EU and at the 
request of member states for other entities (Article 23) who are not themselves connected to the 
national medicines verification system in their country. 
The pharmacist decommissions each pack in the central database by scanning the 2D code. If the 
pharmacist receives an alert indicating that the serial number does not exist or has already been 
decommissioned, or if the tamper-evident seal has been tampered with, the pack must be quarantined 
by the pharmacist until the case is resolved. If a potentially falsified medicine is identified, the 
pharmacist must report it to the National Competent Authority. A written, approved procedure should 
be available and followed to deal with such cases. 
6.4.2 Serialization in the United States 
Section 913 of the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA; Public Law 
110-85) amended the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to create “Sec. 505D. Pharmaceutical
Security.” This section requires the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services to develop standards
as well as “identify and validate effective technologies for the purpose of securing the drug supply
chain against counterfeit, diverted, subpotent, substandard, adulterated, misbranded, or expired drugs”
(59).
In March 2010, FDA published the Guidance for Industry: Standards for Securing the Drug Supply Chain - 
Standardized Numerical Identification for Prescription Drug Packages for identifying package-level standardized 
numerical identifiers (SNI) as an initial step toward facilitating other measures for securing the drug 
supply chain. Although the FDA did not specify a particular means of incorporating SNIs onto the 
unit package at that time, the SNI was compatible with existing machine-readable forms of data 
carriers, such as the 2D matrix barcode and radio frequency identification (RFID).  
While RFIDs and barcodes can carry the same product identification and serial number data, the RFID 
has the advantage of being read remotely. Regardless of the data carrier, when the product ID and 
serial number are linked, the supply chain will be further secured, down to the last handoff to the 
patient through authentication of the product and its pedigree via a database that contains the 
appropriate manufacturer, distributor, and pharmacy transaction data. 
While the 2007 FDAA, 2008 H.R. 5839, and the 2010 FDA guidance were initiated separately, they led 
to a convergence within FDA on using electronic track-and-trace technology with serialization down 
to the unit-of-sale level for prescription drugs. And in 2013, to decrease the production of counterfeit, 
stolen, contaminated, or harmful drugs in the United States, Congress signed into law the Drug Quality 
and Security Act (DQSA).  
The Drug Supply Chain Security Act (DSCSA), Title II of the DQSA, requires that every prescription 
drug package and homogeneous case have its unique identifier in both machine- and human-readable 
forms. The Act outlines steps to achieve interoperable and electronic tracing; this means that, in 
addition to label serialization, a data system would need to store product traceability information 
showing the chain of custody. These regulations require all trading partners in the pharmaceutical 
supply chain—manufacturers, wholesalers, and dispensers—to use secure, interoperable electronic 
systems and processes to uniquely serialize each individual drug package in the supply chain and trace 
their distribution (60).  
The Pharmaceutical Distribution Security Alliance (PDSA) is an organization of stakeholders 
committed to safeguarding patients through better security of the drug supply chain. The PDSA is 
working with the FDA to develop a single national uniform system for product serialization and 
traceability with a goal toward unit-level interoperability. Numerous other organizations, such as the 
Health Distribution Alliance and International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities, are all 
working toward similar goals for serialization. 


Pedigree requirements currently vary from state to state and where unit serialization may be used, it is 
seldom linked to a pedigree. While many pedigrees are paper-based, there are various types of electronic 
pedigrees currently being used, including the GS1 Drug Pedigree Messaging Standard. GS1 is a leading 
global organization dedicated to the design and implementation of global standards and solutions to 
improve the efficiency and visibility of supply-and-demand chains globally and across sectors. 
6.5 Technologies 
6.5.1 Radio Frequency Identification Tag 
RFID refers to an automated data-capture system that uses low-power radio waves to communicate 
between two components: tags and readers. Readers are devices with antennas that emit radio waves 
and receive signals back from the tags. Tags use radio waves to communicate their information to 
readers; they can be passive or active. Passive tags are powered by the reader and do not have a battery 
whereas active tags are powered by batteries. In the last mile, RFID technologies are used for inventory 
control, tracking and tracing products, verification of shipments and receipt of products, or finished 
product authentication. RFID tags may also record temperature within the supply chain or detect the 
opening and closing of packing containers. The degree to which these devices may replace or 
supplement temperature-monitors and recorders remains to be determined.  
Adverse events associated with RFID application for medicines have not yet been reported or 
identified. Studies showed that the nonthermal effects of RFID radiation remain undetectable in 
biopharmaceutical products, even after unusually long exposure durations (61). An ideal RFID read 
environment would be free of metals and liquids, would enforce an air gap between each object’s tag, 
would allow the RFID tags to be flat in a standardized orientation to the antenna, and would be in free 
air. 
6.5.2 Internet of Things 
The Internet of Things (IoT) is the process of adding sensors to physical items and connecting the 
sensors through communications to exchange data. The data is used to create additional value to the 
users of the physical item along with value to manufacturers, logistics providers, and other 
stakeholders. Temperature sensors that use such communication methods as Bluetooth, radio 
frequency, and cellular communication networks are an example of IoT in the pharmaceutical industry. 
These communication methods enable a real-time understanding of temperature and, in the case of 
cellular communication networks, a location.  
6.5.3 Blockchain 
A blockchain is a tamper-proof, distributed database that stores blocks of information for 
cryptographically bound transactions via peer-to-peer networks. It is an emerging technology that is 
expected to open up a promising future for the pharmaceutical industry in counterfeit drug prevention, 
drug distribution, tracking and tracing, safety and security, and temperature control among other 
functions  (62). 
The architecture of a blockchain enables users to share validated and updated ledgers for every 
transaction. Nodes receive copies of each transaction and validate them, synchronizing this 
information throughout the network. As such, the need for a central validating authority is eliminated. 
The connections between transactions in separate blocks are linked, which gave rise to the term 
“blockchain” (see Figure 6.5.3-1) (63, 64). 
