Figure 6.5.3-1 Internet of Things Based Blockchain for Temperature Monitoring and Counterfeit 
Pharmaceutical Prevention. Rajani Singh, Ashutosh Dhar Dwivedi and Gautam Srivastava. 2020 (64) 
6.5.4 Machine Learning 
Machine learning as part of artificial intelligence is the combination of data and algorithms that result 
in a learning process with the goal of producing optimal results. In many cases, the data comes from 
multiple sources, and with the combined data, additional value is achieved to produce more accurate 
and optimal answers for the purpose of reducing risk and managing costs. The process of data 
collection is ongoing and, as more data is added over time, machine learning continues to further 
optimize solutions. Combining machine learning with IoT produces an immediate understanding of 
real-time situations that enables users not only to make quicker decisions but, more importantly, to be 
told what the optimal answers are. The current focus in the pharmaceutical industry is to protect 
product quality and patient safety. With machine learning and IoT, the industry can optimize existing 
outcomes and also find more cost-effective solutions.  
The last mile is often the most expensive part of the delivery process due to fuel costs and labor 
expenses. In addition, companies must also factor in the cost of expired and damaged products, failed 
deliveries, returns, and reverse logistics when planning a shipment. Machine learning algorithms can 
learn from data and improve over time to optimize last-mile deliveries and reduce costs. Along with 
the IoT temperature data, additional data can be combined such as weather, traffic delays, airport and 
seaport delays, and geopolitical events. When data is combined, optimal answers can be achieved to 
protect the product and also reduce cost. Machine learning can improve last-mile deliveries by 
predicting customer preferences as well as routing vehicles through traffic patterns and congestion 
levels, allowing companies to plan their routes accordingly (65). Additional optimization can be 
achieved by selecting the correct packaging to reduce both packaging and logistics costs. 


6.6 Management of Deviations and Complaints 
Any last-mile distribution-related events categorized either as a deviation or complaint should be 
recorded and appropriately investigated according to written procedure. There should be a risk-based 
decision process in place to assess product-quality impact and to identify root cause for events with 
potential product-quality impact (50). All the relevant event data, including any investigation results 
and CAPAs, should be accessible and ready to share with local regulatory authorities and entities 
responsible for distribution such as manufacturer, MAH, or logistics service providers. 
6.7 Performance Management 
From a supply chain perspective, products should be delivered on time, to the right place with the right 
quality and quantity. Any disturbance should be appropriately managed to circumvent product 
shortages. Last-mile metrics should promote consistency and accuracy in the distribution process. For 
each metric, a target and baseline should be determined; the target can be an internal or external 
benchmark. The baseline allows for analysis against previous performance, while the target allows for 
analysis against expected performance. Any time a target is not met consistently, or a trend predicts a 
possible issue, a root cause analysis should be considered, and a corrective action plan should be 
initiated if appropriate. 
Analysis of complaints from shipment recipients provides data on additional shipping and distribution 
issues, such as carrier service level and accuracy. Organizations can use these metrics to identify 
vendors that promote accuracy and a high service level within the last mile. 
Shipping error rates provide information on the number of packages that reached customers right first 
time. Analysis of errors may include, but is not limited to, incorrect addresses, incorrect recipients, 
incorrect quantity, and temperature excursions. Temperature-monitoring with periodic sampling rates 
during qualification testing is required to ensure appropriate shipping temperature throughout the 
duration. The data should be analyzed to ensure appropriate temperature ranges can be maintained 
throughout the shipment and may be input to lane risk assessments. 
6.8 Last-Mile Education 
Maintaining the quality of temperature-sensitive drugs, vaccines, and biological products requires the 
consistent application of effective practices by manufacturers, distributors, prescribers, pharmacists, 
and patients (end users). Pharmacists, nurses, and other healthcare providers are the last interface 
between the patient and their medication, and they should educate patients regarding the proper storage 
of products to ensure product integrity at the patient level, as well as the management of unacceptable 
medications such as recall, rejected and returned products. Implementation and maintenance of such 
practices requires the significant sharing of information within the supply chain. 
Last-mile education is the responsibility of all the involved stakeholders from the manufacturer to the 
patient and any distribution intermediary. The level of education and training on overall GDP and 
specific product storage and distribution practices is commensurate with the level of risk associated 
with the distribution of the product to the patient. Thus, each distribution process should be the subject 
of a documented risk assessment on all process-critical control points to identify potential time and 
temperature abuse that could have an adverse effect on product quality. Any risk identified requires 
mitigation measures, which should be part of the training on a last-mile distribution process.  
GDP training should capture all involved stakeholders—product manufacturer, wholesalers, hospital 
and pharmacy employees, and the patient. Education requirements should be defined as prerequisite 
to engage in last-mile distribution, while training may be product- or process-specific and depend on a 
specific role the stakeholder plays in the last-mile supply chain.  


Therefore, stakeholders should develop a specific education and training matrix for the different levels 
of responsibility from acceptance, transport, and storage to application for the patient or home storage. 
References used for the training material should capture both international and national regulatory 
requirements as applicable. Patients need to be informed about access to websites where additional 
information can be found on last-mile storage and distribution of the product.  
Vaccines present a particular distribution challenge within the cold or frozen supply chain. Many 
vaccines are heat-sensitive and/or freeze-sensitive, and some require specific freezing conditions. 
Medicinal prescribers annotate their written prescriptions with instructions for the pharmacist to 
further instruct the patient or caregiver regarding the proper transport and storage of vaccines. 
Consequently, it is highly recommended that the dispensing personnel become—and remain—
thoroughly trained with the transport and storage characteristics of the vaccines they dispense. For 
example information on the general education, scheduling, transport, and stability of vaccines can be 
found 
on 
the 
U.S. 
Centers 
for 
Disease 
Control 
and 
Prevention 
website 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines). Specific manufacturer-derived information may be obtained from 
most local medical societies. 
The vaccine supply chain and last-mile distribution are still challenging, and closer cooperation of all 
stakeholders is required. With the recent COVID-19 pandemic vaccine campaigns, several 
organizations have issued specific guidelines on how to handle, transport, store, and apply such 
vaccines. Examples include but are not limited to: 
1.
World Health Organization (WHO) guidance on the shipping of vaccines and specific initiatives
related to the COVID-19 pandemic covering various topics such as:
•
National Deployment and Vaccination Plan—Covers also country readiness and delivery
workstream to disseminate guidance, trainings, tools, and advocacy advice
•
Vaccine Introduction Readiness Assessment Tool—Completing the tool can help
countries assess their readiness to introduce COVID-19 vaccines, identify process and quality
gaps, provide a roadmap, and self-monitor
•
COVAX Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator —A global collaboration project
to help accelerate development accelerate the development, production, and equitable access
to COVID-19 tests, treatments, and vaccines and enable access to the diverse portfolio of
vaccines under development
2.
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) COVID-19 Vaccination Program
Interim Playbook for Jurisdiction Operations provides guidance to U.S. states and territories on
how to plan and operationalize a vaccination response to COVID-19 within their jurisdictions.
Other international and national organizations have developed similar programs addressing concerns 
related to the last-mile distribution and application of COVID-19 vaccines to patients.  
6.9 Good Distribution Practice Information for Healthcare 
Professionals (Dispensers) 
Healthcare professionals or pharmacies dispensing temperature-controlled drug products must provide 
effective packaging and instructions for the handling and storage of those products during transit to 
the final destination. Verbal and/or written instructions, like those below, should be provided in an 
appropriate language to the patient, relative, or caregiver. 
•
Educate and train staff on storage requirements for all drug products
•
Display required storage temperatures in convenient locations


•
Continuously monitor refrigerator and freezer temperatures, and train responsible persons on the
escalation process in case of deviations
•
Establish a schedule and procedures to defrost and clean refrigerators; describe the process in a
standard operating procedure and train responsible employees accordingly
•
Maintain an adequate amount of refrigeration/freezer capacity and manage the capacity against a
documented risk assessment
•
Establish a schedule to rotate temperature-controlled products, including monitoring expiration
dates and train all involved employees on the process
•
Verify that drug products within emergency vehicles are properly stored and rotated, ensure that
dispatchers and drivers are trained to these procedures, and make sure training verification is in
place
•
Identify temperature-sensitive products at the time of dispensing and apply appropriate labels to
the prescription container according to defined procedure; ensure all involved employees receive
adequate training
•
Identify for nurses those drugs that are to be stored in hospital floor refrigerators and emphasize
the need to promptly return (where applicable for multi-use products) a patient’s vial to the
refrigerator; ensure proper training is in place and a record of training is kept
•
Ensure that pharmacy delivery vehicles and shipment containers meet established criteria for
temperature extremes and are designed in accordance with GDP requirements
•
Ensure the use of temperature-controlled vehicles, equipment, and packaging is defined and
documented, and ensure training records are maintained for all employees
•
Provide verbal and written instructions in appropriate language(s) to the patient, relative, friend,
or other caregiver; provide additional information after dispensing, as needed, to enhance patient
compliance
•
Educate patients on how to perform temperature checks of temperature-sensitive products that
are delivered to their home
•
Provide appropriate information to patients to keep frozen immunization vials frozen until they
arrive at their physician’s office for injection
6.10 Information to the Patient/Recipient 
Patients receiving their prescription drugs should also receive instructions on correct handling and 
storage. Patients should be aware that keeping their prescription drugs in a temperature-uncontrolled 
environment (e.g., car) could expose the drugs to temperatures that are too hot or cold. If the drugs 
require refrigerated storage, patients must store these drugs in the home refrigerator, preferably on the 
front shelves as the back of the refrigerator may expose drugs to freezing conditions. If the drugs need 
to be stored at room temperature, patients should put them in a safe, dry place where they will avoid 
direct sun exposure. 
Patients receiving their prescription drugs through a mail-order pharmacy need to be informed of the 
following: 
•
Open the packaging immediately and inspect the products for any damages
•
Place the product in its appropriate storage temperature


•
Explain to patients that, even though the cool bag may be completely melted, the products are safe
as most mail-order pharmacies are qualifying their cold chain solutions with an additional 12 hours
after delivery
•
Follow instructions on how to dispose of the shipping container and its components (trash,
recycling, or composting advice)
•
Communicate with a pharmacist about any drug or packaging questions
To ensure that products maintain their quality, effectiveness, and safety through to expiry, data-driven 
management systems play a vital role in planning, inventory management, demand management, and 
environment control (e.g., temperature). By applying ALCOA+ principles, data quality provides 
evidence of correct product storage and transport conditions throughout the supply chain to the 
patient. 
Two of the biggest challenges associated with the pharmaceutical supply chain are temperature-
monitoring and counterfeit drug prevention. Many drugs and vaccines remain viable only within a 
specific range of temperatures. A viable smart healthcare ecosystem could be enabled by applying a 
real-time shipment temperature-monitoring device connected to the IoT, cloud database(s), and/or 
block chain technologies. Real-time monitoring may pose new challenges to security and data 
management, which may require additional resources to manage.  
7.0 Cost Management and Sustainability 
To ensure product availability with the right quality, effectiveness, and safety, cost-effective measures 
are applicable across the supply chain, from the manufacturer to the points of dispensing and 
administration. These measures, which include but are not limited to, inventory management, 
sustainability programs, and temperature control, should help prevent product shortages and have a 
positive impact on patient health. 
7.1 Inventory Management 
7.1.1 Rotating versus Stockpiling 
An important criterion for the cost of stockpiles is if they are rotating or static. 
Emergency stockpiles for crisis situations: Product shelf life varies by the type of product. 
Stockpiles can be partially dynamic, but also require holding stocks that do not rotate if they are 
dedicated to a specific emergency or to crisis situations and therefore need to be held as part of a static 
stockpiling approach (e.g., stockpiling of masks prior to the COVID-19 pandemic or, more recently, 
iodine tablets). If stocks are not managed on a rotating basis with “normal” inventory, there is a high 
risk of expiration. This necessitates their disposal, generating unnecessary additional costs, creating a 
complete loss of the initial investment, and triggering a negative environmental impact. A static 
stockpile, with no stock rotation, might therefore result in a large volume of expired stock that needs 
to be replenished, causing additional costs for their creation, maintenance, and the turnover of the 
stockpile. Who covers the cost of expired products and who pays for their disposal should be defined 
by contract. 
Increasing buffer stocks for critical or essential medicines: This could be integrated via rotation 
into pharmaceutical full-line wholesaler/full-service healthcare distributor rolling stocks thereby 
reducing the risk of products expiring and could be carried out on a FEFO basis, i.e., dynamic 
stockpiling. Naturally, the shelf life of products differs according to the type of product; however, 
buffer stocks can be organized in a way that the products are continuously used and replenished. In 
that case, the length of storage, expiry date of products, and potential safe disposal of unwanted 
medicines need to be considered. Increased buffer stocks held at the wholesale level need to be 
purchased from the pharmaceutical industry, which increases the capital costs. This is one of the main 


reasons, other than available warehouse space, why the establishment of larger stockpiles of more than 
two weeks at the level of pharmaceutical full-line wholesalers and full-service healthcare distributors is 
highly challenging. This can be attributed to insufficient margins, while also holding a prefinancing 
function for the healthcare supply chain. 
7.1.2 Organizational and Administrative Reflections 
Additional administrative and logistics costs may apply to storage, based on the conditions and to 
whom the safety stocks should be delivered. Costs are higher the more frequently the list of products 
to be stocked changes because it requires a greater effort to administer the stocks. A decision should 
also be made as to what condition the emergency stocks will be supplied or released to the market, 
how they should be rotated (e.g., FEFO), and how the rationalization or allocation system would be 
organized with respect to market deliveries to ensure equitable access. 
7.2 Warehouse Storage and Temperature Control 
The inventory level, buffer-stock determination, and size of individual packs should be considered 
when establishing the right size of warehouse. Choosing the right size of the warehouse is key to 
minimizing the cost of energy that will be required for temperature control. The cost of energy is one 
of the highest fixed costs of an organization. The use of engineering solutions can be helpful in saving 
energy. For example, mineral wool batting, polyurethane (PUR), polyisocyanurate (PIR) and 
polystyrene (EPS), used as insulation to reduce energy consumption. Also, the application of solar 
panels may be used to generate power and reduce energy costs. 
7.3 Waste Stream for Packaging Components and Drug 
Product 
Sections 7.3–7.5 provide a non-exhaustive overview of various global directives and waste stream 
management for packaging components used to distribute temperature-sensitive products in the last 
mile.  Packaging components, including ice bricks, boxes, and isolated containers, may generate waste 
for each container shipped (e.g., 20 Kg per container). Depending on the time period, thousands of 
waste materials can be generated, hence the importance of studying the reuse or recycling for this 
business. 
7.3.1 Recycling and Regulations 
Most national and supranational entities have legislative guidelines in effect governing the proper post-
transit disposal of pharmaceutical products and devices. Some also cover the packaging materials used 
during transport. Currently, the “extended producer responsibility” or Extended Product 
Responsibility (EPR) program, has been instituted in several countries. The concept behind EPR 
implies that everyone along the product chain shares responsibility for the environmental impact of 
packaging. That includes the upstream considerations of material selection and manufacturing 
processes to the downstream effects of use, waste management, and disposal. However, this approach 
largely sidesteps the issue of who is directly responsible for the waste and disposal of post-consumer 
packaging. Some corporations have instituted their own EPR programs, but those are generally 
confined to the return of specific product components (e.g., printer or copier ink cartridges). 
European Union—Directive 94/62/EC on packaging and packaging waste forms the basis of the 
EU’s position toward packaging issues; this directive was amended by Directive 2004/12/EC to 
include states newly admitted to the EU. Further information is available from the European 
Committee for Standardization (http://www.cen.eu/cenorm/homepage.htm) and the European 
Organization for Packaging and the Environment (http://www.europen.be). The EU GDP does not 
directly address the impact of packaging on the environment, however, the EU has adopted “extended 
producer responsibility” as its public policy. This requires packaging producers to be fiscally and 
physically responsible for their products at the post-consumer stage of their lifecycle. This approach 


creates strong incentives for producers and manufacturers to incorporate external-packaging costs, like 
waste managements, into their designs from their inception. Packaging waste can be “taken back” or 
managed through reuse, recycling, or remanufacturing. Optionally, the responsibility may be delegated 
to a third party to act as a producer-responsibility organization. Producers pay certain fees and taxes 
to governmental and nonprofit entities to cover the reclamation and disposal costs. For example, the 
Green Dot Program operates in 20 EU member countries where a green dot on a product’s packaging 
indicates it complies with packaging regulations. Manufacturers purchase licenses to participate in the 
Green Dot program, which collects and recycles or otherwise disposes of the packaging on behalf of 
the license-holders. The EU’s EPR program has recently expanded to automobiles and electronics in 
many member states. 
United States—In the United States, the sole federal EPR program involves the take-back of 
rechargeable (nickel-cadmium) batteries, in which the producers of the batteries instituted a national 
take-back program to avoid variable individual state legislation. Most shipments of pharmaceuticals to 
the consumer, particularly biologicals, use EPS/foam packaging, which usually winds up in landfills. 
The Alliance of Foam Packaging Recyclers has posted a resource document on their website 
(http://www.epspackaging.org) listing available recycling/reclamation sites in the United States for 
EPS packaging. At the present, a “true” national EPR public policy and program remains an unmet 
need. 
Japan–Japan’s packaging directives are part of the environmental Japanese Industrial Standards, which 
take their cue from JIS Q 0064: Guide for the Inclusion of Environmental Aspects in Product Standards (66). 
More information about the Japanese Industrial Standards Committee can be found at 
http://www.jisc.go.jp/eng/. 
Brazil–Resolution SMA 45/2015 of 23 June 2015 establishes the Terms of Commitment for the 
Reverse Logistics of Household Medicines for Human Use, Expired or Disused, and their Packaging, 
according to the standardized model made available by the State Secretariat for the Environment 
(SMA) and the Environmental Company of the State of São Paulo (CETESB). (1) Consumers must 
dispose the expired or disused medicines and their packaging at one of the receiving points implanted 
in pharmacies and drugstores; (2) Drugstores and pharmacies established as receiving points are 
obliged, at their expense, to make available and maintain their container dispensing establishments, in 
order to promote the implementation of the reverse logistics system of medicines discarded by 
consumers and their packaging; (3) Distributors of medicines are obliged to collect containers 
containing the medicinal products discarded by the consumer from the primary storage point 
(pharmacies and drugstores) to the secondary storage point, provided that this collection can be carried 
out by the same vehicle and at the same time as the delivery of medicinal products to the primary point; 
and (4) Manufacturers and importers of medicinal products shall be obliged to carry out, at their own 
expense, by their own means or by means of third-party contracts, the transport of medicinal products 
discarded by consumers from secondary storage points to the final treatment sites and environmentally 
appropriate final disposal (67, 68).  
7.3.2 Reverse Logistics 
Reverse logistics encompasses all operations related to the upstream movement of products and 
materials. It is the process of moving goods from their typical destination for the purpose of capturing 
value or for proper disposal. Remanufacturing and refurbishing activities also may be included in the 
definition of reverse logistics. Two types of reverse logistics can be considered in the pharmaceutical 
environment: 
Closed-Loop Transit 
Many wholesalers in Europe and the United States use this system. Most of these companies use their 
own trucks to deliver to the end users, where they can then pick up old packaging and put it back into 
the distribution channel or recycle the components. 


Return of Packaging 
Some manufacturers and distributors employ this method, wherein a prepaid return freight sticker is 
attached or included with the original shipment to the end user. Once the end user removes the 
medicinal product, the package can be sent back to the distributor or manufacturer. This method is 
also used to return expired or mishandled medicinal products. 
7.4 Establishing Lowest-Cost Temperature-Control 
Solution for Shipment 
Freight is an important cost factor to be considered when establishing a solution for temperature-
controlled shipment. Some examples of other factors that play a role in the decision are the mode of 
transportation, the type and weight of effective thermal packaging, the amount of time spent in 
transport, and the environmental impact of the packaging.  
There are different kinds of isolated passive containers available, which may be made of EPS, 
extruded polystyrene (XPS), polyurethane (PUR), or vacuum insulated panels (VIP), and refrigerants 
made of water and/or phase-change material (PCM). Passive thermal solutions composed of VIPs and 
PCM are typically more expensive than more traditional solutions of EPS boxes and water-based 
refrigerants. Traditional solutions are usually physically larger and heavier for the same quantity of 
product to be shipped, which results in higher freight costs. The freight costs are generally greater than 
the temperature-control solution costs, but this solution can significantly impact the total cost of 
shipment. 
Air freight is generally more expensive than ocean freight or road freight. Transport by road in 
refrigerated trucks is typically less expensive than shipping passive-thermal solutions by air, but the 
time it takes to reach the destination and the ability to plug the truck into an electrical power supply 
when the active cooling unit on the truck is turned off (e.g., on a ferry) are necessary considerations.  
Even though air freight is the most expensive mode, sometimes it is the best solution or may be the 
only solution when considering the time available for shipment or accessibility of the destination, for 
instance, island locations or other difficult-to-reach areas without passable roads. Passive-thermal 
containers are generally less expensive than the active containers shipped by air, but their performance 
time is limited, and they may not provide sufficient protection before reaching the destination.  
Both passive and active transport equipment is designed for a defined amount of time under specific 
anticipated external temperature conditions as used in the qualification studies. It is important to 
consider these factors when evaluating the suitability of such packaging for its intended use, as well as 
knowing the routing specifics, risks associated with critical control points in the process, and the overall 
transit time from origin to destination.  
Reuse is another way to reduce the cost of passive-thermal solutions. The reuse process should be 
qualified and have a documented quality control process for the returned solutions, including cleaning 
and inspections to ensure the used system will provide acceptable performance for its intended use. 
7.5 Cost of Failure 
Establishing a robust shipment process with a qualified solution is an investment made to avoid losses 
due to quality issues. The cost associated with damage, recalls, returned goods, and rejection due to 
temperature-control failure is high. The cost can be even higher if the damage is to patient safety and 
health because of a failure in temperature-monitoring and appropriate quality controls. Any of these 
circumstances can damage the company brand and image. 
Mistakes in purchase orders, invoices, selecting materials picking and separation, address and 
customers should be avoided. The result of mistakes impacts products and may lead to rejection due 


to limited or absence of supporting stability data. Insuring high-value shipments because of the high 
risks associated is common. 
7.5.1 Business Contingency Plan 
The goal of risk-based planning is to focus on preparing the organization for a multitude of risks, 
including man-made and natural disasters. Some points to consider when developing an emergency 
plan are: 
•
Prioritize the operations and responsibilities to guide a disaster response in advance
•
Consider alternative locations for operations such as call centers, offices, warehouses, product
processing, transportation operations, or equipment
•
Back up data and IT infrastructure in a remote location outside the anticipated disaster impact
zone
•
Consider ways to reroute transport operations and protect or remove a product that is in an impact
area
•
Prioritize key activities and responsibilities and designate personnel who will be responsible for
these activities if regular personnel are unavailable
•
Plan for the cascading effects of shifting responsibilities if multiple persons are unavailable, and
reorganize remaining personnel in response to the disaster
•
Establish local-level, site-specific business continuity plans tailored to individual business centers
and individual customers and products, as needed
•
Prevent man-made disasters to the greatest extent practical based on the situation (the Customs-
Trade Partnership Against Terrorism guidelines produced by the U.S. Customs and Border
Protection provides an example of resources to guide this effort)
•
Implement reporting systems and tools, alarms, and other automated monitoring systems to speed
notification of an incident and enable a timely response
•
Establish a response plan and designate a responsible person to coordinate appropriate
intervention activities
•
Apply the principles of quality assurance to monitor, measure, and continuously improve disaster- 
intervention results
8.0 Summary 
The intent of this technical report is to convey the importance of proper information, training, and 
communication between handoffs as vital to maintaining medicinal product integrity in the 
pharmaceutical supply chain, especially in the last mile. Knowledge of the challenges encountered along 
the last mile allows for improvements in future guidance documents, products, and services to the 
temperature-controlled supply chain community. 
The last mile of delivering temperature-controlled pharmaceutical products has many challenges to 
manage including, but not limited to, the complexity of pharmaceutical supply chain networks, various 
pharmaceutical product characteristics and temperature sensitivities, weather conditions, sourcing of 
services and temperature-controlled solutions, use of new technologies and communication platforms, 
developments in new regulations, execution of cost-effective and sustainable measures, and education 
in product handling. Sharing information about conditions and practices for the storage and transport 
of product across all supply chain partners is critical to maintaining product quality, applying 


appropriate measures, and preventing temperature excursions in the supply chain, including the last 
mile. When all supply-chain partners involved collaborate closely, the last-mile partners can deliver 
products on time, to the right place, with the right quantity and quality to the end user. 
9.0 References 
1.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 39 (Revised 2021): Guidance
for Temperature-Controlled Medicinal
Products: Maintaining the Quality of
Temperature-Sensitive Medicinal Products
through the Transportation Environment;
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2021.
2.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 46: Last Mile: Guidance for
Good Distribution Practices for
Pharmaceutical Products to the End User;
PDA: Bethesda, MD, 2009.
3.
Medicines & Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency. 'GxP' Data
Integrity Guidance and Definitions;
MHRA: London, 2018.
4.
World Health Organization. Annex 5:
Guidance on Good Data and Record
Management Practices, TRS 996; WHO:
Geneva, 2016; p 46.
5.
World Health Organization. Annex 9:
Model guidance for the storage and transport
of time- and temperature–sensitive
pharmaceutical products, TRS No. 961;
WHO: Geneva, 2011.
6.
Walter, E; Lazic-Peric, A. Distribution
Profile and Efficiency of the European
Pharmaceutical Full-Line Wholesaling
Sector; Institute for Pharmaeconomic
Research: Vienna, 2017.
7.
European Commission. Directive
2004/27/EC of the European Parliament
and the Council of 31 March 2004
amending Directive 001/83/EC on the
Community Code relating to Medicinal
Products for Human Use; Journal of the
European Union. European
Commission: Brussels, 2004.
8.
European Commission. Directive
2001/83/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on
the Community Code Relating to Medicinal
Products for Human Use; OJ European
Commission: Brussels, 2001.
9.
European Commission. Guidelines of 5
November 2013 on Good Distribution
Practice of Medicinal Products for Human
Use; European Commission: Brussels,
2013.
10.
European Medicines Agency.
EudraGMDP. EudraGMDP.
http://eudragmdp.ema.europa.eu/ins
pections/common/searchSites.do
(accessed 3 Oct 2023).
11.
World Health Organization. Annex 5:
WHO Good Distribution Practices for
Pharmaceutical Products, TRS 957;
WHO: Geneva, 2010.
12.
World Health Organization. Annex 7:
Good Storage and Distribution Practices for
Medical Products, TRS 1025; WHO:
Geneva, 2020.
13.
Zambia Medicines Regulatory
Authority. Good Distribution Practices
Guidelines; ZMRA: Lusaka, Zambia,
2017.
14.
Ministry of Health, Republic of
Kenya. Guidelines for Transportation of
Pharmaceuticals in Kenya; Kenya
Ministry of Health: Nairobi, Kenya,
2019.
15.
Ethiopian Food, Medicine and
Healthcare Administration and
Control Authority. Standard Operating
Procedures for Pharmaceuticals Good


Distribution and Storage Practices; EFDA: 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 2018. 
16.
Nigeria National Agency for Food
and Drug Administration and
Control. AFDAC Good Distribution
Practices Guidelines For Pharmaceutical
Product; NAFDAC: Abuja, Nigeria,
2021.
17.
South African Health Products
Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA).
Guideline For Good Wholesaling Practice
For Wholesaler; SAHPRA: Pretoria,
South Africa, 2022.
18.
Union Economique et Monetaire
Ouest Africanine Annexe al la Decision
N° 09/2010/CM/UEMOA: Guide de
Bonnes Pratiques de Distribution et
D’Importation des Produits
Pharmaceutiques a Usage Humain dans les
Etats Meembres de L’UEMOA;
UEMOA: Burkina Faso, 2010.
19.
Coordenadoria de Con Trole de
Doenças Centro de Vigilância
Sanitária. Portaria CVS 1, de
22/07/2020 - Disciplina, no âmbito do
Sistema Estadual de Vigilância Sanitária
– Sevisa, o licenciamento sanitário dos
estabelecimentos de interesse da saúde e das
fontes de radiação ionizante, e dá
providências correlatas; DOE No. 146,
07/24/20, Section 1, page 14.
Secretaria de Estado da Saúde: São
José dos Pinhais, PR, Brasil, 2020.
20.
Agência Nacional de Vigilência
Sanitariá (Anvisa). Resolution of the
Collegiate Board - RDC No 234/2018:
Rules for Subcontracting: Production Stages,
Control Analysis for Quality Control of
Transport and Storage of Medicines and
Biological Products; RDC n° 234/2018.
Brazilian Ministry of Health: Brasilia,
Brazil, 2018.
21.
Agência Nacional de Vigilência
Sanitariá (Anvisa). Resolution of the
Collegiate Board - RDC Nº 430/2020 
providing for Good Practices in the 
Distribution, Storage and Transport of 
Medicines; RDC Nº 430/2020. 
Brazilian Ministry of Health: Brasilia, 
Brazil, 2020. 
22.
Agência Nacional de Vigilência
Sanitariá (Anvisa). Resolution of the
Collegiate Board - RDC Nº 653/2022
Amends the Board Resolution Collegiate -
RDC Nº 430, dated 8 October 2020;
RDC Nº 653/2022. Brazilian Ministry
of Health: Brasilia, Brazil, 2022.
23.
Agência Nacional de Vigilência
Sanitariá (Anvisa). Resolution of the
Collegiate Board - RDC Nº 18/2014
Provides for Communication to the Agency
National Health Surveillance –
ANVISA those Cases of Temporary
Discontinuation and Definitive
Manufacture or Import of Medicines,
Manufacturing Reactivation or Import of
Medicines, and Provides Other Measures;
RDC Nº 18/2014. Brazilian Ministry
of Health: Brasilia, Brazil, 2014.
24.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
21 CFR 205—Guidelines for State
Licensing of Wholesale Prescription Drug
Distributors; U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services:
Washington, DC, 1999.
25.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
21 CFR 203—Prescription Drug
Marketing; Government Publishing
Office: Washington, D.C., 1999.
26.
U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention.
General Chapter <659> Packaging
and Storage Requirements, Revision
Bulletin, Postponement. In USP 41–
NF 36, USP: Rockville, Md., 2018.
27.
U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention.
General Chapter <1079> Risks and
Mitigation Strategies for the Storage
and Transportation of Finished Drug


Products. In USP43–NF38, USP: 
Rockville, Md., 2020; p 7635. 
28.
National Association of Boards of
Pharmacy. Drug Distributor
Accreditation. Programs >
Accreditations.
https://nabp.pharmacy/programs/ac
creditations/drug-distributor/
(accessed 30 Nov 2023).
29.
Health Canada. Food and Drug
Regulations; C.R.C., c. 870. Canada
Minister of Justice: Ottawa, Ontario,
2023.
30.
Health Canada. Food and Drug Act;
R.S.C., 1985, c. F-27 (Section 30).
Canada Minister of Public Works and
Government Services: Ottawa,
Ontario, 1985.
31.
Health Canada. Guidelines for
Environmental Control of Drugs during
Storage and Transportation; Minister of
Health: Ottawa, ON, 2020.
32.
National Bureau of Statistics of
China. Statistical Communiqué of the
People's Republic of China on the
2021 National Economic and Social
Development. National Bureau of
Statistics of China.
http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/Pre
ssRelease/202202/t20220227_18279
63.html (accessed 4 Oct 2023).
33.
National Medical Products
Administration of China. Chapter V --
Distribution, Drug Administration Law of
the People's Republic of China; Order of
the President of the People's
Republic of China, No. 31. NMPA:
Beijing, 2019.
34.
Wei, X. Nation to Promote Internet
Plus Healthcare. The State Council,
The People's Republic of China.
http://english.www.gov.cn/premier/
news/2018/04/12/content_2814761
09872514.htm (accessed 28 Sep 
2023). 
35.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 53: Guidance for Industry:
Stability Testing to Support Distribution of
New Drug Products; PDA: Bethesda,
MD, 2011.
36.
van Asselt, E J; Bishara, R H.
Establishing and Managing the Drug
Product Stability Budget.
Pharmaceutical Outsourcing 2015,
July/August, 16 (4), S. 20-27.
37.
World Health Organization. Annex 2:
Stability Testing of Active Pharmaceutical
Ingredients and Finished Pharmaceutical
Products (TRS No. 953); WHO
Technical Report Series No. 953.
WHO: Geneva, 2009.
38.
Yoshioka, S; Stella, V J. Stability of
Drugs and Dosage Forms. Springer
Science: New York, 2002.
39.
International Council for
Harmonisation. Quality Guideline
Q1A(R2): Stability Testing of New Drug
Substances; ICH: Geneva, 2003.
40.
International Council for
Harmonisation. ICH Quality Guideline
Q1E: Evaluation for Stability Data; ICH:
Geneva, 2003.
41.
van Asselt, E J, et al. Last Mile
Shipping Conditions and
Temperature Excursion Handling for
Room Temperature Pharma Products
in Europe. Pharmaceutical Outsourcing
2018, July/August, 19 (4), 12-17.
42.
Anderson, C, et al. The Use of
Temperature Mapping for the
Qualification of Storage Areas for the
Proper Temperature. USP
Pharmacopeial Forum 2019, 45 (5).
43.
Seevers, R H, et al. The Use of Mean
Kinetic Temperature (MKT) in The
Handling, Storage, and Distribution


of Temperature Sensitive 
Pharmaceuticals. Pharmaceutical 
Outsourcing 2009, May/Jun, S. 12-17. 
44.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 64: Active Temperature-
Controlled Systems: Qualification Guidance;
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2013.
45.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 72: Passive Thermal Protection
Systems for Global Distribution:
Qualification and Operational Guidance;
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2015.
46.
International Safe Transit
Association. ISTA PCG-02 Passive
Thermal Packaging System Operational
Qualification Best Practice Guideline;
ISTA: East Lansing, MI, 2020.
47.
International Safe Transit
Association. ISTA PCG-03 Thermal
Shipping System: Performance Qualification
(PQ) and Performance Verification (PV)
Best Practice Guideline; ISTA: East
Lansing, MI, 2022.
48.
van Asselt, E J, et al. Pharma
Requirements for Temperature
Controlled Trailers. Pharmaceutical
Outsourcing 2017, July/August, 18 (4), S
12-179.
49.
United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe. Agreement on
the International Carriage of Perishable
Foodstuffs and on the Special Equipment to
be Used for such Carriage (ATP); United
Nations: New York, 2016.
50.
International Council for
Harmonisation. Quality Guideline
Q9(R1): Quality Risk Management; ICH:
Geneva, 2023.
51.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 58: Risk Management for
Temperature-Controlled Distribution;
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2012; p 73.
52.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Guidance for Industry: Data Integrity and
Compliance with cGMP: Questions and
Answers; U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services: Silver Spring,
Md., 2018.
53.
European Commission. Annex 11:
Computerised Systems, EudraLex –
Volume 4 – Good Manufacturing Practice
for Medicinal Products for Human and
Veterinary Use; European
Commission: Brussels, 2011.
54.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
21 CFR Part 11, Electronic  Records;
Electronic Signatures—Scope and
Application; Pharmaceutical CGMPs.
Government Publishing Office:
Washington, D.C., 2003.
55.
van Asselt, E J, et al. Temperature
Data Integrity and Security along the
Pharmaceutical Supply Chain.
Pharmaceutical Outsourcing 2019,
July/August, 20 (3), S. 12-15.
56.
World Health Organization. Annex 8:
Joint FIP/WHO Guidelines on Good
Pharmacy Practice: Standards for Quality of
Pharmacy Services (TRS 961); WHO:
Geneva, 2011.
57.
European Commission. Directive
2011/62/EU of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 8 June 2011
Amending Directive 2001/83/EC on the
Community Code relating to Medicinal
Products for Human Use, as regards the
Prevention of the Entry into the Legal
Supply Chain of Falsified Medicinal
Products; Journal of the European
Union. European Commission:
Brussels, 2011.
58.
European Commission. Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/161 of
2 October 2015 Supplementing Directive
2001/83/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council by Laying Down


Detailed Rules for the Safety Features 
Appearing on the Packaging of Medicinal 
Products for Human Use; Journal of the 
European Union. European 
Commission: Brussels, 2016. 
59.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
21 USC 355e, Sec. 505D. Pharmaceutical
Security; U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services Silver Spring,
Md., 2007.
60.
U.S. Congress. The Drug Supply Chain
Security Act, Title II of the Drug Quality
and Security Act U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. Washington, DC,
2013.
61.
Uysal, I, et al. Effects of Radio
Frequency Identification–Related
Radiation on In Vitro Biologics. PDA
J Pharm Sci and Technol 2012, 66 (4),
333-45.
62.
Zakari, N, et al. Blockchain
Technology in the Pharmaceutical
Industry: A Systematic Review. Peer J
Comput Sci 2022 Mar 11.
63.
Soundarya, K, et al. A Counterfeit
Solution for Pharma Supply Chain.
EAIEU 2018, 11 Apr.
64.
Singh, R, et al. Internet of Things
Based Blockchain for Temperature
Monitoring and Counterfeit
Pharmaceutical Prevention. Sensors
(Basel) 2020, 20 (14), 3951.
65.
Owczarek, D. How to Solve Vehicle
Routing Problem: Last-Mile Delivery
Optimization with AI. Logistics |
Artificial Intelligence.
https://nexocode.com/blog/posts/ai
-in-last-mile-delivery-optimization-
vehicle-routing-problem/ (accessed
29  Sep 2023).
66.
Japanese Industrial Standards
Committee. Japan's Standardization
Policy; JISC: Tokyo, 2017.
67.
Secretaria de Estado do Meio
Ambiente. Resolution SMA Nº 45, of
23 June 2015 that Defines Guidelines for
Implementation and Operationalization of
Post-Consumption Responsibility in the
State of São Paulo, and Provides Related
Measures; São Paulo, Brazil, 2015.
68.
Secretaria de Estado de Infraestrutura
e Meio Ambiente. Terms of Commitment
- Termo de Compromisso para a Logística
Reversa de Medicamentos Domiciliares de
Uso Humano, Vencidos ou em Desuso, e
suas Embalagens; Processo CETESB
no 090201/2020-02. SIMA: São
Paulo, Brazil, 2020.


Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.) 
An Authorized User of this electronic publication in the purchase. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following: 
•
Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
•
Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
•
Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the
individual use of an Authorized User
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following: 
•
Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to
anyone other than an Authorized User
•
Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites,
either available on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a
license from PDA, Inc.
•
Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA
Electronic Publication
•
Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of
the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA
Electronic Publication or its content
•
Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk
reproduction or distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial
purpose
•
Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
including any texts or graphics
•
Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright
information or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material
To License or purchase Reprints 
•
Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for
a fee.
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
•
Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.
To order reprints, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.


Pharmaceutical Products to End Users
About PDA Technical Reports 
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Teams (listed 
on inside front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the 
pharmaceutical/biopharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in 
development, PDA Technical Reports are subjected to a global review of PDA members and other 
topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. 
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Team during the preparation 
of the final working draft. The level of expertise of the Team and those participating in the global 
review ensure a broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.  PDA 
thanks the following peer reviewers for lending their time and expertise to ensure the quality and 
relevance of this technial report. 
Peer Reviewers 
Robert Battista, Modality Solutions 
Prakash Deshmukh, Consultant 
Vaibhav Patel, Elucida Oncology 
Siegfried Schmitt, Parexel 
Elio Vari, Pharmacomitalia 
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the 
project. PDA’s Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products 
Advisory Board, Biopharmaceutical Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality Advisory 
Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and 
determines whether or not to publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report. 
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers 
are encouraged to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, 
or mistakes that might be found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: 
TRfeedback@pda.org. 


Pharmaceutical Products to End Users
Sanctioning Advisory Board: SAB 
Gabriele Gori, Independent Consultant (Chair) 
Ivy Louis, VIENNI Training & Consulting LLC 
(Vice-Chair) 
Fred Ayers, ValSource, Inc. 
Marcia Baroni, Emergent BioSolutions Inc. 
Greg Bassett, Bristol Myers Squibb 
Rebecca Brewer, Quality Executive Partners 
Emily Cheah, PhD, Charles River Laboratories 
Tom Damratoski, CivicaRx 
David Exline, Gateway Analytical, LLC. 
Rhonda Ezell, Alkermes 
Mauro Giusti, Eli Lilly Italia 
Austin Kuo, Eli Lilly & Company 
Gitte Letting, Novo Nordisk A/S 
Bruce Loxley, Glaxo Smith Kline 
Martine Nolan, Sanofi 
Vincent O'Shaughnessy, Amgen 
Ken Paddock, Baxter  
Jim Polarine Jr., MA, STERIS Co. 
Matthew Schmidt, Merck & Co., Inc. 
Alexander Stoll, PhD, Fresenius-Kabi 
Luca Tamarindo, Akka 
Kristin Valente, Merck & Co., Inc. 
PDA Officers & Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck 
Chair-Elect: Melissa Seymour, Biogen, Inc. 
Secretary: Bettine Boltres, PhD, West 
Pharmacetuical Services 
Treasurer: Emma Ramnarine, Genenech/Roche 
Immediate Past-Chair: Susan Schniepp, RCA 
President: Glenn Wright 
Directors 
Lisa Bennett, Seer Pharma 
Cristiana Campa, PhD, Glaxo Smith Kline 
Andrew Chang, PhD, Novo Nordisk, Inc. 
Cylia Chen, MA, Amgen 
Mirko Gabriele, PhD, Thermo Fisher Scientific 
Marc Gloglovsky, ValSource Inc. 
Andrew Hopkins, Abbvie 
Stephan O. Krause, PhD, Bristol Myers Squibb 
Ivy Louis, VIENNI Training & Consulting 
LLP 
Amy McDaniel, PhD, Bristol Myers Squibb 
Brigitte Reutter-Haerle, Vetter Pharma 
International GmbH 
Osamu Shirokizawa, Life Scientia, Ltd. 
PDA Publication Production & Editing 
Jessie Lindner, Project Manager, Science 
Josh Eaton, Senior Director, Scientific & 
Regulatory Affairs 
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing & 
Press Relations 
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer 


Bethesda Towers 
4350 East West Highway 
Suite 600 
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA 
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900 
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296 
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
