True Copy 
An exact copy of an original recording of data 
that has been verified and certified to confirm 
it is an exact and complete copy that preserves 
the entire content and meaning of the original 
record, including, in the case of electronic data, 
all essential metadata and the original record 
format as appropriate (can be referred to also 
as certified copy) (4). 
Upstream 
Refers to the supply side of the supply chain. 
Upstream partners are the suppliers who 
provide goods and services to the organization 
that are to satisfy demands, which originate at 
the point of demand or use, as well as other 
flows, such as return product movements, 
payments for purchases, etc. This is the 
opposite of downstream. 
2.1 Abbreviations 
EPR 
Extended Product Responsibility 
FEFO First Expired, First Out 
GDP 
Good Distribution Practices 
GDocP Good Documentation Practices 
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation 
IoT 
Internet of Things 
MAH Marketing Authorization Holder 
MKT Mean Kinetic Temperature  
NGO Non-governmental Organizations 
RFID Radio Frequency Identification 
3PL 
Third-Party Logistic Provider 
3.0 Pharmaceutical Supply Chains 
The pharmaceutical supply chain has a high level of complexity as it varies regionally and in the number 
of stakeholders including but not limited to manufacturers, distribution centers, wholesalers, points of 
dispensing, and points of administration. In addition, many countries have public and private 
pharmaceutical supply chains managed by governmental organizations and wholesale distributors 
respectively. Before a patient receives a pharmaceutical product, distribution routes should be 
appropriately managed in the supply chain to maintain product safety, integrity, quality, and efficacy. 
Therefore, the roles and responsibilities of supply chain partners and the design of the supply chain 
should be clearly determined to manage the environmental conditions, regulations, and product 
requirements for delivery to patients. 
3.1 Distribution in Supply Chains 
Distribution of medicinal products in the supply chain can be divided into internal and external 
distribution. Internal distribution can be considered as the transport of a commercial product within a 
pharmaceutical manufacturer’s supply chain; that is, all transports from the manufacturing facility to 
the packaging facility to the warehouse to a distribution center (5). During internal distribution, the 
marketing authorization holder (MAH) is the owner of the goods at all times. An internal distribution 
network with direct distribution to the customer (also called direct sales) is subject to review by 
inspectorates as part of the manufacturer’s good manufacturing practices (GMP) and good distribution 
practices (GDP) authorization. Internal distribution is typically called the “first mile” and direct 
distribution from the manufacturer to a point of administration (e.g., hospital) is referred to as the “last 
mile.” In some unique circumstances, manufacturers may ship directly to the patient such items as test 
kits and orphan drugs, for example, in compliance with local laws and regulations. When the 
manufacturer is shipping directly to the patient, the last-mile best practices outlined in this report 
should be considered and followed.  
External distribution, on the other hand, is product that is no longer owned by the manufacturer. It 
covers the transport of commercial products through various steps in the customer’s supply chain, that 
is, transport from a pharmaceutical manufacturer’s distribution center to commercial customers 


(including wholesalers, retailers, and buying groups like non-governmental organizations (NGO)), 
clinical facilities, or directly to the patient. External distribution is normally not part of a product filing, 
and it can be called “middle mile” as well as last mile to the end user the patient. Here the last mile is 
the final transportation path to product administration. This can be the product pick-up from a point 
of dispensing, such as a pharmacy to a patient’s home or a shipment of goods from a (wholesaler) 
warehouse to a point of administration like a hospital or vaccine center.  
Moving through the supply chain, product volumes decrease from product-pallet shipments in the first 
mile to single packs in the last mile. Meanwhile, the mix of products typically varies in a shipment from 
one or a few product(s) in the first mile to multiple or more than hundred products in the middle mile 
to one or a few products in the last mile. In addition, the distance and duration of the shipments 
typically decrease from thousands of miles (from continent to continent) and multiple transportation 
days by air and ocean in the first mile to a few kilometers and hours or minutes in the last mile. 
Exceptions do exist, however; for example, the last mile can take days in rural and remote areas where 
transportation by foot or via rivers by boat is the only option. 
Within the external distribution network, there may be two supply chains for pharmaceuticals—public 
and private. Public supply chains are owned by the government and focus on essential medicines for 
the population, like vaccines and products for the prevention or treatment of malaria and human 
immunodeficiency viruses. Very often NGOs donate products to public supply chains to support the 
population in low-income and/or developing countries. The public supply chains typically comprise 
central, regional, and district government distribution centers, public pharmacies, health centers, and 
public hospitals. Private supply chains typically comprise wholesalers, pharmacies, clinics, and 
healthcare professionals authorized to dispense medicinal products to the public. In this case, 
wholesalers also deliver goods to hospitals and health centers via their network of distribution centers. 
The external distribution network is overseen by inspectorates as part of the wholesaler’s GDP 
authorization. Figure 3.1-1 summarizes, at a high level, pharmaceutical supply chains, the relationship 
between internal and external distribution, and the differences between first-, middle-, and last-mile 
distribution. In some cases, or in some countries, a pharmaceutical manufacturer can also own a local 
wholesaler distribution license, thereby owning product and taking full responsibility for the 
distribution network in the middle and the last miles. 
Figure 3.1-1 Schematic Representation of the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain 


3.2 Roles and Responsibilities in Supply Chains 
There are a number of discernable roles and responsibilities in the pharmaceutical supply chain: 
Manufacturer 
Produces goods in the internal distribution network and executes stability testing to set expiry, storage, 
and transportation conditions. 
Wholesaler 
Procures, holds, supplies, imports, or exports medicinal products in an external private distribution 
network, apart from supplying medicinal products to the public. 
Public Medical Store 
Stores and ships goods in a public distribution network along the health pyramid. 
Non-Governmental Organization 
Professional organization that donates goods to public supply chains. 
Service Delivery Point (SDP) 
Receives goods that are supplied to patients. 
Point of Administration 
Receives goods that are administrated to patients, e.g., hospital, clinic, vaccine center. 
Point of Dispensing 
Location where goods are dispensed to users, e.g., patient. 
Marketing Authorization Holder 
The person or company who is licensed to distribute, sell, and commercialize a medical product. 
Third-Party Logistic Provider (3PL) or Logistic Service Provider 
Entity that, on behalf of a manufacturer or wholesaler, executes logistics activities like warehousing 
and transportation in the supply chain. 
Customs 
The official department that administers and collects the duties levied by the government on imported 
goods. 
Insurance Company 
A term insurance company, as its primary and predominant business activity during the taxable year, 
issues insurance or annuity contracts or reinsures the risks underwritten by other insurance companies. 
Quality Assurance 
Ensures that a quality system is in place to guarantee product is being distributed in compliance with 
GDP and that the quality, safety, and efficacy of the pharmaceutical product is maintained. 
Pharmaceutical Products Destruction Commission 
Multisectoral committee oversees the destruction of expired or deteriorated pharmaceutical products 
in accordance with hygiene laws and regulations. 
Inspectorate 
Inspects manufacturers, wholesalers, pharmacies, or processors of regulated products to verify 
compliance with relevant regulations and provides permits to the MAH to import pharmaceutical 
products into a specified market. 


All participants in the supply chain are responsible for maintaining product quality and the right storage 
and transportation conditions for the delivery of effective and safe products to patients. 
Communication about product quality requirements for all players is essential to achieve this aim. 
Defining the shared responsibility of the participants in a written Quality Agreement is a good practice. 
Section 3.3 through Section 3.9 provide examples of pharmaceutical supply chains in various regions 
around the world.  
3.3 Supply Chains in Europe 
Most pharmaceuticals in the European Union (EU) are distributed via private supply chains, while the 
public supply chains are used primarily to distribute vaccines to vaccine centers for vaccination 
programs. In addition, NGOs buy pharmaceutical products from manufacturers for donation 
programs that they then provide to public supply chains on other continents like Africa and Asia. The 
Guidelines of 5 November 2013 on Good Distribution Practice of Medicinal Products for Human Use are the most 
important GDP guidelines in the EU: they are in force in all EU member states and in several other 
countries as well. The GDP guidelines of the non-EU member states such as Russia and the United 
Kingdom share many similarities with the EU GDP guidelines.  
The EU GDP guidelines require a wholesaler to be licensed to distribute an approved product into the 
region in which the wholesaler will sell that product. While there are many actors in the supply chain, 
in the EU, almost 60% of all medicinal products sold are distributed to pharmacies through 
pharmaceutical wholesale distributors, while 33% are distributed by the manufacturer directly to 
hospitals and 8% directly to pharmacies (6).  
Pharmaceutical full-line wholesaling activity consists of the purchase, warehousing, storage, order 
preparation, and delivery of medicines. Pharmaceutical full-line wholesalers carry and distribute a 
complete range and depth of products within the framework set by the authorities and the market to 
meet the needs of those with whom they have normal business relations. They also have the capability 
to deliver all medicines in their geographical area of activity typically on the same day or within 24 
hours on working days. Pharmaceutical full-line wholesalers provide working capital, extend financing 
services, and fund stock and receivables of pharmacies and healthcare professionals. These factors 
distinguish them from other distributors/wholesalers in the supply chain. 
In most EU member states, pharmaceutical full-line wholesalers also respond to Public Service 
Obligations or carry a Public Service Function as charged by Article 81 of Directive 2004/27/EC. 
Article 81 introduced an obligation for member states to implement the following measures:  
The holder of a marketing authorization for a medicinal product and the distributors 
of the said medicinal product actually placed on the market in a Member State shall, 
within the limits of their responsibilities, ensure appropriate and continued supplies 
of that medicinal product to pharmacies and persons authorized to supply medicinal 
products so that the needs of patients in the Member State in question are covered 
(7).  
Apart from this provision, many EU member states (e.g., Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, 
Slovenia, Spain, Portugal) have appended a separate Public Service Obligation on wholesale 
distributors to guarantee that certain products be made available across the region. This ensures that 
through a permanently available and adequate range of medicinal products, referred to as buffer stocks, 
the requirements of any specific geographical area will be met, and requested medicinal products can 
be delivered in a timely manner. In addition, one of the minimum requirements for wholesalers of 
medicinal products to obtain their distribution authorization (as set by Article 84 of Directive 
2001/83/EC), is compliance with the principles and guidelines of GDP (8).  
The EU GDP guidelines also address the issue of handling and transporting temperature-sensitive 
medicinal products. The general requirement of suitability does not specifically target temperature-
