3.7 Supply Chains in Canada 
Canada has two main levels of regulating bodies for medicines: Health Canada is the federal regulator, 
and the Colleges of Pharmacy are the provincial regulators for pharmacies. Health Canada oversees 
the activities of manufacturing, importation, testing, packaging, labeling, distribution, and wholesaling 
and, thus, regularly audits and licenses wholesalers.  
Each of the ten provinces and three territories in Canada have their respective College of Pharmacy. 
Hospitals fall under the College of Pharmacy, and they are funded by their respective provincial 
government or by the government of the territory. Hospitals obtain their licenses from the provincial 
government where they are established. Pharmacies and clinics, private or public, obtain their licenses 
from the College of Pharmacy of their respective province.  
The Canadian Food and Drug Act (CFDA) and Food and Drug Regulations (FDR) are the two main 
legal documents that govern the drug, medical device, natural health product, and cosmetics industries 
(29, 30). The FDR and the Guidelines for Environmental Control of Drugs during Storage and Transportation  
are the Canadian equivalent of the EU GDP(31). Health Canada refers to these documents when 
auditing any licensed owner of a drug establishment. 
Health Canada is also the federal department responsible for monitoring and assessing the wide variety 
of drugs marketed in in the country. They assess and monitor drugs to ensure that they are in 
pharmaceutical compliance with the CFDA and its accompanying regulations. 
Canada is the second largest country in the world, having an area of almost 10 million km2, with a 
relatively small population of 38 million people. Almost 80% of the population is situated in the south 
of the country, close to the USA–Canada border, which occupies only about 30% of the total area of 
the country (see Figure 3.7.1). 
Figure 3.7-1 Map of Canada 


Wholesalers package, pick up, store, transport, and deliver medicines to more than 11,000 pharmacies 
and hospitals across the country. Transportation of pharmaceutical products can be challenging due to 
long distances and seasonal temperatures that range from -40 °C to 50 °C, especially when products 
travel from the south to the north. As a result, products need robust environmental control and 
protection. In some areas, like in the far north, only one carrier operates and therefore, it is important 
to assess the route, understand carrier capabilities, and account for the handoff from one carrier to 
another. It is equally imperative for the wholesaler to have a solid quality agreement with the main 
carrier responsible for the route in total and with the carrier originally picking up the product at the 
distribution center. 
To preserve drug safety, quality, and efficacy, proper storage and transportation conditions must be 
maintained throughout the drug supply chain—from the point of manufacture to the delivery of 
products at the final destination. These conditions are described in the FDR and in the Guidelines for 
Environmental Control of Drugs during Storage and Transportation. Drugs must be stored and transported 
according to labeled storage conditions or specific transport conditions supported by data. Controls 
for conditions specified on the label (e.g., temperature, humidity, light) should be in place. Each 
building used to store drugs must be indicated on the drug establishment license (DEL) warehouse 
annex. Furthermore, when using contracted third parties to store drugs, it is the wholesaler’s 
responsibility to ensure that the third-party logistics provider’s (3PL) buildings are indicated on the 
DEL warehouse annex, and that the contracted 3PL stores the drugs according to the conditions 
described on the label.  
Packaging and packaging configurations are the responsibility of the DEL owner, who is therefore 
responsible for designing and validating the packaging used to ship products and for qualifying each 
route according to a protocol. The executed protocol and the documentation may be presented to 
Health Canada during an audit. 
Considering the difficult Canadian geography, long distances, and extremes in weather, manufacturers 
are encouraged to share allowable temperature excursions with the wholesaler. Unfortunately, this 
information is difficult to obtain even when it is part of the quality agreement signed between the 
wholesaler and the product manufacturer. 
3.8 Supply Chains in China 
China had approximately 134,000 pharmaceutical distributors in 2021 with a market size of 2 trillion 
renminbi (RMB), equivalent to approximately 300 billion USD (32). These distributors sell most 
pharmaceuticals to China hospitals. The Central Pharmacy Department in a hospital is responsible for 
the purchase and dispensing of pharmaceutical products including inpatient, outpatient, and emergency 
pharmacies. Although sales are driven to retail pharmacies, especially online pharmacies, hospital sales 
still account for more than 60% of drug sales. Therefore, the main distribution channel for Chinese 
wholesalers is the hospital, regardless of whether the medical institution is government- or privately-
owned. 
A typical manufacturer uses provincial distributors to cover hospital channels, a central purchase 
department to provide for chain pharmacies and an ecommerce platform to supply directly to the 
patient. The transaction partners are required to exchange “first transaction documents,” including 
business licenses, drug transaction licenses, and drug sales permits, before a transaction takes place to 
ensure that the transaction partners have been granted the necessary authorization to deal in a 
permitted product (33). A distributor is not necessarily bound to limit distribution to within a certain 
region, but the local administration that issues the distribution license will be held responsible for any 
conduct contrary to the regulations. Therefore, it is almost impossible for a distributor to open a 
distribution center in another region, since no authority would issue a license for a distributor not 
registered in that region. 
The pharmaceutical supply chain in China can be divided into the following three steps: 


1.
National distribution from manufacturers to wholesalers
2.
Local dispatch from wholesalers to hospitals/pharmacies
3.
Last-mile distribution from pharmacies to patients
Long-haul distribution is usually carried out with the support of 3PL companies, while the dispatch to 
hospitals is usually handled by the wholesalers themselves, using their own transportation teams who 
also serve (partly) as the stocking staff of hospital pharmacies. The transportation team is of crucial 
importance as the service interface between wholesalers and hospitals. The complexity of such a 
delivery system makes it almost impossible for manufacturers to replace wholesalers with 3PL 
companies to provide direct sales to hospitals. Retail pharmacies can dispatch prescription drug (Rx) 
products in stores or to homes with their own third-party courier services “if the Rx product is to treat 
chronic diseases and the prescription has been verified by certified pharmacists” (34). Specialty 
pharmacies, or direct-to-patient pharmacies, serve as the main channel to patients with home delivery 
services for specialty drugs.  
Two critical factors have a great impact on the last mile for pharmaceutical products in China: National 
Health Insurance and the fast-growing eCommerce channel. The National Health Insurance is the 
public healthcare insurance system that dominates paying for the healthcare of Chinese citizens. Apart 
from reimbursement pricing, volume-based purchasing, and diagnosis-related groups, the National 
Health Insurance has one determinant for expense control—budgeted expense for providers. The 
management of the budget is also related to the key performance indicators for the hospital 
management team. With this philosophy in mind, not all retail pharmacies enjoy “reimbursement 
status” for their patients, even for chronic prescription products. The second factor of eCommerce 
channels involves online pharmacies selling prescription products with the support of telemedicine 
offered by the platforms. Such purchases are not reimbursable, but they are convenient in terms of 
access and delivery.  
According to Menet (menet.com.cn), a highly recognized data source for the healthcare market, online 
sales for drugs grew by 37.6% in 2022 over 2021, with a seven-year compound annual growth rate 
(CAGR) of 48.4%, accounting for 2.8% of the total drug sales. Concurrent to the development of 
eCommerce is the emergence of online-to-office (O2O) platforms. O2O is a phrase used in digital 
marketing to describe systems that entice consumers in a digital environment to make purchases of 
goods or services from physical businesses. These O2O platforms use carriers that link the stores and 
customers, and they offer access to retail pharmacies so users/patients can select a product from the 
listed retail pharmacies according to preferred brand, price, and distance, for example, have it delivered 
within 30 minutes. O2O business has become an important online outlet for retail pharmacies with 
thin margins. Healthcare providers in China are mainly state-owned. Grade-3 hospitals, predominantly 
medical university-affiliated hospitals, are also state-owned, but private providers are gaining in growth 
rate. 
Further 
information 
can 
be 
found 
in 
the 
China 
Statistical 
Yearbook 
2022 
(https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2022/indexeh.htm).  In 2021, the top 10 wholesalers, with a total 
revenue of 1.3 trillion RMB (about 194 billion USD), accounted for 65% of the market; the top three 
of those account for 68.35% of the top-10 sales with revenue of 896 billion RMB (about 133 billion 
USD). The top performers in distribution are also publicly listed companies, the majority being state-
owned. To the contrary, the majority shareholders of the leading retail chain pharmacies are private 
entrepreneurs, although the chain pharmacies are mostly publicly listed companies. 
In short, the supply chain for pharmaceutical products in China is shifting from hospitals to retail 
pharmacies, and online pharmacies are growing at a faster rate than offline retail pharmacies. 
Ownership does not affect the nature of the healthcare supply chain, but the nature of healthcare 
products might. 
In summary, the pharmaceutical supply chain and last-mile delivery of pharmaceutical products can 
vary significantly from region to region, with each region presenting different challenges and 


considerations. It is important for companies involved in the distribution of pharmaceutical products 
to understand the local regulations and requirements to ensure a safe and efficient delivery process. 
4.0 Pharmaceutical Products 
The pharmaceutical supply chain distributes different kinds of products to the patient via the last mile. 
Product characteristics and stability impact how these products should be handled along the chain and, 
therefore, understanding of these product properties is important. The product characteristics, stability, 
and requirements are further explored in Sections 4.1–4.2. 
4.1 Product Characteristics and Stability 
The chemical and physical properties of a drug substance and the drug product formulation determine 
its product stability and shelf life (35-37). During this shelf life, pharmaceutical products like vaccines, 
tablets, creams, and injectables are exposed to hazards that may impact their quality, efficacy, safety, 
and aesthetics. These hazards, including intrinsic factors such as the molecular structure of the drug 
itself and environmental factors (e.g., temperature, pH, buffer species, ionic strength, light, oxygen, 
moisture, additives, excipients), may affect the rates of chemical and physical degradation of drug 
substances (38).  
Temperature is one of the primary hazards that effects drug stability and shelf life. Thus, storage and 
shipping temperatures should stay within the allowed and filed conditions established during stability-
testing programs that are typically run at the beginning of the product lifecycle. These studies determine 
the impact of temperature, moisture (relative humidity), light, shock, vibration, drop, and pressure on 
the product in its primary marketed packaging. Here the formation of degradation products and 
decrease in label claim or potency are measured using stability-indicating methods to the end of the 
product shelf life, which can range from days to years. During these stability studies, the product is 
stored under strictly controlled conditions in climate chambers at, for example, 5 ± 3 °C and 25 ± 2 
°C (38). Samples are drawn from the controlled temperature chambers for testing at regular intervals. 
From these stability studies, the product shelf life and temperature conditions during manufacture, 
packaging, distribution, and storage are established (39, 40).  
4.2 Application of Product Stability Budget and Mean 
Kinetic Temperature 
Products requiring storage at defined temperatures may experience exposure to temperatures outside 
of the defined range for a period of time during filling, labeling, inspection, packaging, shipping, and 
distribution including to the end user. Proper management is essential to achieve an understanding of 
the potential temperature exposures a product may experience as it is transported to the point of use. 
Some examples of situations that may arise include: 
Transit within a refrigerated truck 
Even though a truck has reached the correct set temperature, the temperature may rise temporarily in 
warm environments or fall in cool environments as the doors are opened for loading and unloading. 
Temperature-monitoring devices, located on the outside of product containers, will record this change 
in temperature, and some monitors may exceed the labeled storage claim of the product. 
Storing of prescription drugs within a hospital or pharmacy 
The refrigeration unit used to store temperature-sensitive pharmaceuticals accidently stops cooling 
overnight or during the weekend. 
Dispensing of prescription drugs within a pharmacy 


A pharmacy will remove a product from the refrigerator to place a patient label on the product and 
check that the medication is suitable for dispensing (e.g., it has not expired and that the correct product 
was removed from the inventory). 
Shipment of drug product from a pharmacy to an end user 
A product requiring storage at a controlled room temperature (USP definition) is mailed to a patient’s 
home and remains in a mailbox or on a doorstep for several hours where it is exposed to ambient 
summer or winter temperatures. 
In the examples above, it would be important to know if the exposures would be problematic to the 
product. USP <1079> states that deviations or variances in exposure to temperatures outside of the 
product’s label range should be addressed with the manufacturer or MAH to determine if the exposure 
is acceptable and if the product may be used. 
The total allowable time outside the storage condition, based on stability studies, will be defined as the 
product’s time out of refrigeration (TOR) or time out of storage (TOS) and will be used to support 
excursion temperatures outside the storage conditions. The total TOR/TOS found to be acceptable is 
divided by site departments to cover the total time required for each stage in manufacturing, shipping, 
distribution, and use. Any time left over can be used for excursions more than the defined times. 
Even though comprehensive stability studies that support handling both within and outside of the 
manufacturer’s control have been executed, the resulting stability data is typically not shared with other 
parties, including distributors, caregivers, or patients. Typically, product labels and inserts contain only 
long-term storage conditions, such as, “Store between 2–8 °C (36–46 °F). Do not freeze!” When 
excursions outside the label storage temperatures do occur, the manufacturer instructs that they should 
be contacted regarding the ultimate disposition of the drug product. Manufacturers are reluctant to 
provide expanded standard stability information to other parties, since the same allowable excursions 
could be used multiple times by those possessing the product without the knowledge of the 
manufacturer. The cumulative effects of multiple excursions could impact the quality of the product. 
A better approach would be to use transportation statements in labeling, for example, “Store at 2–8 
ºC; excursions to 25 ºC during transport not to exceed 24 hours” or “Store at 15–25 °C; excursions to 
2–32 °C during transport not to exceed 24 hours” (41). Such statements must be supported by stability 
data and approved by competent health authorities. 
Drug manufacturers can facilitate the use of their temperature-controlled products, when product-
stability data allow, by providing a wider range of label storage temperatures (i.e., 2–15 °C rather than 
2–8 °C), providing separate long-term storage and transport temperatures, providing specific storage 
and/or handling temperatures for patient use only, and/or by using mean kinetic temperature (MKT). 
Using the calculated MKT for a drug product is appropriate to approximate the effects of storage-
temperature variations that may occur during product transport in the absence of product-specific 
kinetic data. MKT calculations for each portion of the distribution process may be used to estimate 
the impact of temperature excursions on the quality of the drug product (27, 42, 43). 
For brief segments, such as transport, the MKT for the segment is best used in conjunction with upper 
and lower temperature limits from the manufacturer. 
For longer segments, such as storage, calculating the MKT of only the excursion is preferable to using 
the MKT of the entire segment for evaluating the impact of the excursion. 
Within these limitations, MKT and the controlled room temperature and cold temperature as defined 
by USP are useful in understanding the impact of temperature excursions on product quality over the 
lifetime of a drug. 
Each successive owner of the material—manufacturer, wholesaler, pharmacy, and patient—can, at 
best, be responsible only for their particular segment, including the storage and transport temperatures 
and the interpretation of the resulting partial MKT values. Others in the distribution chain will have 


access only to what is provided in the drug’s labeling, typically storage statements (e.g., “Store at 
controlled room temperature,” “Excursions permitted 15–30 ºC,” “Do not freeze”,); therefore, the 
inclusion of MKT excursion data in the labeling is useful because the manufacturer may be able to use 
MKT to evaluate the impact of temperature excursions that occur during the last mile, if the patient 
contacts manufacturer to request help. The manufacturer of a drug product has a unique responsibility, 
since it is the manufacturer who performs the stability studies to determine the expiration dating of 
the drug. It is those stability studies, plus any additional studies the manufacturer may choose to do, 
such as freeze-thaw and temperature-excursion studies beyond the standard ICH data package, that 
enable informed decisions to be made about the use of MKT to evaluate the impact of temperature 
excursions on the product. For this reason, when questions arise during the distribution process about 
temperature excursions, they are best raised with the manufacturer who can use the stability data to 
interpret the MKT. 
At multiple points in the supply chain, excursions outside the labeled long-term storage temperature 
range may occur. This may be due to a deficiency in the stability information that is necessary for 
managing temperature excursions experienced throughout the distribution process. The misalignment 
can be resolved if the logistics group openly communicates the stability needs to the research and 
development team that executes the stability studies. Comprehensive stability data is essential for 
managing temperature excursions that are likely to occur during transit (36, 41). 
5.0 Services and Temperature Controlled Systems 
Within supply chain management, suppliers and receivers of goods may use services and temperature-
controlled systems from other entities to support the storage and transport of pharmaceutical products. 
When temperature-sensitive products need to be shipped, additional services may be needed to protect 
and monitor the goods. Sections 5.1–5.6 focus on contract management, storage, packaging, and 
transport for pharmaceutical products. 
5.1 Contract Management 
When services or outsource activities are applied in the supply chain, contract management should be 
applied according to the applicable country’s rules. The quality system should extend to the control 
and review of any outsourced activities related to the procurement, holding, supply, or export of 
medicinal products, and all of these processes should incorporate quality risk management. 
In addition, there must be a written contract between the contract-giver and the contract-acceptor that 
clearly establishes the duties of each party. Besides the commercial contract, from a regulatory 
perspective, a technical or quality agreement is expected that includes additional details for deviation 
management and change control. The contract-givers are responsible for auditing the contract-
acceptor to verify the agreed-upon activities. 
The contract-acceptor should not pass any of the work entrusted to them under the contract to a third 
party without the contract-giver’s prior evaluation, approval, and an audit of the third party by the 
contract-giver or the contract-acceptor. The contract-acceptor must forward any information that can 
influence the quality of the product(s) to the contract-giver in accordance with the requirements of the 
contract. 
5.2 Storage 
5.2.1 Storage Facilities 
Storage facilities should be secure and structurally sound to allow safe storage and handling of the 
medicinal products. Management and operation of the facility should include but is not limited to: 
•
Access to the storage facilities should be restricted to authorized staff.


•
Premises should be provided with adequate lighting to enable all operations to be carried out
accurately and safely.
•
Appropriate cleaning equipment and cleaning products should be chosen and used so as not to
present a source of contamination.
•
Any products withdrawn, recalled, expired or suspected of falsification should be segregated from
saleable stock (either physically or through an equivalent electronic system, when possible).
•
Medicinal products should be handled and stored in such a manner as to prevent spillage, breakage,
contamination, and mix-ups.
•
Stock should be rotated according to the “first expired, first out” (FEFO) principle. Regular stock
inventories should be performed, and stock irregularities should be investigated.
5.2.2 Environmental Control 
The storage of pharmaceutical products is critical for the last mile knowing the challenging conditions 
these products will be exposed to until they reach the end users. If applicable, temperature and humidity 
requirements must be maintained during storage, regardless of the type of storage unit used (e.g., deep 
freezer, freezer, refrigerator, walk-in cooler or freezer, storage rooms).  
To ensure proper storage, three essential conditions must be met: temperature and humidity 
maintenance, distribution, and monitoring. Temperature and humidity must be maintained during 
regular operation and should consider traffic movement (door opening) and defrost cycles where 
applicable. To ensure proper temperature and humidity distribution, storage units should be mapped 
to ensure that all locations inside do not deviate from the required temperature range (i.e., there should 
be no exception, even for small units like an under-counter refrigerator). The temperature- and 
humidity-mapping, in regions where this is necessary, should be conducted when the unit is empty 
(44). However, additional studies might be required based on the geographic location, atmosphere, 
and local regulations (e.g., winter/summer season, dry/wet seasons) in combination with partial or full 
loads, as product placement may affect air movement. Once temperature-mapping is executed, the 
next step is analyzing the thermal mapping data to identify the locations with the lowest and highest 
values where temperature and humidity sensors can be positioned for permanent monitoring. 
In some cases, temperature probes are placed inside a container with liquid to provide a more accurate 
product temperature rather than air temperature, which can fluctuate and trigger an alarm 
unnecessarily. Many electronic sensors can simulate probes in liquid to alleviate temperature changes 
and reduce nuisance alarms. A contingency plan must be in place in the event of a power outage or 
mechanical failure. Standup freezers and refrigerators can only maintain the proper temperature for a 
few hours during failures and are not typically designed with significant insulation properties 
(particularly models with glass doors). 
The medication provider (e.g., pharmacist) must communicate to end users the importance of proper 
storage conditions and provide guidance on the best ways to store the product prior to use. If the 
product requires refrigeration, the products will be stored in a refrigerator. Refrigerators used at a home 
often cool the interior space with cold air from the freezer section of the unit. Placing the products 
near the vents supplying cold air may expose products to freezing temperatures. The same situation 
can happen when a refrigerator is over-packed and prevents air from circulating correctly. Along with 
requirements to protect the product from excess heat and/or freezing, the impact of light and humidity 
can be substantial and should be explained to end users, if applicable.  
5.3 Packaging 
The diversity of environmental conditions encountered in the last mile makes this segment the most 
challenging of the whole distribution chain. For this reason, the qualification of packaging requires a 
deep analysis of potential environmental and handling conditions that will be experienced until the 
product is delivered to end users. PDA Technical Report No. 64: Active Temperature-Controlled Systems: 


Qualification Guidance, Technical Report No. 72: Passive Thermal Protection Systems for Global Distribution: 
Qualification and Operational Guidance, and TR 39 detail all the processes for qualifying a thermal solution 
(1, 44, 45). The most crucial step in this process, however, is to design proper testing conditions before 
starting the qualification process. Any scenarios that the products will encounter must be taken into 
consideration (e.g., design qualification, operational qualification). For instance, if the product will be 
delivered by car or truck, with or without active heating and cooling, or with couriers or parcels, the 
conditions inside the packaging, the number of stops, and how the products are tendered to the end 
users need to be known in the development of testing temperature profiles and handling procedures. 
Data collection is crucial in the establishment of qualification procedures. Using dummy boxes to 
collect outside temperatures and measure handling conditions (e.g., vibration, orientation) during 
shipments is a very effective method for understanding the shipping environment that will be used for 
qualification. In the case of parcel shipments, thermal shipping containers can be flipped multiple 
times, increasing the probability of a package landing on its side. 
The role of packaging in the last mile is fundamental. Earlier in the supply chain, most pharmaceutical 
products would have been transported in larger quantities (e.g., pallet size, multiple-counts package). 
For the last mile, products are shipped in much smaller quantities for the final deliveries such as those 
to pharmacies, clinics, nursing homes and, eventually, directly to patients. These shipments will 
experience more diversified conditions than they had in their homogeneous distribution. Considering 
the time and conditions under which the packaged products stay at their origin until they have been 
picked up for transport and delivery is also important. In some cases, and in some regions of the world, 
packages are stacked on a pallet, rolling carts, or shelves for several hours before being picked up. 
These conditions need to be considered during design and qualification. In addition, sustainability (e.g., 
single use versus reuse), theft, and all means of potential damage should also be factored into the 
packaging design.  
5.3.1 Packaging with Passive Thermal Functionality 
Packaging with passive thermal functionality uses a combination of insulation and refrigerants, such as 
water-based gel packs, phase-change materials (PCM), dry ice, or liquid nitrogen to ensure that 
medicinal products are distributed under defined temperature conditions. Regardless of the options 
selected, containers must be qualified (46, 47). A prequalified passive-thermal solution can be 
acceptable as long as the ambient temperature for which it was qualified and the payload used for the 
qualification is similar to the product to be shipped. The vendor qualification documentation of the 
prequalified solution must be reviewed and assessed by the shipper to confirm its suitability for the 
intended use. Universal pack-outs do not require seasonal or regional adjustments and maximize 
operational efficiency but usually are more expensive and weigh more, resulting in a higher logistics 
expense. Overall, the product mass, container-insulation thickness, performance hours, and thermal 
stress will affect the size of the required passive-thermal solution with refrigerants and thermal barriers, 
which in turn factors into material costs, warehouse space, and carrier charges. Substitutions of any 
components should be tested to confirm that the same thermal performance is achieved. Live shipment 
testing is strongly recommended to confirm the performance capability of the designed thermal 
shipping system and process is effective and reproducible in representative real-world distribution lanes 
with actual transportation process and logistics service providers (47). Factors related to home 
deliveries that include additional transport hours and time packages are left outside or in mailboxes 
must be considered in the final design of the thermal-packaging solution. 
5.3.2 Packaging with Active Thermal Functionality 
Several different systems with active thermal packaging are available which are equipped with active 
refrigeration or heating capabilities using calibrated and temperature-control devices. The refrigeration 
or heating used to keep the products under proper temperature conditions can be mechanical, 
chemical, or electric and typically is designed to be reused multiple times. Contrary to previous 
segments of the supply chain, active-thermal containers are much smaller and accommodate a small 
