1.0 Introduction 
This guidance document complements the information provided in PDA Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 
2021): Guidance for Temperature-Controlled Medicinal Products — Maintaining the Quality of Temperature-Sensitive 
Medicinal Products through the Transportation Environment by going beyond manufacturer-focused issues and 
addressing issues specifically encountered within the “last mile” of the distribution of medicinal 
products and devices (1). This revision updates the original 2009 technical report to account for 
expanded regulations, the development and implementation of newer, more advanced technologies 
and supply chains that have become more extensive and complex (2). 
1.1 Purpose and Scope 
“Last mile” distribution is an often-used logistical term that refers to the transport of product from the 
manufacturing facility to the end user. For the purposes of this technical report, last mile is defined as 
the final transfer of a drug from the manufacturer or wholesaler to the end user which could be either 
the patient or the entity (e.g., pharmacy, hospital) that provides the drug to the patient. Transfers earlier 
in the distribution process involve organizations with greater knowledge of the product and the 
resources to ensure carefully controlled conditions of storage and transport compared to those 
available to the end user. As such, PDA Technical Report No. 46 (Revised 2024): Last Mile: Guidance for 
Good Distribution Practices for Pharmaceutical Products to End User provides recommendations and tools 
based on current best practices to ensure that product quality is maintained until the final handoff. 
2.0 Glossary and Abbreviations 
The Glossary includes a list of common terms specific to this technical report. Definitions of terms 
are listed alphabetically and may come from sources such as the U.S. Pharmacopeia, American Society 
for Testing Materials, International Conference for Harmonisation, International Organization for 
Standardization, or other PDA technical reports. Definitions quoted from other sources are cited at 
the end of the definition. 
ALCOA+ 
ALCOA+ is an acronym standing for 
Attributable, 
Legible, 
Contemporaneous, 
Original, Accurate (“ALCOA”) and Complete, 
Consistent, Enduring and Available (“+”). It is 
a set of characteristics that all data must meet 
to ensure data integrity. Adherence to 
ALCOA+ principles is the basis for Good 
Documentation Practice. 
Corrective Action, Preventive Action 
(CAPA) 
Action to eliminate the cause of a detected 
nonconformity or other undesirable situation. 
Corrective action is taken to prevent 
recurrence, whereas preventive action is taken 
to prevent occurrence.  
Customer 
In distribution, the customer is the trading 
partner or reseller; in direct-to-consumer  
situations, the customer is the end user who is 
either the patient taking the product or the 
person administering the product to the patient 
such as a physician. 
Data Integrity 
Data integrity is the degree to which data are 
complete, consistent, accurate, trustworthy, 
reliable and that these characteristics of the 
data are maintained throughout the data life 
cycle (3).  
Downstream 
Refers to the demand side of the supply chain 
that consists of one or more companies or 
individuals who participate in the flow of 
pharmaceuticals 
moving 
from 
the 
manufacturer to the end user.  
Good Distribution Practices (GDP) 
Defined as the part of quality assurance that 
ensures the quality of the pharmaceutical 


product is maintained by means of adequate 
control of the numerous activities that occur 
during the distribution process. 
Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) 
Best 
practices 
in 
manufacturing 
of 
pharmaceuticals or biopharmaceuticals, from a 
regulatory standpoint, are regarded as the 
minimum current good manufacturing practice 
for methods to be used in, and the facilities or 
controls to be used for, the manufacture, 
processing, packaging, or holding of a drug to 
ensure it meets requirements of safety, identity, 
and strength and meets the quality and purity 
characteristics that it purports or is represented 
to possess. 
Last Mile 
Last mile is a multidimensional, cross-industry 
term that defines a point in the supply chain 
where the product or service directly faces the 
customer, end user, or patient. 
Mean Kinetic Temperature (MKT) 
The single calculated temperature at which the 
total amount of degradation over a particular 
period is equal to the sum of the individual 
degradations that would occur at various 
temperatures. Thus, MKT may be considered 
as an isothermal storage temperature that 
simulates the nonisothermal effects of storage 
temperature variation. It is not a simple 
arithmetic mean. 
Metadata 
Metadata are data that describe the attributes of 
other data and provide context and meaning. 
Typically, these are data that describe the 
structure, data elements, inter-relationships, 
and other characteristics of data, e.g., audit 
trails. Metadata also permit data to be 
attributable to an individual (or if automatically 
generated, to the original data source) (3). 
Original Record 
Data as the file or format in which it was 
originally generated, preserving the integrity 
(accuracy, completeness, content and meaning) 
of the record, e.g., original paper record of 
manual observation, or electronic raw data file 
from a computerized system (3). 
Pedigree, e-Pedigree 
A pedigree is a record, containing information 
regarding each transaction, resulting in a 
change of ownership of a pharmaceutical, from 
sale by a manufacturer, through acquisition and 
sale by a wholesaler, until final sale to a 
pharmacy or person furnishing, administering, 
or dispensing the pharmaceutical. 
Phase Change Material (PCM) 
A physical material that stores and releases 
thermal energy when freezing or melting. A 
PCM releases energy when freezing [latent heat 
energy] and absorbs energy when melting. 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) 
Is an automatic technique for identifying 
objects using radio frequency transmissions. 
An RFID system generally consists of a tag, 
reader, antenna, and software. An RFID tag is 
simply another type of data carrier. Essentially, 
tags comprise a semiconductor chip with 
memory, 
processing 
capability 
and 
a 
transmitter connected to an antenna (aerial). 
Reverse Logistics 
The process of planning, implementing, and 
controlling the efficient, cost-effective flow of 
raw materials, in-process inventory, finished 
goods and related information from the point 
of consumption to the point of origin for the 
purpose of recapturing value or disposal. 
Shipping Lane 
An established route of transportation between 
a specific point of origin to a specific 
destination. 
More 
defined 
routes 
will 
consistently use the same combination and 
types of transportation vehicles and transfer 
procedures, but this may not be observed 
through all shipping lanes throughout the last 
mile. 
Supply Chain 
The chain of events or process which includes 
all storage and movement of raw materials, 
work-in-process inventory, and finished goods 
from point-of-origin to point-of-consumption. 
