=== PDF PAGE 1 (content p-4) ===
(Revised 2024) 
Distribution Practices for 
Pharmaceutical Products to End 
Users 

=== PDF PAGE 2 (content p-3) ===
Products to End Users 
Authors and Contributors 
Erik J. van Asselt, Ph.D., MSD (Co-Lead) 
Rafik H. Bishara, Ph.D., Eli Lilly & 
Company (retired) (Co-Lead) 
Riekert Bruinink, Former GDP Regulators 
Junpei Cheng, EC Healthcare Fund 
Giovanni Curotto, Epiqure 
Fabian De Paoli, CCM28 
Monika Derecque-Pois, GIRP 
Ibnou Khadim Diaw, Africa Resource 
Centre Organization 
Jean-Pierre Emond, The Illuminate Group 
John Heller, Merck & Co., Inc. 
Jeroen Janssens, Glaxo Smith Kline 
Claude Jolicoeur, McKesson 
Karl Kussow, FedEx 
Zvonimir Majic, Technical Advisor 
D. Mark Maurice, Sensitech
Janusz Mielewczyk, Amgen
Richard Peck, RP Pharma Consulting
Valentin Plouchard, EuropaBio - the
European Association for 
Bioindustries 
Marcia Alves Preda, Nordika 
Jennifer Richards, URAC 
Paul Rigby, Prioritise Ltd. 
Anthony (TJ) Rizzo, Cold Chain 
Technologies 
Lutz Schuette, Phoenix Group 
Robert Seevers, Pearl Pathways 
Eric Stener, Sanofi 

=== PDF PAGE 3 (content p-2) ===
for Good Distribution 
Practices for 
Pharmaceutical 
Products to End Users 
ISBN: 979-8-218-47790-5 
All rights reserved. 

=== PDF PAGE 4 (content p-1) ===
Table of Contents
1.0 
Introduction ............................... 1 
1.1 
Purpose and Scope ...................... 1 
2.0 
Glossary and Abbreviations ..... 1 
2.1 
Abbreviations ................................ 3 
3.0 
Pharmaceutical Supply Chains 3 
3.1 
Distribution in Supply Chains ........ 3 
3.2 
Roles and Responsibilities in 
Supply Chains ............................... 5 
3.3 
Supply Chains in Europe .............. 6 
3.4 
Supply Chains in Africa ................. 7 
3.5 
Supply Chains in Brazil ................. 9 
3.6 
Supply Chains in the United States
 .................................................... 10 
3.7 
Supply Chains in Canada ........... 12 
3.8 
Supply Chains in China ............... 13 
4.0 
Pharmaceutical Products ........ 15 
4.1 
Product Characteristics and 
Stability........................................ 15 
4.2 
Application of Product Stability 
Budget and Mean Kinetic 
Temperature ............................... 15 
5.0 
Services and Temperature 
Controlled Systems ................. 17 
5.1 
Contract Management ................ 17 
5.2 
Storage........................................ 17 
5.2.1 
Storage Facilities ................ 17 
5.2.2 
Environmental Control ........ 18 
5.3 
Packaging ................................... 18 
5.3.1 
Packaging with Passive 
Thermal Functionality ......... 19 
5.3.2 
Packaging with Active 
Thermal Functionality ......... 19 
5.3.3 
Sustainability in Packaging . 20 
5.4 
Transportation ............................. 20 
5.4.1 
Road Transportation ........... 20 
5.4.2 
Drones ................................ 21 
5.4.3 
Distribution from Point of 
Dispensing to End-Use in Mail 
Service Pharmacy ............... 21 
5.5 
Temperature-Monitoring During 
Transport ..................................... 22 
5.5.1 
Temperature-Monitoring or 
Data Loggers ....................... 22 
5.5.2 
Temperature Indicators ....... 22 
5.5.3 
Risk-Based Approach: 
Implementation and 
Management ....................... 23 
5.6 
Security ....................................... 23 
6.0 
Data and Knowledge 
Management ............................. 23 
6.1 
Good Documentation Practices 
and Data Integrity ........................ 23 
6.1.1 
Data Governance ................ 24 
6.1.2 
Good Documentation 
Practices.............................. 24 
6.1.3 
Data Integrity and Quality 
Management ....................... 25 
6.2 
Temperature Management .......... 26 
6.3 
Other Critical Process Parameters
 ..................................................... 26 
6.4 
Serialization ................................. 27 
6.4.1 
Serialization in the European 
Union ................................... 27 
6.4.2 
Serialization in the United 
States .................................. 28 
6.5 
Technologies ............................... 29 
6.5.1 
Radio Frequency Identification 
Tag ...................................... 29 
6.5.2 
Internet of Things ................ 29 
6.5.3 
Blockchain ........................... 29 
6.5.4 
Machine Learning ................ 30 
6.6 
Management of Deviations and 
Complaints .................................. 31 
6.7 
Performance Management .......... 31 
6.8 
Last-Mile Education ..................... 31 
6.9 
Good Distribution Practice 
Information for Healthcare 
Professionals (Dispensers) ......... 32 
6.10 Information to the Patient/Recipient
 ..................................................... 33 

=== PDF PAGE 5 (content p0) ===
7.0 
Cost Management and 
Sustainability ........................... 34 
7.1 
Inventory Management ............... 34 
7.1.1 
Rotating versus Stockpiling 34 
7.1.2 
Organizational and 
Administrative Reflections .. 35 
7.2 
Warehouse Storage and 
Temperature Control ................... 35 
7.3 
Waste Stream for Packaging 
Components and Drug Product .. 35 
7.3.1 
Recycling and Regulations.. 35 
7.3.2 
Reverse Logistics ................ 36 
7.4 
Establishing Lowest-Cost 
Temperature-Control Solution for 
Shipment ..................................... 37 
7.5 
Cost of Failure ............................. 37 
7.5.1 
Business Contingency Plan 38 
8.0 
Summary .................................. 38 
9.0 
References ............................... 39 
Figures and Tables Index
Figure 3.1-1 Schematic Representation of 
the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain ... 4 
Figure 3.4-1 Example of Pharmaceutical 
Supply Chain in Senegal ................... 8 
Figure 3.5-1 Example of Brazil’s Supply 
Chain ................................................. 9 
Figure 3.6-1 Example of U.S. Private Sector 
Supply Chain .................................. 11 
Figure 3.7-1 Map of Canada ...................... 12 
Figure 6.5.3-1 Internet of Things Based 
Blockchain for Temperature 
Monitoring and Counterfeit 
Pharmaceutical Prevention. .......... 30 

=== PDF PAGE 6 (content p1) ===
1.0 Introduction 
This guidance document complements the information provided in PDA Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 
2021): Guidance for Temperature-Controlled Medicinal Products — Maintaining the Quality of Temperature-Sensitive 
Medicinal Products through the Transportation Environment by going beyond manufacturer-focused issues and 
addressing issues specifically encountered within the “last mile” of the distribution of medicinal 
products and devices (1). This revision updates the original 2009 technical report to account for 
expanded regulations, the development and implementation of newer, more advanced technologies 
and supply chains that have become more extensive and complex (2). 
1.1 Purpose and Scope 
“Last mile” distribution is an often-used logistical term that refers to the transport of product from the 
manufacturing facility to the end user. For the purposes of this technical report, last mile is defined as 
the final transfer of a drug from the manufacturer or wholesaler to the end user which could be either 
the patient or the entity (e.g., pharmacy, hospital) that provides the drug to the patient. Transfers earlier 
in the distribution process involve organizations with greater knowledge of the product and the 
resources to ensure carefully controlled conditions of storage and transport compared to those 
available to the end user. As such, PDA Technical Report No. 46 (Revised 2024): Last Mile: Guidance for 
Good Distribution Practices for Pharmaceutical Products to End User provides recommendations and tools 
based on current best practices to ensure that product quality is maintained until the final handoff. 
2.0 Glossary and Abbreviations 
The Glossary includes a list of common terms specific to this technical report. Definitions of terms 
are listed alphabetically and may come from sources such as the U.S. Pharmacopeia, American Society 
for Testing Materials, International Conference for Harmonisation, International Organization for 
Standardization, or other PDA technical reports. Definitions quoted from other sources are cited at 
the end of the definition. 
ALCOA+ 
ALCOA+ is an acronym standing for 
Attributable, 
Legible, 
Contemporaneous, 
Original, Accurate (“ALCOA”) and Complete, 
Consistent, Enduring and Available (“+”). It is 
a set of characteristics that all data must meet 
to ensure data integrity. Adherence to 
ALCOA+ principles is the basis for Good 
Documentation Practice. 
Corrective Action, Preventive Action 
(CAPA) 
Action to eliminate the cause of a detected 
nonconformity or other undesirable situation. 
Corrective action is taken to prevent 
recurrence, whereas preventive action is taken 
to prevent occurrence.  
Customer 
In distribution, the customer is the trading 
partner or reseller; in direct-to-consumer  
situations, the customer is the end user who is 
either the patient taking the product or the 
person administering the product to the patient 
such as a physician. 
Data Integrity 
Data integrity is the degree to which data are 
complete, consistent, accurate, trustworthy, 
reliable and that these characteristics of the 
data are maintained throughout the data life 
cycle (3).  
Downstream 
Refers to the demand side of the supply chain 
that consists of one or more companies or 
individuals who participate in the flow of 
pharmaceuticals 
moving 
from 
the 
manufacturer to the end user.  
Good Distribution Practices (GDP) 
Defined as the part of quality assurance that 
ensures the quality of the pharmaceutical 

=== PDF PAGE 7 (content p2) ===
product is maintained by means of adequate 
control of the numerous activities that occur 
during the distribution process. 
Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) 
Best 
practices 
in 
manufacturing 
of 
pharmaceuticals or biopharmaceuticals, from a 
regulatory standpoint, are regarded as the 
minimum current good manufacturing practice 
for methods to be used in, and the facilities or 
controls to be used for, the manufacture, 
processing, packaging, or holding of a drug to 
ensure it meets requirements of safety, identity, 
and strength and meets the quality and purity 
characteristics that it purports or is represented 
to possess. 
Last Mile 
Last mile is a multidimensional, cross-industry 
term that defines a point in the supply chain 
where the product or service directly faces the 
customer, end user, or patient. 
Mean Kinetic Temperature (MKT) 
The single calculated temperature at which the 
total amount of degradation over a particular 
period is equal to the sum of the individual 
degradations that would occur at various 
temperatures. Thus, MKT may be considered 
as an isothermal storage temperature that 
simulates the nonisothermal effects of storage 
temperature variation. It is not a simple 
arithmetic mean. 
Metadata 
Metadata are data that describe the attributes of 
other data and provide context and meaning. 
Typically, these are data that describe the 
structure, data elements, inter-relationships, 
and other characteristics of data, e.g., audit 
trails. Metadata also permit data to be 
attributable to an individual (or if automatically 
generated, to the original data source) (3). 
Original Record 
Data as the file or format in which it was 
originally generated, preserving the integrity 
(accuracy, completeness, content and meaning) 
of the record, e.g., original paper record of 
manual observation, or electronic raw data file 
from a computerized system (3). 
Pedigree, e-Pedigree 
A pedigree is a record, containing information 
regarding each transaction, resulting in a 
change of ownership of a pharmaceutical, from 
sale by a manufacturer, through acquisition and 
sale by a wholesaler, until final sale to a 
pharmacy or person furnishing, administering, 
or dispensing the pharmaceutical. 
Phase Change Material (PCM) 
A physical material that stores and releases 
thermal energy when freezing or melting. A 
PCM releases energy when freezing [latent heat 
energy] and absorbs energy when melting. 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) 
Is an automatic technique for identifying 
objects using radio frequency transmissions. 
An RFID system generally consists of a tag, 
reader, antenna, and software. An RFID tag is 
simply another type of data carrier. Essentially, 
tags comprise a semiconductor chip with 
memory, 
processing 
capability 
and 
a 
transmitter connected to an antenna (aerial). 
Reverse Logistics 
The process of planning, implementing, and 
controlling the efficient, cost-effective flow of 
raw materials, in-process inventory, finished 
goods and related information from the point 
of consumption to the point of origin for the 
purpose of recapturing value or disposal. 
Shipping Lane 
An established route of transportation between 
a specific point of origin to a specific 
destination. 
More 
defined 
routes 
will 
consistently use the same combination and 
types of transportation vehicles and transfer 
procedures, but this may not be observed 
through all shipping lanes throughout the last 
mile. 
Supply Chain 
The chain of events or process which includes 
all storage and movement of raw materials, 
work-in-process inventory, and finished goods 
from point-of-origin to point-of-consumption. 

=== PDF PAGE 8 (content p3) ===
True Copy 
An exact copy of an original recording of data 
that has been verified and certified to confirm 
it is an exact and complete copy that preserves 
the entire content and meaning of the original 
record, including, in the case of electronic data, 
all essential metadata and the original record 
format as appropriate (can be referred to also 
as certified copy) (4). 
Upstream 
Refers to the supply side of the supply chain. 
Upstream partners are the suppliers who 
provide goods and services to the organization 
that are to satisfy demands, which originate at 
the point of demand or use, as well as other 
flows, such as return product movements, 
payments for purchases, etc. This is the 
opposite of downstream. 
2.1 Abbreviations 
EPR 
Extended Product Responsibility 
FEFO First Expired, First Out 
GDP 
Good Distribution Practices 
GDocP Good Documentation Practices 
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation 
IoT 
Internet of Things 
MAH Marketing Authorization Holder 
MKT Mean Kinetic Temperature  
NGO Non-governmental Organizations 
RFID Radio Frequency Identification 
3PL 
Third-Party Logistic Provider 
3.0 Pharmaceutical Supply Chains 
The pharmaceutical supply chain has a high level of complexity as it varies regionally and in the number 
of stakeholders including but not limited to manufacturers, distribution centers, wholesalers, points of 
dispensing, and points of administration. In addition, many countries have public and private 
pharmaceutical supply chains managed by governmental organizations and wholesale distributors 
respectively. Before a patient receives a pharmaceutical product, distribution routes should be 
appropriately managed in the supply chain to maintain product safety, integrity, quality, and efficacy. 
Therefore, the roles and responsibilities of supply chain partners and the design of the supply chain 
should be clearly determined to manage the environmental conditions, regulations, and product 
requirements for delivery to patients. 
3.1 Distribution in Supply Chains 
Distribution of medicinal products in the supply chain can be divided into internal and external 
distribution. Internal distribution can be considered as the transport of a commercial product within a 
pharmaceutical manufacturer’s supply chain; that is, all transports from the manufacturing facility to 
the packaging facility to the warehouse to a distribution center (5). During internal distribution, the 
marketing authorization holder (MAH) is the owner of the goods at all times. An internal distribution 
network with direct distribution to the customer (also called direct sales) is subject to review by 
inspectorates as part of the manufacturer’s good manufacturing practices (GMP) and good distribution 
practices (GDP) authorization. Internal distribution is typically called the “first mile” and direct 
distribution from the manufacturer to a point of administration (e.g., hospital) is referred to as the “last 
mile.” In some unique circumstances, manufacturers may ship directly to the patient such items as test 
kits and orphan drugs, for example, in compliance with local laws and regulations. When the 
manufacturer is shipping directly to the patient, the last-mile best practices outlined in this report 
should be considered and followed.  
External distribution, on the other hand, is product that is no longer owned by the manufacturer. It 
covers the transport of commercial products through various steps in the customer’s supply chain, that 
is, transport from a pharmaceutical manufacturer’s distribution center to commercial customers 

=== PDF PAGE 9 (content p4) ===
(including wholesalers, retailers, and buying groups like non-governmental organizations (NGO)), 
clinical facilities, or directly to the patient. External distribution is normally not part of a product filing, 
and it can be called “middle mile” as well as last mile to the end user the patient. Here the last mile is 
the final transportation path to product administration. This can be the product pick-up from a point 
of dispensing, such as a pharmacy to a patient’s home or a shipment of goods from a (wholesaler) 
warehouse to a point of administration like a hospital or vaccine center.  
Moving through the supply chain, product volumes decrease from product-pallet shipments in the first 
mile to single packs in the last mile. Meanwhile, the mix of products typically varies in a shipment from 
one or a few product(s) in the first mile to multiple or more than hundred products in the middle mile 
to one or a few products in the last mile. In addition, the distance and duration of the shipments 
typically decrease from thousands of miles (from continent to continent) and multiple transportation 
days by air and ocean in the first mile to a few kilometers and hours or minutes in the last mile. 
Exceptions do exist, however; for example, the last mile can take days in rural and remote areas where 
transportation by foot or via rivers by boat is the only option. 
Within the external distribution network, there may be two supply chains for pharmaceuticals—public 
and private. Public supply chains are owned by the government and focus on essential medicines for 
the population, like vaccines and products for the prevention or treatment of malaria and human 
immunodeficiency viruses. Very often NGOs donate products to public supply chains to support the 
population in low-income and/or developing countries. The public supply chains typically comprise 
central, regional, and district government distribution centers, public pharmacies, health centers, and 
public hospitals. Private supply chains typically comprise wholesalers, pharmacies, clinics, and 
healthcare professionals authorized to dispense medicinal products to the public. In this case, 
wholesalers also deliver goods to hospitals and health centers via their network of distribution centers. 
The external distribution network is overseen by inspectorates as part of the wholesaler’s GDP 
authorization. Figure 3.1-1 summarizes, at a high level, pharmaceutical supply chains, the relationship 
between internal and external distribution, and the differences between first-, middle-, and last-mile 
distribution. In some cases, or in some countries, a pharmaceutical manufacturer can also own a local 
wholesaler distribution license, thereby owning product and taking full responsibility for the 
distribution network in the middle and the last miles. 
Figure 3.1-1 Schematic Representation of the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain 

=== PDF PAGE 10 (content p5) ===
3.2 Roles and Responsibilities in Supply Chains 
There are a number of discernable roles and responsibilities in the pharmaceutical supply chain: 
Manufacturer 
Produces goods in the internal distribution network and executes stability testing to set expiry, storage, 
and transportation conditions. 
Wholesaler 
Procures, holds, supplies, imports, or exports medicinal products in an external private distribution 
network, apart from supplying medicinal products to the public. 
Public Medical Store 
Stores and ships goods in a public distribution network along the health pyramid. 
Non-Governmental Organization 
Professional organization that donates goods to public supply chains. 
Service Delivery Point (SDP) 
Receives goods that are supplied to patients. 
Point of Administration 
Receives goods that are administrated to patients, e.g., hospital, clinic, vaccine center. 
Point of Dispensing 
Location where goods are dispensed to users, e.g., patient. 
Marketing Authorization Holder 
The person or company who is licensed to distribute, sell, and commercialize a medical product. 
Third-Party Logistic Provider (3PL) or Logistic Service Provider 
Entity that, on behalf of a manufacturer or wholesaler, executes logistics activities like warehousing 
and transportation in the supply chain. 
Customs 
The official department that administers and collects the duties levied by the government on imported 
goods. 
Insurance Company 
A term insurance company, as its primary and predominant business activity during the taxable year, 
issues insurance or annuity contracts or reinsures the risks underwritten by other insurance companies. 
Quality Assurance 
Ensures that a quality system is in place to guarantee product is being distributed in compliance with 
GDP and that the quality, safety, and efficacy of the pharmaceutical product is maintained. 
Pharmaceutical Products Destruction Commission 
Multisectoral committee oversees the destruction of expired or deteriorated pharmaceutical products 
in accordance with hygiene laws and regulations. 
Inspectorate 
Inspects manufacturers, wholesalers, pharmacies, or processors of regulated products to verify 
compliance with relevant regulations and provides permits to the MAH to import pharmaceutical 
products into a specified market. 

=== PDF PAGE 11 (content p6) ===
All participants in the supply chain are responsible for maintaining product quality and the right storage 
and transportation conditions for the delivery of effective and safe products to patients. 
Communication about product quality requirements for all players is essential to achieve this aim. 
Defining the shared responsibility of the participants in a written Quality Agreement is a good practice. 
Section 3.3 through Section 3.9 provide examples of pharmaceutical supply chains in various regions 
around the world.  
3.3 Supply Chains in Europe 
Most pharmaceuticals in the European Union (EU) are distributed via private supply chains, while the 
public supply chains are used primarily to distribute vaccines to vaccine centers for vaccination 
programs. In addition, NGOs buy pharmaceutical products from manufacturers for donation 
programs that they then provide to public supply chains on other continents like Africa and Asia. The 
Guidelines of 5 November 2013 on Good Distribution Practice of Medicinal Products for Human Use are the most 
important GDP guidelines in the EU: they are in force in all EU member states and in several other 
countries as well. The GDP guidelines of the non-EU member states such as Russia and the United 
Kingdom share many similarities with the EU GDP guidelines.  
The EU GDP guidelines require a wholesaler to be licensed to distribute an approved product into the 
region in which the wholesaler will sell that product. While there are many actors in the supply chain, 
in the EU, almost 60% of all medicinal products sold are distributed to pharmacies through 
pharmaceutical wholesale distributors, while 33% are distributed by the manufacturer directly to 
hospitals and 8% directly to pharmacies (6).  
Pharmaceutical full-line wholesaling activity consists of the purchase, warehousing, storage, order 
preparation, and delivery of medicines. Pharmaceutical full-line wholesalers carry and distribute a 
complete range and depth of products within the framework set by the authorities and the market to 
meet the needs of those with whom they have normal business relations. They also have the capability 
to deliver all medicines in their geographical area of activity typically on the same day or within 24 
hours on working days. Pharmaceutical full-line wholesalers provide working capital, extend financing 
services, and fund stock and receivables of pharmacies and healthcare professionals. These factors 
distinguish them from other distributors/wholesalers in the supply chain. 
In most EU member states, pharmaceutical full-line wholesalers also respond to Public Service 
Obligations or carry a Public Service Function as charged by Article 81 of Directive 2004/27/EC. 
Article 81 introduced an obligation for member states to implement the following measures:  
The holder of a marketing authorization for a medicinal product and the distributors 
of the said medicinal product actually placed on the market in a Member State shall, 
within the limits of their responsibilities, ensure appropriate and continued supplies 
of that medicinal product to pharmacies and persons authorized to supply medicinal 
products so that the needs of patients in the Member State in question are covered 
(7).  
Apart from this provision, many EU member states (e.g., Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, 
Slovenia, Spain, Portugal) have appended a separate Public Service Obligation on wholesale 
distributors to guarantee that certain products be made available across the region. This ensures that 
through a permanently available and adequate range of medicinal products, referred to as buffer stocks, 
the requirements of any specific geographical area will be met, and requested medicinal products can 
be delivered in a timely manner. In addition, one of the minimum requirements for wholesalers of 
medicinal products to obtain their distribution authorization (as set by Article 84 of Directive 
2001/83/EC), is compliance with the principles and guidelines of GDP (8).  
The EU GDP guidelines also address the issue of handling and transporting temperature-sensitive 
medicinal products. The general requirement of suitability does not specifically target temperature-

=== PDF PAGE 12 (content p7) ===
sensitive products but requires that “[w]holesale distributors must have suitable and adequate premises, 
installations and equipment, so as to ensure proper storage and distribution of medicinal products. In 
particular, the premises should be clean, dry and maintained within acceptable temperature limits….” 
(Sec. 3.1.) and “[t]he premises should be designed or adapted to ensure that the required storage 
conditions are maintained….” (Sec. 3.2). Furthermore, “[s]uitable equipment and procedures should 
be in place to check the environment where medicinal products are stored. Environmental factors to 
be considered include temperature, light, humidity and cleanliness of the premises….” (Sec. 3.2.1). 
In general, a guiding principle underpinning operations and actions undertaken by wholesale 
distributors is that “[t]he wholesale distribution of medicinal products is performed according to the 
information on the outer packaging” (Sec. 5.1) (9). 
The chapter of the EU GDP on transportation specifically targets temperature-sensitive products 
insofar as “[t]he required storage conditions for medicinal products should be maintained during 
transportation within the defined limits as described by the manufacturers or on the outer packaging” 
(Sec. 9.2). In the event of a temperature excursion, the incident should be reported to the distributor 
and recipient of the affected product. In that regard, it must be emphasized that the information on 
temperature control originates from either specific information from the manufacturer or the 
information on the outer packaging of the product. In any case, a risk-based approach should be used 
when planning transportation. As such, and because there is no further precision or requirement of 
stability data, any deviation of the temperature indications must be reported, in compliance with EU 
GDP. 
Although the general regulatory framework laid down by Directive 2001/83/EC and the EU GDP 
guidelines originate at the EU level, member states are responsible for implementing these rules: 
“checks on the persons authorized to engage in activity as a wholesaler in medicinal products, and the 
inspection of their premises, shall be carried out under the responsibility of the Member State which 
granted the authorization for premises located on its territory” (Art. 1) (8). These provisions are 
binding in the EU and are implemented in all member states. Each member state will entrust one or 
more competent authorities, to carry out inspections on the premises of wholesalers to check their 
compliance with the Directive and GDP.  
Wholesale distribution authorizations and GDP certificates are available in a central database called 
EudraGMDP, the content of which is provided by the National Competent Authorities of the 
European Economic Area and is maintained and operated by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) 
(10). 
3.4 Supply Chains in Africa 
Many African countries have adopted the World Health Organization (WHO) GDP guidance, applying 
Annex 5, Annex 7, and Annex 9, often in conjunction with local GDPs (5, 11, 12). For example, 
Zambia, Kenya, Ethiopia,  Nigeria, and Uganda have developed country-specific GDP guidelines and 
the Union Economique et Monetaire Ouest Africanine has established GDP guidelines for French-
speaking African countries (13-18). In Africa, many countries import about 90% of their 
pharmaceutical products, and customs and the inspectorate play a major role in the lead time needed 
to deliver products to the central warehouses, both in the private and public supply chains. 
The African continent faces major challenges to delivering pharmaceuticals of the right quality and 
quantity to the patient, at the right place, and in a timely manner. Some of these challenges include the 
poor infrastructure of motorways, vehicle conditions, high temperatures and humidity, dry and rainy 
seasons, and power outages that impact temperature-controlled stores. The limited financial resources 
and lack of local manufacturers can create a dependency on donations from Faith-based Organizations 
(FBO) and NGOs for the import of medicines and, in some countries, poor supervision from health 
inspectorates and unstable political and governmental circumstances stand in the way. 

=== PDF PAGE 13 (content p8) ===
In Africa, the population has relatively less to spend on medication compared to other continents, and 
reimbursement for the cost of medications by insurance companies is limited. Therefore, the public 
pharmaceutical supply chains play a larger role in supplying medication for free to the population in 
Africa than they do on other continents. Public supply chains typically deliver medication to the 
population for HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, nutrition, reproductive health, hepatitis, and 
noncommunicable diseases, while private supply chains provide other medications.  
Public supply chains for health products in Africa are relatively long and generally follow the four- or 
five-level health system architecture (see Figure 3.4-1). Typically, a central warehouse distributes the 
goods to regional warehouses in the province. From the regional warehouse, goods are shipped to 
district warehouses/stores, and subsequently the goods are shipped via the district warehouses to the 
health facilities to reach the patient. In these supply chains, it may take 6 to 18 months to move goods 
from the central warehouse to the health facilities.  
Given the complexity of the distribution networks, the procedures generally necessitate maintaining 
security stocks of one to two months at the SDP level, three months at the health district level, and 
four to six months at the regional and central levels. As a consequence, out-of-stock situations have a 
major impact on patient health, but the financial consequences of overstocking with safety stocks must 
also be considered.  
Note: Red boxes show the private supply chain, green boxes display the public supply chain. 
Figure 3.4-1 Example of Pharmaceutical Supply Chain in Senegal  
In contrast, the public supply chain in Zambia was reorganized recently from a Tier-3 distribution 
network to a more last-mile model wherein the storage capacity at central and regional warehouses was 
expanded and all district warehouses were eliminated. A central information technology inventory 
management system for stock and purchase-order management and visibility was implemented for the 
entire supply chain, and a last-mile distribution system was established from the central warehouse and 
six regional warehouses to 3400 health facilities which included hospitals, clinics, centers, posts, and 
huts. In addition, regional warehouses are no longer present in each province; instead, their locations 
are based on population distribution, geographical environment, and distance to health facilities 

=== PDF PAGE 14 (content p9) ===
(allowing for a maximum eight-hour drive). As a result, the distance between distribution points is 
shorter than before, total inventory stock level is lower, and medicine accessibility has been improved. 
3.5 Supply Chains in Brazil 
In Brazil, wholesalers, logistic service companies, distributors, pharmacies, clinics, and hospitals must 
be licensed to distribute, store, commercialize, and administrate an approved product, according to the 
Portaria CVS 1/2020 as shown in Figure 3.5-1 (19). The MAH may engage a third-party company for 
the distribution or logistics services, according to Resolution of the Collegiate Board (RDC) n° 234/2018, in 
which case the contracted company is jointly and severally liable with the contracting company for the 
technical and operational aspects of the inherent activity (20).  
GDP is regulated by RDC n° 430/2020 (modified by RDC n° 653/2022) which requires suitable and 
adequate procedures, premises, installations, and equipment that will ensure proper storage and 
distribution of medicinal products. This requirement includes temperature-mapping of distribution 
routes, temperature-monitoring during product distribution, and shipping qualification for all 
medicines (not only temperature-sensitive products) employing a risk-based approach for product 
quality (21, 22). Humidity monitoring during the last mile is not considered necessary as properly 
chosen container closure systems protect against any humidity excursions which might be experienced. 
However, Brazilian regulation does require humidity monitoring unless a risk assessment conducted 
by manufactures and wholesalers determined there is no product impact prior to last mile. Overall, 
product distribution within the temperature and humidity approved in the regulatory application is an 
expectation, and the range of allowed temperature and humidity excursions must be technically 
justified, supported by data, and documented in a risk analysis. 
The MAH of a medicinal product must ensure appropriate and continued supply of that medicinal 
product. In event of a temporary supply discontinuation, a notification to health authorities is required, 
according to the RDC n° 18/2014 (23). 
The main challenge in last-mile transport via road, air, and water, is the size of Brazil as the mode of 
transport is executed by a logistic operator who subcontracts trucks, flights, and boats. 
Note: Private supply in red, public supply chain in green       * Sistema Unico de Saude (Unified Health System) 
Figure 3.5-1 Example of Brazil’s Supply Chain  

=== PDF PAGE 15 (content p10) ===
3.6 Supply Chains in the United States 
In the United States, there is little difference between the public and private supply chains as public-
health efforts normally use private supply chains to achieve their goals. Most prescription drugs travel 
through a complex system that includes large primary wholesalers, smaller secondary wholesalers, and 
a small number of specialty wholesalers. In addition to purchasing overstock from manufacturers and 
primary wholesalers, secondary wholesalers buy and sell drugs among themselves, as well as selling 
them to pharmacies. Thus, prescription drug products may undergo multiple handoffs within a supply 
chain.  
In the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) defines 
wholesale distribution as the “distribution of prescription drugs to persons other than a consumer or 
patient….” (Part 205.3 (f)) and defines a wholesale distributor as “anyone engaged in wholesale 
distribution of prescription drugs….” (Part 205.3 (g)) (24). Additionally, the CFR defines an authorized 
distributor as “a distributor with whom a manufacturer has established an ongoing relationship to 
distribute such manufacturer’s products” (Part 203.3 (b)) (25). Wholesalers must have a method to 
ensure that shipments of prescription drugs are only sold and delivered to licensed entities. 
Neither 21 CFR 203 nor 21 CFR 205 addresses packaging and shipping requirements for temperature-
controlled products. However, U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) General Chapter <659> Packaging and Storage 
Requirements and General Chapter <1079> Risk and Mitigation Strategies for the Storage and 
Transportation of Finished Drug Products are very clear in their guidance for the storage, distribution, 
monitoring, calibration, training and qualification of “cold chain” equipment (26, 27). USP <659>, 
revised in 2020, gives specific guidance on packaging, temperature, storage, and distribution 
requirements.  
Also revised in 2020, USP <1079> provides specific responsibilities, not just for manufacturers but 
for all last-mile participants, including wholesalers, distributors, pharmacies, compounding pharmacies, 
hospitals, healthcare providers, brokers, and logistics service providers. It addresses the responsibilities 
for storage, transport, supplier qualification, quality agreements, excursion handling, training, 
calibration, monitoring systems, staffing, temperature mapping, and shipping package qualification. 
USP <1079> focuses on development of a quality management system and includes a section on the 
“Risk-Based Approach to the Storage and Transportation of Finished Drug Products.” Under 
“Distribution and Shipment of Pharmacopeial Articles,” it states that:  
Shippers and distributors are to follow the proper storage and shipping requirements 
as indicated by the manufacturer….The manufacturers and distributors should work 
together to establish proper distribution and product-handling requirements for the 
purpose of ensuring appropriate product maintenance in transit.  
In addition, under “Temperature Challenges,” USP <1079> states that “Storage temperature ranges 
may not be indicative of the allowable tolerances during shipping. Articles labeled for special storage 
conditions (between 2 °C and 8 °C) vary widely in their tolerance of short-term exposure to heat and 
cold.” Manufacturers ship refrigerated pharmaceuticals in a variety of ways, ranging from protective 
packaging or temperature-controlled trailers to no temperature protection or control at all. The 
decision about how a manufacturer will ship a product depends on the stability data a manufacturer 
provides, which may not be included in the product labeling. 
Shipments from wholesalers are made via private fleet (vehicles owned by the wholesaler), commercial 
carriers, and local courier services. Typically, the duration of these shipments from the wholesaler’s 
distribution centers to the point of dispensing facilities ranges from several hours to multiple days. 
The National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP) Drug Distributor Accreditation program, 
(formerly the Verified-Accreditation Wholesale Distributors program) is designed to protect the U.S. 
prescription drug and medical device supply chain. The accreditation process changed in January 2022 

=== PDF PAGE 16 (content p11) ===
and no longer requires on-site visits. This program involves a self-conducted supply chain inspection 
of a facility’s procedures and practices. Nearly half of the states require NABP Drug Distributor 
Accreditation for distributors who are licensed to distribute in their state, whether or not they have 
facilities in their state, while some states, such as Florida, have a more rigorous licensing process that 
also involves passing state-certification exams (28). Manufacturers can and often do take state 
accreditation and licensing into account when evaluating the relationship they have with a wholesale 
distributor. Other states, such as Georgia and Oklahoma, have started to review their regulatory 
requirements related to the distribution of finished drug products. Public awareness has also increased 
in patient claims of improper handling of temperature-sensitive drug products within the last mile that 
might have adversely impacted patients. 
Without specific regulatory requirements, wholesale distributors have only the manufacturer’s 
instructions to ensure they are providing adequate, appropriate, and proper packaging and shipping 
temperature ranges to maintain product integrity, stability, and potency. In the absence of specific 
packaging requirements or stability data provided by a manufacturer, the distributor should use 
qualified packaging or transportation to maintain product-storage labeling requirements for the 
duration of the shipping time from the removal from the distributor’s temperature-controlled 
environment to delivery at their customer’s location.  
If available, manufacturers should be encouraged to provide specific packaging requirements or 
stability data that supports shipping within parameters outside of storage-labeling requirements, since 
this would reduce environmental packaging waste and costs that are passed on to consumers. In either 
case, the distributor is responsible for having data showing that the package and shipping method 
ensures the product’s temperature will stay within the storage-label requirement or specified time and 
temperature parameters. See Figure 3.6-1 as an example.  
Figure 3.6-1 Example of U.S. Private Sector Supply Chain 

=== PDF PAGE 17 (content p12) ===
3.7 Supply Chains in Canada 
Canada has two main levels of regulating bodies for medicines: Health Canada is the federal regulator, 
and the Colleges of Pharmacy are the provincial regulators for pharmacies. Health Canada oversees 
the activities of manufacturing, importation, testing, packaging, labeling, distribution, and wholesaling 
and, thus, regularly audits and licenses wholesalers.  
Each of the ten provinces and three territories in Canada have their respective College of Pharmacy. 
Hospitals fall under the College of Pharmacy, and they are funded by their respective provincial 
government or by the government of the territory. Hospitals obtain their licenses from the provincial 
government where they are established. Pharmacies and clinics, private or public, obtain their licenses 
from the College of Pharmacy of their respective province.  
The Canadian Food and Drug Act (CFDA) and Food and Drug Regulations (FDR) are the two main 
legal documents that govern the drug, medical device, natural health product, and cosmetics industries 
(29, 30). The FDR and the Guidelines for Environmental Control of Drugs during Storage and Transportation  
are the Canadian equivalent of the EU GDP(31). Health Canada refers to these documents when 
auditing any licensed owner of a drug establishment. 
Health Canada is also the federal department responsible for monitoring and assessing the wide variety 
of drugs marketed in in the country. They assess and monitor drugs to ensure that they are in 
pharmaceutical compliance with the CFDA and its accompanying regulations. 
Canada is the second largest country in the world, having an area of almost 10 million km2, with a 
relatively small population of 38 million people. Almost 80% of the population is situated in the south 
of the country, close to the USA–Canada border, which occupies only about 30% of the total area of 
the country (see Figure 3.7.1). 
Figure 3.7-1 Map of Canada 

=== PDF PAGE 18 (content p13) ===
Wholesalers package, pick up, store, transport, and deliver medicines to more than 11,000 pharmacies 
and hospitals across the country. Transportation of pharmaceutical products can be challenging due to 
long distances and seasonal temperatures that range from -40 °C to 50 °C, especially when products 
travel from the south to the north. As a result, products need robust environmental control and 
protection. In some areas, like in the far north, only one carrier operates and therefore, it is important 
to assess the route, understand carrier capabilities, and account for the handoff from one carrier to 
another. It is equally imperative for the wholesaler to have a solid quality agreement with the main 
carrier responsible for the route in total and with the carrier originally picking up the product at the 
distribution center. 
To preserve drug safety, quality, and efficacy, proper storage and transportation conditions must be 
maintained throughout the drug supply chain—from the point of manufacture to the delivery of 
products at the final destination. These conditions are described in the FDR and in the Guidelines for 
Environmental Control of Drugs during Storage and Transportation. Drugs must be stored and transported 
according to labeled storage conditions or specific transport conditions supported by data. Controls 
for conditions specified on the label (e.g., temperature, humidity, light) should be in place. Each 
building used to store drugs must be indicated on the drug establishment license (DEL) warehouse 
annex. Furthermore, when using contracted third parties to store drugs, it is the wholesaler’s 
responsibility to ensure that the third-party logistics provider’s (3PL) buildings are indicated on the 
DEL warehouse annex, and that the contracted 3PL stores the drugs according to the conditions 
described on the label.  
Packaging and packaging configurations are the responsibility of the DEL owner, who is therefore 
responsible for designing and validating the packaging used to ship products and for qualifying each 
route according to a protocol. The executed protocol and the documentation may be presented to 
Health Canada during an audit. 
Considering the difficult Canadian geography, long distances, and extremes in weather, manufacturers 
are encouraged to share allowable temperature excursions with the wholesaler. Unfortunately, this 
information is difficult to obtain even when it is part of the quality agreement signed between the 
wholesaler and the product manufacturer. 
3.8 Supply Chains in China 
China had approximately 134,000 pharmaceutical distributors in 2021 with a market size of 2 trillion 
renminbi (RMB), equivalent to approximately 300 billion USD (32). These distributors sell most 
pharmaceuticals to China hospitals. The Central Pharmacy Department in a hospital is responsible for 
the purchase and dispensing of pharmaceutical products including inpatient, outpatient, and emergency 
pharmacies. Although sales are driven to retail pharmacies, especially online pharmacies, hospital sales 
still account for more than 60% of drug sales. Therefore, the main distribution channel for Chinese 
wholesalers is the hospital, regardless of whether the medical institution is government- or privately-
owned. 
A typical manufacturer uses provincial distributors to cover hospital channels, a central purchase 
department to provide for chain pharmacies and an ecommerce platform to supply directly to the 
patient. The transaction partners are required to exchange “first transaction documents,” including 
business licenses, drug transaction licenses, and drug sales permits, before a transaction takes place to 
ensure that the transaction partners have been granted the necessary authorization to deal in a 
permitted product (33). A distributor is not necessarily bound to limit distribution to within a certain 
region, but the local administration that issues the distribution license will be held responsible for any 
conduct contrary to the regulations. Therefore, it is almost impossible for a distributor to open a 
distribution center in another region, since no authority would issue a license for a distributor not 
registered in that region. 
The pharmaceutical supply chain in China can be divided into the following three steps: 

=== PDF PAGE 19 (content p14) ===
1.
National distribution from manufacturers to wholesalers
2.
Local dispatch from wholesalers to hospitals/pharmacies
3.
Last-mile distribution from pharmacies to patients
Long-haul distribution is usually carried out with the support of 3PL companies, while the dispatch to 
hospitals is usually handled by the wholesalers themselves, using their own transportation teams who 
also serve (partly) as the stocking staff of hospital pharmacies. The transportation team is of crucial 
importance as the service interface between wholesalers and hospitals. The complexity of such a 
delivery system makes it almost impossible for manufacturers to replace wholesalers with 3PL 
companies to provide direct sales to hospitals. Retail pharmacies can dispatch prescription drug (Rx) 
products in stores or to homes with their own third-party courier services “if the Rx product is to treat 
chronic diseases and the prescription has been verified by certified pharmacists” (34). Specialty 
pharmacies, or direct-to-patient pharmacies, serve as the main channel to patients with home delivery 
services for specialty drugs.  
Two critical factors have a great impact on the last mile for pharmaceutical products in China: National 
Health Insurance and the fast-growing eCommerce channel. The National Health Insurance is the 
public healthcare insurance system that dominates paying for the healthcare of Chinese citizens. Apart 
from reimbursement pricing, volume-based purchasing, and diagnosis-related groups, the National 
Health Insurance has one determinant for expense control—budgeted expense for providers. The 
management of the budget is also related to the key performance indicators for the hospital 
management team. With this philosophy in mind, not all retail pharmacies enjoy “reimbursement 
status” for their patients, even for chronic prescription products. The second factor of eCommerce 
channels involves online pharmacies selling prescription products with the support of telemedicine 
offered by the platforms. Such purchases are not reimbursable, but they are convenient in terms of 
access and delivery.  
According to Menet (menet.com.cn), a highly recognized data source for the healthcare market, online 
sales for drugs grew by 37.6% in 2022 over 2021, with a seven-year compound annual growth rate 
(CAGR) of 48.4%, accounting for 2.8% of the total drug sales. Concurrent to the development of 
eCommerce is the emergence of online-to-office (O2O) platforms. O2O is a phrase used in digital 
marketing to describe systems that entice consumers in a digital environment to make purchases of 
goods or services from physical businesses. These O2O platforms use carriers that link the stores and 
customers, and they offer access to retail pharmacies so users/patients can select a product from the 
listed retail pharmacies according to preferred brand, price, and distance, for example, have it delivered 
within 30 minutes. O2O business has become an important online outlet for retail pharmacies with 
thin margins. Healthcare providers in China are mainly state-owned. Grade-3 hospitals, predominantly 
medical university-affiliated hospitals, are also state-owned, but private providers are gaining in growth 
rate. 
Further 
information 
can 
be 
found 
in 
the 
China 
Statistical 
Yearbook 
2022 
(https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2022/indexeh.htm).  In 2021, the top 10 wholesalers, with a total 
revenue of 1.3 trillion RMB (about 194 billion USD), accounted for 65% of the market; the top three 
of those account for 68.35% of the top-10 sales with revenue of 896 billion RMB (about 133 billion 
USD). The top performers in distribution are also publicly listed companies, the majority being state-
owned. To the contrary, the majority shareholders of the leading retail chain pharmacies are private 
entrepreneurs, although the chain pharmacies are mostly publicly listed companies. 
In short, the supply chain for pharmaceutical products in China is shifting from hospitals to retail 
pharmacies, and online pharmacies are growing at a faster rate than offline retail pharmacies. 
Ownership does not affect the nature of the healthcare supply chain, but the nature of healthcare 
products might. 
In summary, the pharmaceutical supply chain and last-mile delivery of pharmaceutical products can 
vary significantly from region to region, with each region presenting different challenges and 

=== PDF PAGE 20 (content p15) ===
considerations. It is important for companies involved in the distribution of pharmaceutical products 
to understand the local regulations and requirements to ensure a safe and efficient delivery process. 
4.0 Pharmaceutical Products 
The pharmaceutical supply chain distributes different kinds of products to the patient via the last mile. 
Product characteristics and stability impact how these products should be handled along the chain and, 
therefore, understanding of these product properties is important. The product characteristics, stability, 
and requirements are further explored in Sections 4.1–4.2. 
4.1 Product Characteristics and Stability 
The chemical and physical properties of a drug substance and the drug product formulation determine 
its product stability and shelf life (35-37). During this shelf life, pharmaceutical products like vaccines, 
tablets, creams, and injectables are exposed to hazards that may impact their quality, efficacy, safety, 
and aesthetics. These hazards, including intrinsic factors such as the molecular structure of the drug 
itself and environmental factors (e.g., temperature, pH, buffer species, ionic strength, light, oxygen, 
moisture, additives, excipients), may affect the rates of chemical and physical degradation of drug 
substances (38).  
Temperature is one of the primary hazards that effects drug stability and shelf life. Thus, storage and 
shipping temperatures should stay within the allowed and filed conditions established during stability-
testing programs that are typically run at the beginning of the product lifecycle. These studies determine 
the impact of temperature, moisture (relative humidity), light, shock, vibration, drop, and pressure on 
the product in its primary marketed packaging. Here the formation of degradation products and 
decrease in label claim or potency are measured using stability-indicating methods to the end of the 
product shelf life, which can range from days to years. During these stability studies, the product is 
stored under strictly controlled conditions in climate chambers at, for example, 5 ± 3 °C and 25 ± 2 
°C (38). Samples are drawn from the controlled temperature chambers for testing at regular intervals. 
From these stability studies, the product shelf life and temperature conditions during manufacture, 
packaging, distribution, and storage are established (39, 40).  
4.2 Application of Product Stability Budget and Mean 
Kinetic Temperature 
Products requiring storage at defined temperatures may experience exposure to temperatures outside 
of the defined range for a period of time during filling, labeling, inspection, packaging, shipping, and 
distribution including to the end user. Proper management is essential to achieve an understanding of 
the potential temperature exposures a product may experience as it is transported to the point of use. 
Some examples of situations that may arise include: 
Transit within a refrigerated truck 
Even though a truck has reached the correct set temperature, the temperature may rise temporarily in 
warm environments or fall in cool environments as the doors are opened for loading and unloading. 
Temperature-monitoring devices, located on the outside of product containers, will record this change 
in temperature, and some monitors may exceed the labeled storage claim of the product. 
Storing of prescription drugs within a hospital or pharmacy 
The refrigeration unit used to store temperature-sensitive pharmaceuticals accidently stops cooling 
overnight or during the weekend. 
Dispensing of prescription drugs within a pharmacy 

=== PDF PAGE 21 (content p16) ===
A pharmacy will remove a product from the refrigerator to place a patient label on the product and 
check that the medication is suitable for dispensing (e.g., it has not expired and that the correct product 
was removed from the inventory). 
Shipment of drug product from a pharmacy to an end user 
A product requiring storage at a controlled room temperature (USP definition) is mailed to a patient’s 
home and remains in a mailbox or on a doorstep for several hours where it is exposed to ambient 
summer or winter temperatures. 
In the examples above, it would be important to know if the exposures would be problematic to the 
product. USP <1079> states that deviations or variances in exposure to temperatures outside of the 
product’s label range should be addressed with the manufacturer or MAH to determine if the exposure 
is acceptable and if the product may be used. 
The total allowable time outside the storage condition, based on stability studies, will be defined as the 
product’s time out of refrigeration (TOR) or time out of storage (TOS) and will be used to support 
excursion temperatures outside the storage conditions. The total TOR/TOS found to be acceptable is 
divided by site departments to cover the total time required for each stage in manufacturing, shipping, 
distribution, and use. Any time left over can be used for excursions more than the defined times. 
Even though comprehensive stability studies that support handling both within and outside of the 
manufacturer’s control have been executed, the resulting stability data is typically not shared with other 
parties, including distributors, caregivers, or patients. Typically, product labels and inserts contain only 
long-term storage conditions, such as, “Store between 2–8 °C (36–46 °F). Do not freeze!” When 
excursions outside the label storage temperatures do occur, the manufacturer instructs that they should 
be contacted regarding the ultimate disposition of the drug product. Manufacturers are reluctant to 
provide expanded standard stability information to other parties, since the same allowable excursions 
could be used multiple times by those possessing the product without the knowledge of the 
manufacturer. The cumulative effects of multiple excursions could impact the quality of the product. 
A better approach would be to use transportation statements in labeling, for example, “Store at 2–8 
ºC; excursions to 25 ºC during transport not to exceed 24 hours” or “Store at 15–25 °C; excursions to 
2–32 °C during transport not to exceed 24 hours” (41). Such statements must be supported by stability 
data and approved by competent health authorities. 
Drug manufacturers can facilitate the use of their temperature-controlled products, when product-
stability data allow, by providing a wider range of label storage temperatures (i.e., 2–15 °C rather than 
2–8 °C), providing separate long-term storage and transport temperatures, providing specific storage 
and/or handling temperatures for patient use only, and/or by using mean kinetic temperature (MKT). 
Using the calculated MKT for a drug product is appropriate to approximate the effects of storage-
temperature variations that may occur during product transport in the absence of product-specific 
kinetic data. MKT calculations for each portion of the distribution process may be used to estimate 
the impact of temperature excursions on the quality of the drug product (27, 42, 43). 
For brief segments, such as transport, the MKT for the segment is best used in conjunction with upper 
and lower temperature limits from the manufacturer. 
For longer segments, such as storage, calculating the MKT of only the excursion is preferable to using 
the MKT of the entire segment for evaluating the impact of the excursion. 
Within these limitations, MKT and the controlled room temperature and cold temperature as defined 
by USP are useful in understanding the impact of temperature excursions on product quality over the 
lifetime of a drug. 
Each successive owner of the material—manufacturer, wholesaler, pharmacy, and patient—can, at 
best, be responsible only for their particular segment, including the storage and transport temperatures 
and the interpretation of the resulting partial MKT values. Others in the distribution chain will have 

=== PDF PAGE 22 (content p17) ===
access only to what is provided in the drug’s labeling, typically storage statements (e.g., “Store at 
controlled room temperature,” “Excursions permitted 15–30 ºC,” “Do not freeze”,); therefore, the 
inclusion of MKT excursion data in the labeling is useful because the manufacturer may be able to use 
MKT to evaluate the impact of temperature excursions that occur during the last mile, if the patient 
contacts manufacturer to request help. The manufacturer of a drug product has a unique responsibility, 
since it is the manufacturer who performs the stability studies to determine the expiration dating of 
the drug. It is those stability studies, plus any additional studies the manufacturer may choose to do, 
such as freeze-thaw and temperature-excursion studies beyond the standard ICH data package, that 
enable informed decisions to be made about the use of MKT to evaluate the impact of temperature 
excursions on the product. For this reason, when questions arise during the distribution process about 
temperature excursions, they are best raised with the manufacturer who can use the stability data to 
interpret the MKT. 
At multiple points in the supply chain, excursions outside the labeled long-term storage temperature 
range may occur. This may be due to a deficiency in the stability information that is necessary for 
managing temperature excursions experienced throughout the distribution process. The misalignment 
can be resolved if the logistics group openly communicates the stability needs to the research and 
development team that executes the stability studies. Comprehensive stability data is essential for 
managing temperature excursions that are likely to occur during transit (36, 41). 
5.0 Services and Temperature Controlled Systems 
Within supply chain management, suppliers and receivers of goods may use services and temperature-
controlled systems from other entities to support the storage and transport of pharmaceutical products. 
When temperature-sensitive products need to be shipped, additional services may be needed to protect 
and monitor the goods. Sections 5.1–5.6 focus on contract management, storage, packaging, and 
transport for pharmaceutical products. 
5.1 Contract Management 
When services or outsource activities are applied in the supply chain, contract management should be 
applied according to the applicable country’s rules. The quality system should extend to the control 
and review of any outsourced activities related to the procurement, holding, supply, or export of 
medicinal products, and all of these processes should incorporate quality risk management. 
In addition, there must be a written contract between the contract-giver and the contract-acceptor that 
clearly establishes the duties of each party. Besides the commercial contract, from a regulatory 
perspective, a technical or quality agreement is expected that includes additional details for deviation 
management and change control. The contract-givers are responsible for auditing the contract-
acceptor to verify the agreed-upon activities. 
The contract-acceptor should not pass any of the work entrusted to them under the contract to a third 
party without the contract-giver’s prior evaluation, approval, and an audit of the third party by the 
contract-giver or the contract-acceptor. The contract-acceptor must forward any information that can 
influence the quality of the product(s) to the contract-giver in accordance with the requirements of the 
contract. 
5.2 Storage 
5.2.1 Storage Facilities 
Storage facilities should be secure and structurally sound to allow safe storage and handling of the 
medicinal products. Management and operation of the facility should include but is not limited to: 
•
Access to the storage facilities should be restricted to authorized staff.

=== PDF PAGE 23 (content p18) ===
•
Premises should be provided with adequate lighting to enable all operations to be carried out
accurately and safely.
•
Appropriate cleaning equipment and cleaning products should be chosen and used so as not to
present a source of contamination.
•
Any products withdrawn, recalled, expired or suspected of falsification should be segregated from
saleable stock (either physically or through an equivalent electronic system, when possible).
•
Medicinal products should be handled and stored in such a manner as to prevent spillage, breakage,
contamination, and mix-ups.
•
Stock should be rotated according to the “first expired, first out” (FEFO) principle. Regular stock
inventories should be performed, and stock irregularities should be investigated.
5.2.2 Environmental Control 
The storage of pharmaceutical products is critical for the last mile knowing the challenging conditions 
these products will be exposed to until they reach the end users. If applicable, temperature and humidity 
requirements must be maintained during storage, regardless of the type of storage unit used (e.g., deep 
freezer, freezer, refrigerator, walk-in cooler or freezer, storage rooms).  
To ensure proper storage, three essential conditions must be met: temperature and humidity 
maintenance, distribution, and monitoring. Temperature and humidity must be maintained during 
regular operation and should consider traffic movement (door opening) and defrost cycles where 
applicable. To ensure proper temperature and humidity distribution, storage units should be mapped 
to ensure that all locations inside do not deviate from the required temperature range (i.e., there should 
be no exception, even for small units like an under-counter refrigerator). The temperature- and 
humidity-mapping, in regions where this is necessary, should be conducted when the unit is empty 
(44). However, additional studies might be required based on the geographic location, atmosphere, 
and local regulations (e.g., winter/summer season, dry/wet seasons) in combination with partial or full 
loads, as product placement may affect air movement. Once temperature-mapping is executed, the 
next step is analyzing the thermal mapping data to identify the locations with the lowest and highest 
values where temperature and humidity sensors can be positioned for permanent monitoring. 
In some cases, temperature probes are placed inside a container with liquid to provide a more accurate 
product temperature rather than air temperature, which can fluctuate and trigger an alarm 
unnecessarily. Many electronic sensors can simulate probes in liquid to alleviate temperature changes 
and reduce nuisance alarms. A contingency plan must be in place in the event of a power outage or 
mechanical failure. Standup freezers and refrigerators can only maintain the proper temperature for a 
few hours during failures and are not typically designed with significant insulation properties 
(particularly models with glass doors). 
The medication provider (e.g., pharmacist) must communicate to end users the importance of proper 
storage conditions and provide guidance on the best ways to store the product prior to use. If the 
product requires refrigeration, the products will be stored in a refrigerator. Refrigerators used at a home 
often cool the interior space with cold air from the freezer section of the unit. Placing the products 
near the vents supplying cold air may expose products to freezing temperatures. The same situation 
can happen when a refrigerator is over-packed and prevents air from circulating correctly. Along with 
requirements to protect the product from excess heat and/or freezing, the impact of light and humidity 
can be substantial and should be explained to end users, if applicable.  
5.3 Packaging 
The diversity of environmental conditions encountered in the last mile makes this segment the most 
challenging of the whole distribution chain. For this reason, the qualification of packaging requires a 
deep analysis of potential environmental and handling conditions that will be experienced until the 
product is delivered to end users. PDA Technical Report No. 64: Active Temperature-Controlled Systems: 

=== PDF PAGE 24 (content p19) ===
Qualification Guidance, Technical Report No. 72: Passive Thermal Protection Systems for Global Distribution: 
Qualification and Operational Guidance, and TR 39 detail all the processes for qualifying a thermal solution 
(1, 44, 45). The most crucial step in this process, however, is to design proper testing conditions before 
starting the qualification process. Any scenarios that the products will encounter must be taken into 
consideration (e.g., design qualification, operational qualification). For instance, if the product will be 
delivered by car or truck, with or without active heating and cooling, or with couriers or parcels, the 
conditions inside the packaging, the number of stops, and how the products are tendered to the end 
users need to be known in the development of testing temperature profiles and handling procedures. 
Data collection is crucial in the establishment of qualification procedures. Using dummy boxes to 
collect outside temperatures and measure handling conditions (e.g., vibration, orientation) during 
shipments is a very effective method for understanding the shipping environment that will be used for 
qualification. In the case of parcel shipments, thermal shipping containers can be flipped multiple 
times, increasing the probability of a package landing on its side. 
The role of packaging in the last mile is fundamental. Earlier in the supply chain, most pharmaceutical 
products would have been transported in larger quantities (e.g., pallet size, multiple-counts package). 
For the last mile, products are shipped in much smaller quantities for the final deliveries such as those 
to pharmacies, clinics, nursing homes and, eventually, directly to patients. These shipments will 
experience more diversified conditions than they had in their homogeneous distribution. Considering 
the time and conditions under which the packaged products stay at their origin until they have been 
picked up for transport and delivery is also important. In some cases, and in some regions of the world, 
packages are stacked on a pallet, rolling carts, or shelves for several hours before being picked up. 
These conditions need to be considered during design and qualification. In addition, sustainability (e.g., 
single use versus reuse), theft, and all means of potential damage should also be factored into the 
packaging design.  
5.3.1 Packaging with Passive Thermal Functionality 
Packaging with passive thermal functionality uses a combination of insulation and refrigerants, such as 
water-based gel packs, phase-change materials (PCM), dry ice, or liquid nitrogen to ensure that 
medicinal products are distributed under defined temperature conditions. Regardless of the options 
selected, containers must be qualified (46, 47). A prequalified passive-thermal solution can be 
acceptable as long as the ambient temperature for which it was qualified and the payload used for the 
qualification is similar to the product to be shipped. The vendor qualification documentation of the 
prequalified solution must be reviewed and assessed by the shipper to confirm its suitability for the 
intended use. Universal pack-outs do not require seasonal or regional adjustments and maximize 
operational efficiency but usually are more expensive and weigh more, resulting in a higher logistics 
expense. Overall, the product mass, container-insulation thickness, performance hours, and thermal 
stress will affect the size of the required passive-thermal solution with refrigerants and thermal barriers, 
which in turn factors into material costs, warehouse space, and carrier charges. Substitutions of any 
components should be tested to confirm that the same thermal performance is achieved. Live shipment 
testing is strongly recommended to confirm the performance capability of the designed thermal 
shipping system and process is effective and reproducible in representative real-world distribution lanes 
with actual transportation process and logistics service providers (47). Factors related to home 
deliveries that include additional transport hours and time packages are left outside or in mailboxes 
must be considered in the final design of the thermal-packaging solution. 
5.3.2 Packaging with Active Thermal Functionality 
Several different systems with active thermal packaging are available which are equipped with active 
refrigeration or heating capabilities using calibrated and temperature-control devices. The refrigeration 
or heating used to keep the products under proper temperature conditions can be mechanical, 
chemical, or electric and typically is designed to be reused multiple times. Contrary to previous 
segments of the supply chain, active-thermal containers are much smaller and accommodate a small 

=== PDF PAGE 25 (content p20) ===
number of products. Most often, their size is that of a small portable cooler used mainly for delivering 
products to nursing homes, hospitals, clinics, or vaccination centers. Usually, these systems can only 
maintain a temperature of 10 °C to 20 °C below the ambient temperature. Like passive-thermal 
packages, active-thermal containers must follow the same process for qualification. Since these systems 
are designed to be used several times, an inspection process must be in place to ensure that they will 
perform the same each time. 
5.3.3 Sustainability in Packaging 
Pressure to be more sustainable has reached the last-mile segment. More countries and users are asking 
for greater environmental consideration in the usage of packaging for the last mile. Much passive-
thermal packaging is single-use and made of materials that can be difficult to recycle and are not 
biodegradable, including expanded polystyrene (EPS) and polyurethane. New materials are available 
that provide a more sustainable solution such as starch-based, paper, cotton, or wood-fiber packaging 
that is recyclable, biodegradable, or compostable. There are limitations to many of the new sustainable 
materials, however. Some are susceptible to water damage and may require the use of plastic wrapping. 
Additionally, some of the materials may have lower thermal properties compared to traditional 
materials and require thicker insulation or additional refrigerants to provide comparable thermal 
performance. Finally, the cost for these new sustainable solutions can be higher than traditional 
insulation materials.  
Another strategy to improve sustainability is to employ reusable solutions. Last-mile delivery provides 
an opportunity for reusable packages when end users can easily and cost-effectively return thermal 
solutions. Sustainability related to reusable solutions can sometimes be complex, as sometimes the 
carbon footprint of reverse logistics can be greater than a single-use solution with sustainable materials. 
When using a reusable solution, a documented assessment procedure for each solution must be done 
to ensure their performance in the last mile. For example, it is essential for packages made of vacuum 
insulation panels (VIP) to be inspected before use as the loss of the vacuum will significantly diminish 
the thermal performance of the shipping solution. Also, before reusing thermal solutions, sanitation 
procedures could be required. 
5.4 Transportation 
Various transportation methods are used within the last mile (e.g., air, truck, car, bike). Regardless of 
the method, temperature should be maintained to the label claim on the product’s outer packaging or 
the manufacturer’s instructions. Most transport within the last mile is national and each carrier may 
have different transportation methods. Wholesale distributors and local couriers, for example, typically 
use ground methods of transportation. Understanding the method of transportation is important to 
ensuring that proper storage conditions can be maintained throughout the delivery process. 
Considerations for any appropriate transportation method should include the staging process, weather, 
length of transit, and accessibility to the patient; likewise, qualification testing should include each of 
these considerations. It may be necessary to stop during certain weather conditions, e.g., certain months 
of the year, such as the rain season in Africa and Asia or low temperatures in Canada. Similarly, 
deliveries to countries where certain days are religious holidays or long weekends should be scheduled 
accordingly. For specific deliveries, even drones may be used. When using specific solutions like drones 
(e.g., to reach remote patient locations), it must be done in compliance with jurisdictional laws and 
regulations. Qualification testing for such specific solutions should include any stability issues that may 
arise from dropping the shipment to the ground.  
5.4.1 Road Transportation 
Depending on the product, distribution by road might require a temperature-controlled vehicle, like a 
van, truck, or motortruck with trailer (48). PDA TR 64 defines a temperature-controlled trailer as "a 
cargo box attached to a truck…that is equipped with a TCU [temperature-controlled unit] to provide 
active cooling or heating control inside the box…sometimes referred to as ‘reefers’” (44). Most 

=== PDF PAGE 26 (content p21) ===
temperature-controlled trailers are certified under the Agreement on the International Carriage of Perishable 
Foodstuffs and on the Special Equipment to be Used for such Carriage and have one TCU (mono-temp trailer) 
or have one TCU mounted at the front of the trailer and a second evaporator at the rear doors (bi-
temp trailer) (49). Bi-temp trailers are the most commonly used temperature-controlled road vehicles 
in domestic and international road transport to keep temperatures at 2 °C to 8 °C, 15 °C to 25 °C, or 
-15 °C to -25 °C. The bi-temp trailer has a movable split wall that can divide the front from the back
of the trailer where the evaporator at the rear doors controls the temperature in the rear section (48).
Bi-temp solutions are also available in the marketplace for vans.
5.4.2 Drones 
Drones may be an interesting alternative transport mode to deliver low-volume product(s) quickly in 
5 to 60 minutes over a distance up to 100 km to remote/rural areas, such as coastal islands, mountain 
areas, tropical forests, areas with poor infrastructure and infrequent logistics, and/or in case of 
emergency. Delivery drones can be piloted manually, highly automated, or fully automated under 
supervision of a qualified pilot, but will not take off in severe weather conditions (e.g., hail, snow, heavy 
rain, wind). Drone delivery recipients can be trained remotely in less than ten minutes to be familiar 
with drone unloading practices and/or refueling (e.g., exchange of batteries). In the near-term, drone 
transportation is relatively expensive, so routine drone flights would mainly be an option for high-value 
products. 
While drone transport is by definition air transport regulated by national and/or international aviation 
authorities, there are key differences versus shipping using conventional aircraft. A package sent via 
drone is exposed to ambient conditions in a way that a package in the cargo hold of an aircraft is not. 
For this reason, it is essential that the packaging provides any necessary temperature and weather 
protection. In addition, drone transportation has the potential to expose the contents to shock, drop, 
vibration and numerous other factors that could impact the product in a manner that may be very 
different from that experienced in the cargo hold of an aircraft. On the other hand, drones fly up to 
120 meters (about 400 feet) above the ground, which is not high enough to create the pressure concerns 
experienced with aircraft. As the use of drones for the last mile increases, it will be important to provide 
appropriately protective secondary and tertiary packaging for pharmaceuticals and vaccines transported 
via this mode. Specific protection should be considered based on the type of risk and qualification if 
the critical process parameters are met. 
5.4.3 Distribution from Point of Dispensing to End-Use in Mail 
Service Pharmacy 
The traditional dispensing role of pharmacists has shifted to include a clinical focus in monitoring the 
appropriateness of prescribing and in-patient care. Automated programs, including mail-service 
pharmacies, allow the time for these additional clinical responsibilities. Given the shift in dispensing 
trends, quality programs used throughout the pharmaceutical industry to transport medications must 
also be implemented at mail-order pharmacy facilities as well as at local pharmacies.  
When mailing pharmaceuticals for home delivery, temperature assurance should be maintained until 
the patient can return the product to its proper storage environment. When selecting the appropriate 
transport company, thermal solution, or theft protection, mail-order operations must especially focus 
on thermal conditions. The duration for the thermal qualification should start at the time the first 
package is packed until the end user opens it. For example, next-day shipping should have a qualified 
thermal solution for 36 hours that considers the time the first package is packed, delivered to the end 
user’s address (doorstep or mailbox), and opened by the patient at the end of the day (after working 
hours). This example, however, does not consider all the issues involved when the time frame of 
delivery is calculated; in many cases, significantly more time may be needed.  
Due to the expansion of mail-order pharmacies, many facilities must ship to multiple regions, which 
increases the complexity of selecting the appropriate thermal solutions. Many pharmacies currently 

=== PDF PAGE 27 (content p22) ===
choose thermal solutions using a dynamic weather system based on the weather conditions of the 
origin and final destination. Dynamic weather systems provide a more accurate estimate of what the 
package will experience but also require having multiple qualified thermal solutions for different 
weather scenarios, such as cold to warm and warm to cold. Pharmacies that do not use dynamic weather 
systems most often use a universal thermal solution.  
Strategies to improve delivery include but are not limited to: 
•
Minimize transport hours
•
Decrease the time packages are left outside, in a mailbox, or on a carrier’s truck
•
Use prequalified or validated passive-thermal solutions or active temperature control (e.g., reefer
unit)
•
Include temperature indicators or loggers on the product or packaging
•
Develop and maintain ongoing quality programs
5.5 Temperature-Monitoring During Transport 
Global regulations for the transport of temperature-sensitive pharmaceutical products specify that 
transportation is an extension of storage. Therefore, temperature should be maintained to the label 
claim on the product’s outer packaging or the manufacturer’s instructions during transportation 
throughout the entire supply chain, including the last mile.  
To achieve this, the shipper may use qualified temperature-controlled shipping systems such as active-
and/or passive-thermal solutions. Although these solutions may have been qualified to provide 
assurance that they will provide adequate thermal protection during shipping, unforeseen events may 
cause temperature excursions. The only way to provide absolute assurance that the required 
temperature range has been maintained is to include temperature monitors, data loggers, or indicators. 
5.5.1 Temperature-Monitoring or Data Loggers 
A wide variety of temperature-monitoring or data-logging solutions are available for the tracking of 
temperature during transportation. One option is “passive” USB data loggers which can be 
programmed with predefined settings (e.g., logging of internal temperature, a start-delay, alarm limits), 
started, and applied to the shipment. Upon receipt of the shipment, the data logger is retrieved, and 
the data downloaded and reviewed to support the decision about product disposition. There are also 
solutions that use near-field communication or Bluetooth, allowing for easier retrieval of the data upon 
receipt of the shipment. 
Near-real-time (“active”) data loggers are also available which use global positioning systems and 
cellular communication networks to transmit data “live.” They allow the shipper to view the 
temperature data mid-shipment, with the possibility of intervention should an event/issue occur which 
could affect product quality. 
Temperature data loggers (passive and active) provide a full set of temperature data for the shipment, 
including a temperature reading or recording at a set recording interval (e.g., every 10 minutes) as well 
as a detailed statistical analysis of the shipment (e.g., cumulative time outside a defined limit). Even in 
the event of an alarm triggered by the data logger, an analysis of the full data set may still allow the 
product to be released if the temperature excursion is found to be within the allowable limits based on 
stability data for the product. 
5.5.2 Temperature Indicators 
Temperature indicators come in the form of chemical or electronic indicators. These are a lower-cost 
alternative to data loggers but, whereas a data logger provides a full set of temperature data for 
shipment, including statistical analysis, an indicator will only confirm if the required temperature range 

=== PDF PAGE 28 (content p23) ===
was maintained. Temperature indicators do not generally show when the temperature excursion 
occurred, however, some electronic indicators will allow a cumulative alarm to be programmed into 
the indicator. 
5.5.3 Risk-Based Approach: Implementation and Management 
Implementing temperature-monitoring in transportation across the end-to-end supply-chain is highly 
recommended, however, it may not always be possible to use temperature-monitoring solutions within 
the last mile. A risk-based approach should be used to assess the suitability of using temperature-
monitoring solutions (50, 51). Where it is assessed as not suitable or practical (e.g., shipping directly to 
a patient who may struggle with the technology), time-based qualified shipping solutions may be 
implemented. 
As well as using an independent temperature-monitoring solution, if the product is being transported 
in an active thermal solution, it may be appropriate to use the vehicle temperature-monitoring system. 
Whatever system is used, it is vital to make sure the device is properly calibrated to ensure that the 
recorded data is accurate. The precision of the device should be at least ±0.5 °C. 
The location of the temperature-monitoring solution is also very important. The location should be 
based on the temperature-mapping or qualification of the shipping system and placed to represent the 
product temperature as accurately as possible. Poor placement could result in a true temperature 
excursion being missed and product being released when it should be discarded, or a temperature 
excursion being recorded due to measurement of air temperature when, in fact, the product quality is 
not affected. Best practice is to put the temperature sensor next to the product(s) shipped. 
Using reputable providers and solutions, executing an appropriate assessment and/or qualification, 
and assuring a robust implementation and ongoing management process will ensure product safety and 
efficacy. 
5.6 Security 
Security measures taken during the last mile are intended to ensure only the intended recipient receives 
the package. This may include signature-required, tamper-proof, and anonymous packaging. The cost 
of using these methods is balanced against the risk mitigation for each medication, transportation 
method, and consumer. The shipper needs to analyze the use of security methods consistently. 
6.0 Data and Knowledge Management 
Data is critical to manage and prove that products are delivered with the right quantity and quality at 
the right time and under the right conditions. Data can be product information, transport and storage 
conditions, track-and-trace or traceability data, serialization numbers, and other information such as 
supply-chain disruptions related to traffic jams, weather conditions, and inventory levels. Data can be 
static or dynamic. Static data does not change after being recorded and is a fixed data set, whereas 
dynamic data may change after it is recorded and must be continually updated (e.g., temperature data, 
location track-and-trace data of shipments). Sections 6.1–6.1.3 describe the management of data in 
relation to GDP and good documentation practices (GDocP), including the ALCOA+ data-integrity 
principles. 
6.1 Good Documentation Practices and Data Integrity 
Since 2015, regulatory bodies like the EMA, FDA, WHO, and Medicines & Healthcare products 
Regulatory Agency (MHRA) have had an enhanced interest in ensuring data integrity. Each has 
published data integrity guides to promote the transformation of the pharmaceutical industry to an 
elevated data integrity level. Initially, the main focus was on testing laboratories and manufacturing, 

=== PDF PAGE 29 (content p24) ===
but the guidelines also currently apply to distribution to ensure the quality, efficacy, and safety of the 
product is maintained according to local requirements (3, 9, 11, 52).  
6.1.1 Data Governance 
Data governance encompasses the people, processes, and technology arrangements required to achieve 
data integrity. Assuring data integrity requires appropriate quality and risk management systems, 
including adherence to GDocP and local regulations, such as General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) in Europe, that: 
• 
Address data ownership, access, and accountability for processes and risk management throughout 
the entire data lifecycle 
• 
Consider an adequate design, operation, and monitoring of processes and systems  
• 
Include controls over intentional and unintentional breaches of data integrity 
Data-governance design and controls must enable the detection of errors, lapses, and omissions of 
results and data during the data lifecycle. Controls can include procedural, organizational, and 
functional (technical) controls. 
The data governance system must include enough detail to allow accurate and complete reporting and 
interpretation of all data and must ensure data integrity. This system should include, but is not limited 
to, the following elements:  
• 
Validated computerized systems that are fit for their intended use, with special attention to any 
system used to create, process, and store data 
• 
Systems and procedures in place to ensure that records are reliable, complete, and accurate; these 
systems and procedures must also require that all test results that could affect the quality, safety, 
or efficacy of a drug are reported, reviewed, and assessed appropriately  
• 
Organization and storage of data in a way that is interpretable and traceable to the execution and 
purpose of distribution procedures  
• 
Controls in place to ensure that test data are not deleted and that changes to records are 
documented and justified, where required (e.g., audit trails should be enabled and reviewed) 
• 
Data retained in its original format; original records (or true copies), including electronic records, 
are subject to review by qualified personnel 
Risk management is an essential component of the data governance system. A risk-based approach to 
data management ensures that adequate resources are allocated and that control strategies for the 
assurance of the data integrity are commensurate with their potential impact on patient safety, product 
quality, and compliance with regulations. Where risks are identified, appropriate measures or safeguards 
should be implemented to ensure the integrity of critical data and records. 
6.1.2 Good Documentation Practices 
According to the FDA and other inspectorates, ensuring data integrity requires that data be attributable, 
legible, contemporaneous, original, accurate, complete, consistent, enduring, and available (ALCOA+). 
These general principles of GDocP apply to the management of records throughout its lifecycle, 
regardless of the medium (i.e., paper or electronic records), from the time data is first generated and 
any modifications made thereafter (52).  
The EU GDP provides guidance in Section 3.3.1 on how to manage data (53): 
• 
Data should only be entered into the computerised system or amended by persons authorised to 
do so.  

=== PDF PAGE 30 (content p25) ===
•
Data should be secured by physical or electronic means and protected against accidental or
unauthorised modifications.
•
Stored data should be checked periodically for accessibility.
•
Data should be protected by backing up at regular intervals. Back-up data should be retained for
the period stated in national legislation but at least five years at a separate and secure location.
•
Procedures to be followed if the system fails or breaks down should be defined. This should
include systems for the restoration of data.
The WHO guidance differs slightly from the EU GDP in the retention of the data, indicating that “all 
monitoring records should be kept for a minimum of the shelf-life of the product distributed plus one 
year, or as required by the national legislation” (11). However, national legislation may differ from 
either of the WHO or EU GDP guidances; for example the United Kingdom requires a two-year 
retention period, after which time records can be destroyed. 
Each paper and/or electronic record should be secured against modifications and/or deletions to the 
end of the retention time as defined by the applicable regulations. Therefore, a paper record should be 
traceable and stored in a secured environment (e.g., locked, fire-proof cabinet), whereas an electronic 
record should be secured in a computerized system which employs system access (segregation of 
duties), vulnerability scanning, security firewalls, antivirus applications, and security patches. In 
addition, risk assessment of the computerized system should provide requirements toward data 
business continuity management and recovery plan, data integrity, system weaknesses against human 
interactions, data manipulation, confidentiality, data privacy, and so on. In the procurement of new 
computer systems, consideration should be given to security, audit trails, data transfer, and data backup 
capability (53, 54). Using standalone systems should be avoided or mitigated where possible. Data 
management also requires a validation that secures the data, including training, risk assessment for 
outsourced activities (if applicable) such as use of cloud computing, system maintenance, backup 
system features, and data retirement. Cloud computing services are to be treated as a contracted service, 
with the risks identified and addressed, and the responsibilities of both parties clearly outlined in a 
suitable contract or service agreement. If storing electronic records in a PDF format, a risk assessment 
should be completed on the editability of the document. Some security settings for PDFs allow editing, 
which would not comply with requirements applicable to manufacturers in 21 CFR Part 11: Electronic 
Records; Electronic Signatures—Scope and Application and EU GDP Annex 11: Computerised Systems. 
6.1.3 Data Integrity and Quality Management 
There should be written procedure for a data-integrity and data-security assessment that identifies data 
integrity and data security risks and ensures that suitable procedural or technical controls have been 
applied. Any detected or potential data integrity or security breach must be documented as a deviation 
and investigated through the identification of the root cause and the determination of the resulting 
corrective and preventive action (CAPA) plan. Some examples of data integrity breaches include:  
•
Missing or untraceable data entries or archived paper documents
•
Missing a proof of delivery document
•
Missing temperature data logger
•
Data accidently or intentionally omitted or destroyed
•
Deficient electronic data backup or archive
•
Incorrect calculations impacting decisions
•
Unjustified alterations or manipulation of data (e.g., backdating)
•
Wrong access role used (e.g., administrator role used for routine tasks)

=== PDF PAGE 31 (content p26) ===
•
Data review not completed on a signed off report
•
Failure to comply with the ALCOA+ principles
•
Loss of data during data transfer or due to system failure
•
Sharing of user accounts or passwords
If the data-integrity breach may have an impact on product quality and/or patient safety, the violation 
must be escalated to management and communicated to customers (as applicable). An assessment of 
the breach must be conducted and the relevant regulatory or health authorities (e.g., country, local) 
must be notified, if required by local regulations. More information can be found in the FDA 21 CFR 
Part 11 and EU GMP Annex 11. 
6.2 Temperature Management 
Temperature is a critical process parameter that must be monitored and controlled in the supply chain 
during manufacturing, storage, and transportation to ensure that pharmaceutical products comply with 
the critical quality attributes to the end of their shelf life. To secure temperature control of 
pharmaceutical products in the supply chain, five basic principles should be applied by each supply-
chain stakeholder (41, 55): 
1.
Temperature specifications are set for products, processes, and systems.
2.
Temperature is controlled in an environment within the intended range using qualified active
and/or passive system(s).
3.
Temperature is measured by calibrated sensors at hot or cold spot location(s) based on
temperature-mapping studies.
4.
Temperature data is collected and securely stored in readable and retrievable electronic and/or
paper format according to ALCOA+ data integrity principles (53, 54).
5.
Temperature excursions are investigated and product dispositions are executed according to
current GDP (9, 51) and good pharmacy practices (56).
In event of temperature excursions, the product impact assessment and product disposition should be 
based on the generated data. However, additional non-GxP data (metadata) can be used by the business 
to gain a better understanding of the circumstances of the temperature excursion and to determine 
CAPAs for continuous improvement. In the end, temperature data storage, whether on paper or on a 
third-party client’s cloud solution, needs to comply with all relevant regulatory requirements for 
security and data integrity. This will ensure that all collected and recorded data is complete, consistent, 
and accurate throughout the data lifecycle.  
6.3 Other Critical Process Parameters 
In addition to verifying the shipment and receipt of products, monitoring devices may record 
temperature at other points in the supply chain. Other possible enhancements that may prove useful 
include detecting the opening and closing of packing containers and providing a geofence. A geofence 
is a virtual perimeter for a real-world geographic area; it could be dynamically generated or matched to 
a predefined set of boundaries. The degree to which these devices may replace or supplement 
temperature monitors and recorders remains to be determined. 
In the last mile, finished products are protected against humidity by the primary packaging and against 
light by the primary/secondary packaging. Therefore, removal of secondary packaging is not 
recommended as light may impact product quality, safety, and effectiveness. If a product is moved 

=== PDF PAGE 32 (content p27) ===
from a hot, humid environment to a cold environment, that product may get wet due to condensation 
which may impact readability of a batch number or expiry date.  
In the case of a mail-order pharmacy, most shipments use water-based cool bags, packs, or bricks 
(refrigerated or frozen) in “thermal pack-outs.” These bags may leak on occasion due to initial physical 
damage done while frozen (e.g., dropped, impacted); these leaks will generate a significant amount of 
water in the secondary packaging. It is important to use a sealed bag to protect both the pharmaceutical 
product as well as the pharmacy prescription label. The use of dunnage is also advised to prevent 
movement inside the outer package. Air pillows are not recommended because their volume will 
decrease significantly at lower temperature and will not provide significant protection. 
6.4 Serialization 
Serialization is the assigning of a unique serial number to each saleable unit of every prescription 
product. It provides the product’s origin, and other information in the form of a barcode or two-
dimensional (2D) data matrix. This also serves as a unit’s tracking or traceability system through the 
entire supply chain–from production, through distribution, to the point of dispensing to the patient. 
Serialization of pharmaceutical products has been introduced in recent years in many countries to 
protect the patient against counterfeit and falsified drugs. Counterfeit drugs can prove ineffective, 
harmful and, in some cases, fatal. Falsified medicines are often disguised as authentic medicines but 
may contain ingredients of poor or toxic quality or in the wrong dosage. 
6.4.1 Serialization in the European Union 
To address the threat of falsified medicines in the EU, Directive 2011/62/EU and its Delegated 
Regulation 2016/161 include measures aimed at preventing the entry of falsified medicinal products 
into the legal supply chain. The Directive introduces harmonized EU measures to fight medicine 
falsifications; it ensures that medicines are safe and that the trade in medicines is rigorously controlled 
including (57, 58): 
•
Obligatory safety features–a unique identifier and an antitampering device on the outer packaging
of all prescription medicines
•
A common, EU-wide logo to identify legal online pharmacies
•
Tougher rules on the import of active pharmaceutical ingredients
•
Strengthened record-keeping requirements for wholesale distributors
Since 2019, the EU has required manufacturers of prescription medicines to apply a 2D barcode for 
the serial numbers, which must be unique and must be randomly generated. In addition to the serial 
number, the data matrix code contains the product code, batch number, expiration date, and (if 
necessary) national reimbursement number. 
Once the manufacturer has sealed the medicine boxes with a tamper-evident seal and affixed the data 
matrix, the serial numbers are uploaded in the central database (EU hub) and downloaded to the 
databases of the member state where the boxes are being sent. It is possible for a consignment of 
medicines to go to another country, but that triggers an Intermarket Transaction. If the target market 
of a medicine changes, the batch's serial number is sent via the EU hub to the database of the correct 
country. 
Directive 2011/62/EU obliges pharmacists and healthcare professionals who supply medicines to the 
public to check that the tamper-evident seal of the medicine packages was not tampered with and, then 
to deregister the unique serial number on the medicine packaging before dispensing it to a patient (57). 
In addition, the unique serial numbers in the EU hub can be traced to all national medicines repository 
systems in which the package could be dispensed. 

=== PDF PAGE 33 (content p28) ===
Wholesale distributors must verify all packs of medicines they buy from other wholesalers as well as 
any packs returned to them. They must decommission products they export outside the EU and at the 
request of member states for other entities (Article 23) who are not themselves connected to the 
national medicines verification system in their country. 
The pharmacist decommissions each pack in the central database by scanning the 2D code. If the 
pharmacist receives an alert indicating that the serial number does not exist or has already been 
decommissioned, or if the tamper-evident seal has been tampered with, the pack must be quarantined 
by the pharmacist until the case is resolved. If a potentially falsified medicine is identified, the 
pharmacist must report it to the National Competent Authority. A written, approved procedure should 
be available and followed to deal with such cases. 
6.4.2 Serialization in the United States 
Section 913 of the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA; Public Law 
110-85) amended the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to create “Sec. 505D. Pharmaceutical
Security.” This section requires the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services to develop standards
as well as “identify and validate effective technologies for the purpose of securing the drug supply
chain against counterfeit, diverted, subpotent, substandard, adulterated, misbranded, or expired drugs”
(59).
In March 2010, FDA published the Guidance for Industry: Standards for Securing the Drug Supply Chain - 
Standardized Numerical Identification for Prescription Drug Packages for identifying package-level standardized 
numerical identifiers (SNI) as an initial step toward facilitating other measures for securing the drug 
supply chain. Although the FDA did not specify a particular means of incorporating SNIs onto the 
unit package at that time, the SNI was compatible with existing machine-readable forms of data 
carriers, such as the 2D matrix barcode and radio frequency identification (RFID).  
While RFIDs and barcodes can carry the same product identification and serial number data, the RFID 
has the advantage of being read remotely. Regardless of the data carrier, when the product ID and 
serial number are linked, the supply chain will be further secured, down to the last handoff to the 
patient through authentication of the product and its pedigree via a database that contains the 
appropriate manufacturer, distributor, and pharmacy transaction data. 
While the 2007 FDAA, 2008 H.R. 5839, and the 2010 FDA guidance were initiated separately, they led 
to a convergence within FDA on using electronic track-and-trace technology with serialization down 
to the unit-of-sale level for prescription drugs. And in 2013, to decrease the production of counterfeit, 
stolen, contaminated, or harmful drugs in the United States, Congress signed into law the Drug Quality 
and Security Act (DQSA).  
The Drug Supply Chain Security Act (DSCSA), Title II of the DQSA, requires that every prescription 
drug package and homogeneous case have its unique identifier in both machine- and human-readable 
forms. The Act outlines steps to achieve interoperable and electronic tracing; this means that, in 
addition to label serialization, a data system would need to store product traceability information 
showing the chain of custody. These regulations require all trading partners in the pharmaceutical 
supply chain—manufacturers, wholesalers, and dispensers—to use secure, interoperable electronic 
systems and processes to uniquely serialize each individual drug package in the supply chain and trace 
their distribution (60).  
The Pharmaceutical Distribution Security Alliance (PDSA) is an organization of stakeholders 
committed to safeguarding patients through better security of the drug supply chain. The PDSA is 
working with the FDA to develop a single national uniform system for product serialization and 
traceability with a goal toward unit-level interoperability. Numerous other organizations, such as the 
Health Distribution Alliance and International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities, are all 
working toward similar goals for serialization. 

=== PDF PAGE 34 (content p29) ===
Pedigree requirements currently vary from state to state and where unit serialization may be used, it is 
seldom linked to a pedigree. While many pedigrees are paper-based, there are various types of electronic 
pedigrees currently being used, including the GS1 Drug Pedigree Messaging Standard. GS1 is a leading 
global organization dedicated to the design and implementation of global standards and solutions to 
improve the efficiency and visibility of supply-and-demand chains globally and across sectors. 
6.5 Technologies 
6.5.1 Radio Frequency Identification Tag 
RFID refers to an automated data-capture system that uses low-power radio waves to communicate 
between two components: tags and readers. Readers are devices with antennas that emit radio waves 
and receive signals back from the tags. Tags use radio waves to communicate their information to 
readers; they can be passive or active. Passive tags are powered by the reader and do not have a battery 
whereas active tags are powered by batteries. In the last mile, RFID technologies are used for inventory 
control, tracking and tracing products, verification of shipments and receipt of products, or finished 
product authentication. RFID tags may also record temperature within the supply chain or detect the 
opening and closing of packing containers. The degree to which these devices may replace or 
supplement temperature-monitors and recorders remains to be determined.  
Adverse events associated with RFID application for medicines have not yet been reported or 
identified. Studies showed that the nonthermal effects of RFID radiation remain undetectable in 
biopharmaceutical products, even after unusually long exposure durations (61). An ideal RFID read 
environment would be free of metals and liquids, would enforce an air gap between each object’s tag, 
would allow the RFID tags to be flat in a standardized orientation to the antenna, and would be in free 
air. 
6.5.2 Internet of Things 
The Internet of Things (IoT) is the process of adding sensors to physical items and connecting the 
sensors through communications to exchange data. The data is used to create additional value to the 
users of the physical item along with value to manufacturers, logistics providers, and other 
stakeholders. Temperature sensors that use such communication methods as Bluetooth, radio 
frequency, and cellular communication networks are an example of IoT in the pharmaceutical industry. 
These communication methods enable a real-time understanding of temperature and, in the case of 
cellular communication networks, a location.  
6.5.3 Blockchain 
A blockchain is a tamper-proof, distributed database that stores blocks of information for 
cryptographically bound transactions via peer-to-peer networks. It is an emerging technology that is 
expected to open up a promising future for the pharmaceutical industry in counterfeit drug prevention, 
drug distribution, tracking and tracing, safety and security, and temperature control among other 
functions  (62). 
The architecture of a blockchain enables users to share validated and updated ledgers for every 
transaction. Nodes receive copies of each transaction and validate them, synchronizing this 
information throughout the network. As such, the need for a central validating authority is eliminated. 
The connections between transactions in separate blocks are linked, which gave rise to the term 
“blockchain” (see Figure 6.5.3-1) (63, 64). 

=== PDF PAGE 35 (content p30) ===
Figure 6.5.3-1 Internet of Things Based Blockchain for Temperature Monitoring and Counterfeit 
Pharmaceutical Prevention. Rajani Singh, Ashutosh Dhar Dwivedi and Gautam Srivastava. 2020 (64) 
6.5.4 Machine Learning 
Machine learning as part of artificial intelligence is the combination of data and algorithms that result 
in a learning process with the goal of producing optimal results. In many cases, the data comes from 
multiple sources, and with the combined data, additional value is achieved to produce more accurate 
and optimal answers for the purpose of reducing risk and managing costs. The process of data 
collection is ongoing and, as more data is added over time, machine learning continues to further 
optimize solutions. Combining machine learning with IoT produces an immediate understanding of 
real-time situations that enables users not only to make quicker decisions but, more importantly, to be 
told what the optimal answers are. The current focus in the pharmaceutical industry is to protect 
product quality and patient safety. With machine learning and IoT, the industry can optimize existing 
outcomes and also find more cost-effective solutions.  
The last mile is often the most expensive part of the delivery process due to fuel costs and labor 
expenses. In addition, companies must also factor in the cost of expired and damaged products, failed 
deliveries, returns, and reverse logistics when planning a shipment. Machine learning algorithms can 
learn from data and improve over time to optimize last-mile deliveries and reduce costs. Along with 
the IoT temperature data, additional data can be combined such as weather, traffic delays, airport and 
seaport delays, and geopolitical events. When data is combined, optimal answers can be achieved to 
protect the product and also reduce cost. Machine learning can improve last-mile deliveries by 
predicting customer preferences as well as routing vehicles through traffic patterns and congestion 
levels, allowing companies to plan their routes accordingly (65). Additional optimization can be 
achieved by selecting the correct packaging to reduce both packaging and logistics costs. 

=== PDF PAGE 36 (content p31) ===
6.6 Management of Deviations and Complaints 
Any last-mile distribution-related events categorized either as a deviation or complaint should be 
recorded and appropriately investigated according to written procedure. There should be a risk-based 
decision process in place to assess product-quality impact and to identify root cause for events with 
potential product-quality impact (50). All the relevant event data, including any investigation results 
and CAPAs, should be accessible and ready to share with local regulatory authorities and entities 
responsible for distribution such as manufacturer, MAH, or logistics service providers. 
6.7 Performance Management 
From a supply chain perspective, products should be delivered on time, to the right place with the right 
quality and quantity. Any disturbance should be appropriately managed to circumvent product 
shortages. Last-mile metrics should promote consistency and accuracy in the distribution process. For 
each metric, a target and baseline should be determined; the target can be an internal or external 
benchmark. The baseline allows for analysis against previous performance, while the target allows for 
analysis against expected performance. Any time a target is not met consistently, or a trend predicts a 
possible issue, a root cause analysis should be considered, and a corrective action plan should be 
initiated if appropriate. 
Analysis of complaints from shipment recipients provides data on additional shipping and distribution 
issues, such as carrier service level and accuracy. Organizations can use these metrics to identify 
vendors that promote accuracy and a high service level within the last mile. 
Shipping error rates provide information on the number of packages that reached customers right first 
time. Analysis of errors may include, but is not limited to, incorrect addresses, incorrect recipients, 
incorrect quantity, and temperature excursions. Temperature-monitoring with periodic sampling rates 
during qualification testing is required to ensure appropriate shipping temperature throughout the 
duration. The data should be analyzed to ensure appropriate temperature ranges can be maintained 
throughout the shipment and may be input to lane risk assessments. 
6.8 Last-Mile Education 
Maintaining the quality of temperature-sensitive drugs, vaccines, and biological products requires the 
consistent application of effective practices by manufacturers, distributors, prescribers, pharmacists, 
and patients (end users). Pharmacists, nurses, and other healthcare providers are the last interface 
between the patient and their medication, and they should educate patients regarding the proper storage 
of products to ensure product integrity at the patient level, as well as the management of unacceptable 
medications such as recall, rejected and returned products. Implementation and maintenance of such 
practices requires the significant sharing of information within the supply chain. 
Last-mile education is the responsibility of all the involved stakeholders from the manufacturer to the 
patient and any distribution intermediary. The level of education and training on overall GDP and 
specific product storage and distribution practices is commensurate with the level of risk associated 
with the distribution of the product to the patient. Thus, each distribution process should be the subject 
of a documented risk assessment on all process-critical control points to identify potential time and 
temperature abuse that could have an adverse effect on product quality. Any risk identified requires 
mitigation measures, which should be part of the training on a last-mile distribution process.  
GDP training should capture all involved stakeholders—product manufacturer, wholesalers, hospital 
and pharmacy employees, and the patient. Education requirements should be defined as prerequisite 
to engage in last-mile distribution, while training may be product- or process-specific and depend on a 
specific role the stakeholder plays in the last-mile supply chain.  

=== PDF PAGE 37 (content p32) ===
Therefore, stakeholders should develop a specific education and training matrix for the different levels 
of responsibility from acceptance, transport, and storage to application for the patient or home storage. 
References used for the training material should capture both international and national regulatory 
requirements as applicable. Patients need to be informed about access to websites where additional 
information can be found on last-mile storage and distribution of the product.  
Vaccines present a particular distribution challenge within the cold or frozen supply chain. Many 
vaccines are heat-sensitive and/or freeze-sensitive, and some require specific freezing conditions. 
Medicinal prescribers annotate their written prescriptions with instructions for the pharmacist to 
further instruct the patient or caregiver regarding the proper transport and storage of vaccines. 
Consequently, it is highly recommended that the dispensing personnel become—and remain—
thoroughly trained with the transport and storage characteristics of the vaccines they dispense. For 
example information on the general education, scheduling, transport, and stability of vaccines can be 
found 
on 
the 
U.S. 
Centers 
for 
Disease 
Control 
and 
Prevention 
website 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines). Specific manufacturer-derived information may be obtained from 
most local medical societies. 
The vaccine supply chain and last-mile distribution are still challenging, and closer cooperation of all 
stakeholders is required. With the recent COVID-19 pandemic vaccine campaigns, several 
organizations have issued specific guidelines on how to handle, transport, store, and apply such 
vaccines. Examples include but are not limited to: 
1.
World Health Organization (WHO) guidance on the shipping of vaccines and specific initiatives
related to the COVID-19 pandemic covering various topics such as:
•
National Deployment and Vaccination Plan—Covers also country readiness and delivery
workstream to disseminate guidance, trainings, tools, and advocacy advice
•
Vaccine Introduction Readiness Assessment Tool—Completing the tool can help
countries assess their readiness to introduce COVID-19 vaccines, identify process and quality
gaps, provide a roadmap, and self-monitor
•
COVAX Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator —A global collaboration project
to help accelerate development accelerate the development, production, and equitable access
to COVID-19 tests, treatments, and vaccines and enable access to the diverse portfolio of
vaccines under development
2.
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) COVID-19 Vaccination Program
Interim Playbook for Jurisdiction Operations provides guidance to U.S. states and territories on
how to plan and operationalize a vaccination response to COVID-19 within their jurisdictions.
Other international and national organizations have developed similar programs addressing concerns 
related to the last-mile distribution and application of COVID-19 vaccines to patients.  
6.9 Good Distribution Practice Information for Healthcare 
Professionals (Dispensers) 
Healthcare professionals or pharmacies dispensing temperature-controlled drug products must provide 
effective packaging and instructions for the handling and storage of those products during transit to 
the final destination. Verbal and/or written instructions, like those below, should be provided in an 
appropriate language to the patient, relative, or caregiver. 
•
Educate and train staff on storage requirements for all drug products
•
Display required storage temperatures in convenient locations

=== PDF PAGE 38 (content p33) ===
•
Continuously monitor refrigerator and freezer temperatures, and train responsible persons on the
escalation process in case of deviations
•
Establish a schedule and procedures to defrost and clean refrigerators; describe the process in a
standard operating procedure and train responsible employees accordingly
•
Maintain an adequate amount of refrigeration/freezer capacity and manage the capacity against a
documented risk assessment
•
Establish a schedule to rotate temperature-controlled products, including monitoring expiration
dates and train all involved employees on the process
•
Verify that drug products within emergency vehicles are properly stored and rotated, ensure that
dispatchers and drivers are trained to these procedures, and make sure training verification is in
place
•
Identify temperature-sensitive products at the time of dispensing and apply appropriate labels to
the prescription container according to defined procedure; ensure all involved employees receive
adequate training
•
Identify for nurses those drugs that are to be stored in hospital floor refrigerators and emphasize
the need to promptly return (where applicable for multi-use products) a patient’s vial to the
refrigerator; ensure proper training is in place and a record of training is kept
•
Ensure that pharmacy delivery vehicles and shipment containers meet established criteria for
temperature extremes and are designed in accordance with GDP requirements
•
Ensure the use of temperature-controlled vehicles, equipment, and packaging is defined and
documented, and ensure training records are maintained for all employees
•
Provide verbal and written instructions in appropriate language(s) to the patient, relative, friend,
or other caregiver; provide additional information after dispensing, as needed, to enhance patient
compliance
•
Educate patients on how to perform temperature checks of temperature-sensitive products that
are delivered to their home
•
Provide appropriate information to patients to keep frozen immunization vials frozen until they
arrive at their physician’s office for injection
6.10 Information to the Patient/Recipient 
Patients receiving their prescription drugs should also receive instructions on correct handling and 
storage. Patients should be aware that keeping their prescription drugs in a temperature-uncontrolled 
environment (e.g., car) could expose the drugs to temperatures that are too hot or cold. If the drugs 
require refrigerated storage, patients must store these drugs in the home refrigerator, preferably on the 
front shelves as the back of the refrigerator may expose drugs to freezing conditions. If the drugs need 
to be stored at room temperature, patients should put them in a safe, dry place where they will avoid 
direct sun exposure. 
Patients receiving their prescription drugs through a mail-order pharmacy need to be informed of the 
following: 
•
Open the packaging immediately and inspect the products for any damages
•
Place the product in its appropriate storage temperature

=== PDF PAGE 39 (content p34) ===
•
Explain to patients that, even though the cool bag may be completely melted, the products are safe
as most mail-order pharmacies are qualifying their cold chain solutions with an additional 12 hours
after delivery
•
Follow instructions on how to dispose of the shipping container and its components (trash,
recycling, or composting advice)
•
Communicate with a pharmacist about any drug or packaging questions
To ensure that products maintain their quality, effectiveness, and safety through to expiry, data-driven 
management systems play a vital role in planning, inventory management, demand management, and 
environment control (e.g., temperature). By applying ALCOA+ principles, data quality provides 
evidence of correct product storage and transport conditions throughout the supply chain to the 
patient. 
Two of the biggest challenges associated with the pharmaceutical supply chain are temperature-
monitoring and counterfeit drug prevention. Many drugs and vaccines remain viable only within a 
specific range of temperatures. A viable smart healthcare ecosystem could be enabled by applying a 
real-time shipment temperature-monitoring device connected to the IoT, cloud database(s), and/or 
block chain technologies. Real-time monitoring may pose new challenges to security and data 
management, which may require additional resources to manage.  
7.0 Cost Management and Sustainability 
To ensure product availability with the right quality, effectiveness, and safety, cost-effective measures 
are applicable across the supply chain, from the manufacturer to the points of dispensing and 
administration. These measures, which include but are not limited to, inventory management, 
sustainability programs, and temperature control, should help prevent product shortages and have a 
positive impact on patient health. 
7.1 Inventory Management 
7.1.1 Rotating versus Stockpiling 
An important criterion for the cost of stockpiles is if they are rotating or static. 
Emergency stockpiles for crisis situations: Product shelf life varies by the type of product. 
Stockpiles can be partially dynamic, but also require holding stocks that do not rotate if they are 
dedicated to a specific emergency or to crisis situations and therefore need to be held as part of a static 
stockpiling approach (e.g., stockpiling of masks prior to the COVID-19 pandemic or, more recently, 
iodine tablets). If stocks are not managed on a rotating basis with “normal” inventory, there is a high 
risk of expiration. This necessitates their disposal, generating unnecessary additional costs, creating a 
complete loss of the initial investment, and triggering a negative environmental impact. A static 
stockpile, with no stock rotation, might therefore result in a large volume of expired stock that needs 
to be replenished, causing additional costs for their creation, maintenance, and the turnover of the 
stockpile. Who covers the cost of expired products and who pays for their disposal should be defined 
by contract. 
Increasing buffer stocks for critical or essential medicines: This could be integrated via rotation 
into pharmaceutical full-line wholesaler/full-service healthcare distributor rolling stocks thereby 
reducing the risk of products expiring and could be carried out on a FEFO basis, i.e., dynamic 
stockpiling. Naturally, the shelf life of products differs according to the type of product; however, 
buffer stocks can be organized in a way that the products are continuously used and replenished. In 
that case, the length of storage, expiry date of products, and potential safe disposal of unwanted 
medicines need to be considered. Increased buffer stocks held at the wholesale level need to be 
purchased from the pharmaceutical industry, which increases the capital costs. This is one of the main 

=== PDF PAGE 40 (content p35) ===
reasons, other than available warehouse space, why the establishment of larger stockpiles of more than 
two weeks at the level of pharmaceutical full-line wholesalers and full-service healthcare distributors is 
highly challenging. This can be attributed to insufficient margins, while also holding a prefinancing 
function for the healthcare supply chain. 
7.1.2 Organizational and Administrative Reflections 
Additional administrative and logistics costs may apply to storage, based on the conditions and to 
whom the safety stocks should be delivered. Costs are higher the more frequently the list of products 
to be stocked changes because it requires a greater effort to administer the stocks. A decision should 
also be made as to what condition the emergency stocks will be supplied or released to the market, 
how they should be rotated (e.g., FEFO), and how the rationalization or allocation system would be 
organized with respect to market deliveries to ensure equitable access. 
7.2 Warehouse Storage and Temperature Control 
The inventory level, buffer-stock determination, and size of individual packs should be considered 
when establishing the right size of warehouse. Choosing the right size of the warehouse is key to 
minimizing the cost of energy that will be required for temperature control. The cost of energy is one 
of the highest fixed costs of an organization. The use of engineering solutions can be helpful in saving 
energy. For example, mineral wool batting, polyurethane (PUR), polyisocyanurate (PIR) and 
polystyrene (EPS), used as insulation to reduce energy consumption. Also, the application of solar 
panels may be used to generate power and reduce energy costs. 
7.3 Waste Stream for Packaging Components and Drug 
Product 
Sections 7.3–7.5 provide a non-exhaustive overview of various global directives and waste stream 
management for packaging components used to distribute temperature-sensitive products in the last 
mile.  Packaging components, including ice bricks, boxes, and isolated containers, may generate waste 
for each container shipped (e.g., 20 Kg per container). Depending on the time period, thousands of 
waste materials can be generated, hence the importance of studying the reuse or recycling for this 
business. 
7.3.1 Recycling and Regulations 
Most national and supranational entities have legislative guidelines in effect governing the proper post-
transit disposal of pharmaceutical products and devices. Some also cover the packaging materials used 
during transport. Currently, the “extended producer responsibility” or Extended Product 
Responsibility (EPR) program, has been instituted in several countries. The concept behind EPR 
implies that everyone along the product chain shares responsibility for the environmental impact of 
packaging. That includes the upstream considerations of material selection and manufacturing 
processes to the downstream effects of use, waste management, and disposal. However, this approach 
largely sidesteps the issue of who is directly responsible for the waste and disposal of post-consumer 
packaging. Some corporations have instituted their own EPR programs, but those are generally 
confined to the return of specific product components (e.g., printer or copier ink cartridges). 
European Union—Directive 94/62/EC on packaging and packaging waste forms the basis of the 
EU’s position toward packaging issues; this directive was amended by Directive 2004/12/EC to 
include states newly admitted to the EU. Further information is available from the European 
Committee for Standardization (http://www.cen.eu/cenorm/homepage.htm) and the European 
Organization for Packaging and the Environment (http://www.europen.be). The EU GDP does not 
directly address the impact of packaging on the environment, however, the EU has adopted “extended 
producer responsibility” as its public policy. This requires packaging producers to be fiscally and 
physically responsible for their products at the post-consumer stage of their lifecycle. This approach 

=== PDF PAGE 41 (content p36) ===
creates strong incentives for producers and manufacturers to incorporate external-packaging costs, like 
waste managements, into their designs from their inception. Packaging waste can be “taken back” or 
managed through reuse, recycling, or remanufacturing. Optionally, the responsibility may be delegated 
to a third party to act as a producer-responsibility organization. Producers pay certain fees and taxes 
to governmental and nonprofit entities to cover the reclamation and disposal costs. For example, the 
Green Dot Program operates in 20 EU member countries where a green dot on a product’s packaging 
indicates it complies with packaging regulations. Manufacturers purchase licenses to participate in the 
Green Dot program, which collects and recycles or otherwise disposes of the packaging on behalf of 
the license-holders. The EU’s EPR program has recently expanded to automobiles and electronics in 
many member states. 
United States—In the United States, the sole federal EPR program involves the take-back of 
rechargeable (nickel-cadmium) batteries, in which the producers of the batteries instituted a national 
take-back program to avoid variable individual state legislation. Most shipments of pharmaceuticals to 
the consumer, particularly biologicals, use EPS/foam packaging, which usually winds up in landfills. 
The Alliance of Foam Packaging Recyclers has posted a resource document on their website 
(http://www.epspackaging.org) listing available recycling/reclamation sites in the United States for 
EPS packaging. At the present, a “true” national EPR public policy and program remains an unmet 
need. 
Japan–Japan’s packaging directives are part of the environmental Japanese Industrial Standards, which 
take their cue from JIS Q 0064: Guide for the Inclusion of Environmental Aspects in Product Standards (66). 
More information about the Japanese Industrial Standards Committee can be found at 
http://www.jisc.go.jp/eng/. 
Brazil–Resolution SMA 45/2015 of 23 June 2015 establishes the Terms of Commitment for the 
Reverse Logistics of Household Medicines for Human Use, Expired or Disused, and their Packaging, 
according to the standardized model made available by the State Secretariat for the Environment 
(SMA) and the Environmental Company of the State of São Paulo (CETESB). (1) Consumers must 
dispose the expired or disused medicines and their packaging at one of the receiving points implanted 
in pharmacies and drugstores; (2) Drugstores and pharmacies established as receiving points are 
obliged, at their expense, to make available and maintain their container dispensing establishments, in 
order to promote the implementation of the reverse logistics system of medicines discarded by 
consumers and their packaging; (3) Distributors of medicines are obliged to collect containers 
containing the medicinal products discarded by the consumer from the primary storage point 
(pharmacies and drugstores) to the secondary storage point, provided that this collection can be carried 
out by the same vehicle and at the same time as the delivery of medicinal products to the primary point; 
and (4) Manufacturers and importers of medicinal products shall be obliged to carry out, at their own 
expense, by their own means or by means of third-party contracts, the transport of medicinal products 
discarded by consumers from secondary storage points to the final treatment sites and environmentally 
appropriate final disposal (67, 68).  
7.3.2 Reverse Logistics 
Reverse logistics encompasses all operations related to the upstream movement of products and 
materials. It is the process of moving goods from their typical destination for the purpose of capturing 
value or for proper disposal. Remanufacturing and refurbishing activities also may be included in the 
definition of reverse logistics. Two types of reverse logistics can be considered in the pharmaceutical 
environment: 
Closed-Loop Transit 
Many wholesalers in Europe and the United States use this system. Most of these companies use their 
own trucks to deliver to the end users, where they can then pick up old packaging and put it back into 
the distribution channel or recycle the components. 

=== PDF PAGE 42 (content p37) ===
Return of Packaging 
Some manufacturers and distributors employ this method, wherein a prepaid return freight sticker is 
attached or included with the original shipment to the end user. Once the end user removes the 
medicinal product, the package can be sent back to the distributor or manufacturer. This method is 
also used to return expired or mishandled medicinal products. 
7.4 Establishing Lowest-Cost Temperature-Control 
Solution for Shipment 
Freight is an important cost factor to be considered when establishing a solution for temperature-
controlled shipment. Some examples of other factors that play a role in the decision are the mode of 
transportation, the type and weight of effective thermal packaging, the amount of time spent in 
transport, and the environmental impact of the packaging.  
There are different kinds of isolated passive containers available, which may be made of EPS, 
extruded polystyrene (XPS), polyurethane (PUR), or vacuum insulated panels (VIP), and refrigerants 
made of water and/or phase-change material (PCM). Passive thermal solutions composed of VIPs and 
PCM are typically more expensive than more traditional solutions of EPS boxes and water-based 
refrigerants. Traditional solutions are usually physically larger and heavier for the same quantity of 
product to be shipped, which results in higher freight costs. The freight costs are generally greater than 
the temperature-control solution costs, but this solution can significantly impact the total cost of 
shipment. 
Air freight is generally more expensive than ocean freight or road freight. Transport by road in 
refrigerated trucks is typically less expensive than shipping passive-thermal solutions by air, but the 
time it takes to reach the destination and the ability to plug the truck into an electrical power supply 
when the active cooling unit on the truck is turned off (e.g., on a ferry) are necessary considerations.  
Even though air freight is the most expensive mode, sometimes it is the best solution or may be the 
only solution when considering the time available for shipment or accessibility of the destination, for 
instance, island locations or other difficult-to-reach areas without passable roads. Passive-thermal 
containers are generally less expensive than the active containers shipped by air, but their performance 
time is limited, and they may not provide sufficient protection before reaching the destination.  
Both passive and active transport equipment is designed for a defined amount of time under specific 
anticipated external temperature conditions as used in the qualification studies. It is important to 
consider these factors when evaluating the suitability of such packaging for its intended use, as well as 
knowing the routing specifics, risks associated with critical control points in the process, and the overall 
transit time from origin to destination.  
Reuse is another way to reduce the cost of passive-thermal solutions. The reuse process should be 
qualified and have a documented quality control process for the returned solutions, including cleaning 
and inspections to ensure the used system will provide acceptable performance for its intended use. 
7.5 Cost of Failure 
Establishing a robust shipment process with a qualified solution is an investment made to avoid losses 
due to quality issues. The cost associated with damage, recalls, returned goods, and rejection due to 
temperature-control failure is high. The cost can be even higher if the damage is to patient safety and 
health because of a failure in temperature-monitoring and appropriate quality controls. Any of these 
circumstances can damage the company brand and image. 
Mistakes in purchase orders, invoices, selecting materials picking and separation, address and 
customers should be avoided. The result of mistakes impacts products and may lead to rejection due 

=== PDF PAGE 43 (content p38) ===
to limited or absence of supporting stability data. Insuring high-value shipments because of the high 
risks associated is common. 
7.5.1 Business Contingency Plan 
The goal of risk-based planning is to focus on preparing the organization for a multitude of risks, 
including man-made and natural disasters. Some points to consider when developing an emergency 
plan are: 
•
Prioritize the operations and responsibilities to guide a disaster response in advance
•
Consider alternative locations for operations such as call centers, offices, warehouses, product
processing, transportation operations, or equipment
•
Back up data and IT infrastructure in a remote location outside the anticipated disaster impact
zone
•
Consider ways to reroute transport operations and protect or remove a product that is in an impact
area
•
Prioritize key activities and responsibilities and designate personnel who will be responsible for
these activities if regular personnel are unavailable
•
Plan for the cascading effects of shifting responsibilities if multiple persons are unavailable, and
reorganize remaining personnel in response to the disaster
•
Establish local-level, site-specific business continuity plans tailored to individual business centers
and individual customers and products, as needed
•
Prevent man-made disasters to the greatest extent practical based on the situation (the Customs-
Trade Partnership Against Terrorism guidelines produced by the U.S. Customs and Border
Protection provides an example of resources to guide this effort)
•
Implement reporting systems and tools, alarms, and other automated monitoring systems to speed
notification of an incident and enable a timely response
•
Establish a response plan and designate a responsible person to coordinate appropriate
intervention activities
•
Apply the principles of quality assurance to monitor, measure, and continuously improve disaster- 
intervention results
8.0 Summary 
The intent of this technical report is to convey the importance of proper information, training, and 
communication between handoffs as vital to maintaining medicinal product integrity in the 
pharmaceutical supply chain, especially in the last mile. Knowledge of the challenges encountered along 
the last mile allows for improvements in future guidance documents, products, and services to the 
temperature-controlled supply chain community. 
The last mile of delivering temperature-controlled pharmaceutical products has many challenges to 
manage including, but not limited to, the complexity of pharmaceutical supply chain networks, various 
pharmaceutical product characteristics and temperature sensitivities, weather conditions, sourcing of 
services and temperature-controlled solutions, use of new technologies and communication platforms, 
developments in new regulations, execution of cost-effective and sustainable measures, and education 
in product handling. Sharing information about conditions and practices for the storage and transport 
of product across all supply chain partners is critical to maintaining product quality, applying 

=== PDF PAGE 44 (content p39) ===
appropriate measures, and preventing temperature excursions in the supply chain, including the last 
mile. When all supply-chain partners involved collaborate closely, the last-mile partners can deliver 
products on time, to the right place, with the right quantity and quality to the end user. 
9.0 References 
1.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 39 (Revised 2021): Guidance
for Temperature-Controlled Medicinal
Products: Maintaining the Quality of
Temperature-Sensitive Medicinal Products
through the Transportation Environment;
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2021.
2.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 46: Last Mile: Guidance for
Good Distribution Practices for
Pharmaceutical Products to the End User;
PDA: Bethesda, MD, 2009.
3.
Medicines & Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency. 'GxP' Data
Integrity Guidance and Definitions;
MHRA: London, 2018.
4.
World Health Organization. Annex 5:
Guidance on Good Data and Record
Management Practices, TRS 996; WHO:
Geneva, 2016; p 46.
5.
World Health Organization. Annex 9:
Model guidance for the storage and transport
of time- and temperature–sensitive
pharmaceutical products, TRS No. 961;
WHO: Geneva, 2011.
6.
Walter, E; Lazic-Peric, A. Distribution
Profile and Efficiency of the European
Pharmaceutical Full-Line Wholesaling
Sector; Institute for Pharmaeconomic
Research: Vienna, 2017.
7.
European Commission. Directive
2004/27/EC of the European Parliament
and the Council of 31 March 2004
amending Directive 001/83/EC on the
Community Code relating to Medicinal
Products for Human Use; Journal of the
European Union. European
Commission: Brussels, 2004.
8.
European Commission. Directive
2001/83/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on
the Community Code Relating to Medicinal
Products for Human Use; OJ European
Commission: Brussels, 2001.
9.
European Commission. Guidelines of 5
November 2013 on Good Distribution
Practice of Medicinal Products for Human
Use; European Commission: Brussels,
2013.
10.
European Medicines Agency.
EudraGMDP. EudraGMDP.
http://eudragmdp.ema.europa.eu/ins
pections/common/searchSites.do
(accessed 3 Oct 2023).
11.
World Health Organization. Annex 5:
WHO Good Distribution Practices for
Pharmaceutical Products, TRS 957;
WHO: Geneva, 2010.
12.
World Health Organization. Annex 7:
Good Storage and Distribution Practices for
Medical Products, TRS 1025; WHO:
Geneva, 2020.
13.
Zambia Medicines Regulatory
Authority. Good Distribution Practices
Guidelines; ZMRA: Lusaka, Zambia,
2017.
14.
Ministry of Health, Republic of
Kenya. Guidelines for Transportation of
Pharmaceuticals in Kenya; Kenya
Ministry of Health: Nairobi, Kenya,
2019.
15.
Ethiopian Food, Medicine and
Healthcare Administration and
Control Authority. Standard Operating
Procedures for Pharmaceuticals Good

=== PDF PAGE 45 (content p40) ===
Distribution and Storage Practices; EFDA: 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 2018. 
16.
Nigeria National Agency for Food
and Drug Administration and
Control. AFDAC Good Distribution
Practices Guidelines For Pharmaceutical
Product; NAFDAC: Abuja, Nigeria,
2021.
17.
South African Health Products
Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA).
Guideline For Good Wholesaling Practice
For Wholesaler; SAHPRA: Pretoria,
South Africa, 2022.
18.
Union Economique et Monetaire
Ouest Africanine Annexe al la Decision
N° 09/2010/CM/UEMOA: Guide de
Bonnes Pratiques de Distribution et
D’Importation des Produits
Pharmaceutiques a Usage Humain dans les
Etats Meembres de L’UEMOA;
UEMOA: Burkina Faso, 2010.
19.
Coordenadoria de Con Trole de
Doenças Centro de Vigilância
Sanitária. Portaria CVS 1, de
22/07/2020 - Disciplina, no âmbito do
Sistema Estadual de Vigilância Sanitária
– Sevisa, o licenciamento sanitário dos
estabelecimentos de interesse da saúde e das
fontes de radiação ionizante, e dá
providências correlatas; DOE No. 146,
07/24/20, Section 1, page 14.
Secretaria de Estado da Saúde: São
José dos Pinhais, PR, Brasil, 2020.
20.
Agência Nacional de Vigilência
Sanitariá (Anvisa). Resolution of the
Collegiate Board - RDC No 234/2018:
Rules for Subcontracting: Production Stages,
Control Analysis for Quality Control of
Transport and Storage of Medicines and
Biological Products; RDC n° 234/2018.
Brazilian Ministry of Health: Brasilia,
Brazil, 2018.
21.
Agência Nacional de Vigilência
Sanitariá (Anvisa). Resolution of the
Collegiate Board - RDC Nº 430/2020 
providing for Good Practices in the 
Distribution, Storage and Transport of 
Medicines; RDC Nº 430/2020. 
Brazilian Ministry of Health: Brasilia, 
Brazil, 2020. 
22.
Agência Nacional de Vigilência
Sanitariá (Anvisa). Resolution of the
Collegiate Board - RDC Nº 653/2022
Amends the Board Resolution Collegiate -
RDC Nº 430, dated 8 October 2020;
RDC Nº 653/2022. Brazilian Ministry
of Health: Brasilia, Brazil, 2022.
23.
Agência Nacional de Vigilência
Sanitariá (Anvisa). Resolution of the
Collegiate Board - RDC Nº 18/2014
Provides for Communication to the Agency
National Health Surveillance –
ANVISA those Cases of Temporary
Discontinuation and Definitive
Manufacture or Import of Medicines,
Manufacturing Reactivation or Import of
Medicines, and Provides Other Measures;
RDC Nº 18/2014. Brazilian Ministry
of Health: Brasilia, Brazil, 2014.
24.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
21 CFR 205—Guidelines for State
Licensing of Wholesale Prescription Drug
Distributors; U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services:
Washington, DC, 1999.
25.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
21 CFR 203—Prescription Drug
Marketing; Government Publishing
Office: Washington, D.C., 1999.
26.
U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention.
General Chapter <659> Packaging
and Storage Requirements, Revision
Bulletin, Postponement. In USP 41–
NF 36, USP: Rockville, Md., 2018.
27.
U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention.
General Chapter <1079> Risks and
Mitigation Strategies for the Storage
and Transportation of Finished Drug

=== PDF PAGE 46 (content p41) ===
Products. In USP43–NF38, USP: 
Rockville, Md., 2020; p 7635. 
28.
National Association of Boards of
Pharmacy. Drug Distributor
Accreditation. Programs >
Accreditations.
https://nabp.pharmacy/programs/ac
creditations/drug-distributor/
(accessed 30 Nov 2023).
29.
Health Canada. Food and Drug
Regulations; C.R.C., c. 870. Canada
Minister of Justice: Ottawa, Ontario,
2023.
30.
Health Canada. Food and Drug Act;
R.S.C., 1985, c. F-27 (Section 30).
Canada Minister of Public Works and
Government Services: Ottawa,
Ontario, 1985.
31.
Health Canada. Guidelines for
Environmental Control of Drugs during
Storage and Transportation; Minister of
Health: Ottawa, ON, 2020.
32.
National Bureau of Statistics of
China. Statistical Communiqué of the
People's Republic of China on the
2021 National Economic and Social
Development. National Bureau of
Statistics of China.
http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/Pre
ssRelease/202202/t20220227_18279
63.html (accessed 4 Oct 2023).
33.
National Medical Products
Administration of China. Chapter V --
Distribution, Drug Administration Law of
the People's Republic of China; Order of
the President of the People's
Republic of China, No. 31. NMPA:
Beijing, 2019.
34.
Wei, X. Nation to Promote Internet
Plus Healthcare. The State Council,
The People's Republic of China.
http://english.www.gov.cn/premier/
news/2018/04/12/content_2814761
09872514.htm (accessed 28 Sep 
2023). 
35.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 53: Guidance for Industry:
Stability Testing to Support Distribution of
New Drug Products; PDA: Bethesda,
MD, 2011.
36.
van Asselt, E J; Bishara, R H.
Establishing and Managing the Drug
Product Stability Budget.
Pharmaceutical Outsourcing 2015,
July/August, 16 (4), S. 20-27.
37.
World Health Organization. Annex 2:
Stability Testing of Active Pharmaceutical
Ingredients and Finished Pharmaceutical
Products (TRS No. 953); WHO
Technical Report Series No. 953.
WHO: Geneva, 2009.
38.
Yoshioka, S; Stella, V J. Stability of
Drugs and Dosage Forms. Springer
Science: New York, 2002.
39.
International Council for
Harmonisation. Quality Guideline
Q1A(R2): Stability Testing of New Drug
Substances; ICH: Geneva, 2003.
40.
International Council for
Harmonisation. ICH Quality Guideline
Q1E: Evaluation for Stability Data; ICH:
Geneva, 2003.
41.
van Asselt, E J, et al. Last Mile
Shipping Conditions and
Temperature Excursion Handling for
Room Temperature Pharma Products
in Europe. Pharmaceutical Outsourcing
2018, July/August, 19 (4), 12-17.
42.
Anderson, C, et al. The Use of
Temperature Mapping for the
Qualification of Storage Areas for the
Proper Temperature. USP
Pharmacopeial Forum 2019, 45 (5).
43.
Seevers, R H, et al. The Use of Mean
Kinetic Temperature (MKT) in The
Handling, Storage, and Distribution

=== PDF PAGE 47 (content p42) ===
of Temperature Sensitive 
Pharmaceuticals. Pharmaceutical 
Outsourcing 2009, May/Jun, S. 12-17. 
44.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 64: Active Temperature-
Controlled Systems: Qualification Guidance;
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2013.
45.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 72: Passive Thermal Protection
Systems for Global Distribution:
Qualification and Operational Guidance;
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2015.
46.
International Safe Transit
Association. ISTA PCG-02 Passive
Thermal Packaging System Operational
Qualification Best Practice Guideline;
ISTA: East Lansing, MI, 2020.
47.
International Safe Transit
Association. ISTA PCG-03 Thermal
Shipping System: Performance Qualification
(PQ) and Performance Verification (PV)
Best Practice Guideline; ISTA: East
Lansing, MI, 2022.
48.
van Asselt, E J, et al. Pharma
Requirements for Temperature
Controlled Trailers. Pharmaceutical
Outsourcing 2017, July/August, 18 (4), S
12-179.
49.
United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe. Agreement on
the International Carriage of Perishable
Foodstuffs and on the Special Equipment to
be Used for such Carriage (ATP); United
Nations: New York, 2016.
50.
International Council for
Harmonisation. Quality Guideline
Q9(R1): Quality Risk Management; ICH:
Geneva, 2023.
51.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Report No. 58: Risk Management for
Temperature-Controlled Distribution;
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2012; p 73.
52.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Guidance for Industry: Data Integrity and
Compliance with cGMP: Questions and
Answers; U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services: Silver Spring,
Md., 2018.
53.
European Commission. Annex 11:
Computerised Systems, EudraLex –
Volume 4 – Good Manufacturing Practice
for Medicinal Products for Human and
Veterinary Use; European
Commission: Brussels, 2011.
54.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
21 CFR Part 11, Electronic  Records;
Electronic Signatures—Scope and
Application; Pharmaceutical CGMPs.
Government Publishing Office:
Washington, D.C., 2003.
55.
van Asselt, E J, et al. Temperature
Data Integrity and Security along the
Pharmaceutical Supply Chain.
Pharmaceutical Outsourcing 2019,
July/August, 20 (3), S. 12-15.
56.
World Health Organization. Annex 8:
Joint FIP/WHO Guidelines on Good
Pharmacy Practice: Standards for Quality of
Pharmacy Services (TRS 961); WHO:
Geneva, 2011.
57.
European Commission. Directive
2011/62/EU of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 8 June 2011
Amending Directive 2001/83/EC on the
Community Code relating to Medicinal
Products for Human Use, as regards the
Prevention of the Entry into the Legal
Supply Chain of Falsified Medicinal
Products; Journal of the European
Union. European Commission:
Brussels, 2011.
58.
European Commission. Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/161 of
2 October 2015 Supplementing Directive
2001/83/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council by Laying Down

=== PDF PAGE 48 (content p43) ===
Detailed Rules for the Safety Features 
Appearing on the Packaging of Medicinal 
Products for Human Use; Journal of the 
European Union. European 
Commission: Brussels, 2016. 
59.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
21 USC 355e, Sec. 505D. Pharmaceutical
Security; U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services Silver Spring,
Md., 2007.
60.
U.S. Congress. The Drug Supply Chain
Security Act, Title II of the Drug Quality
and Security Act U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. Washington, DC,
2013.
61.
Uysal, I, et al. Effects of Radio
Frequency Identification–Related
Radiation on In Vitro Biologics. PDA
J Pharm Sci and Technol 2012, 66 (4),
333-45.
62.
Zakari, N, et al. Blockchain
Technology in the Pharmaceutical
Industry: A Systematic Review. Peer J
Comput Sci 2022 Mar 11.
63.
Soundarya, K, et al. A Counterfeit
Solution for Pharma Supply Chain.
EAIEU 2018, 11 Apr.
64.
Singh, R, et al. Internet of Things
Based Blockchain for Temperature
Monitoring and Counterfeit
Pharmaceutical Prevention. Sensors
(Basel) 2020, 20 (14), 3951.
65.
Owczarek, D. How to Solve Vehicle
Routing Problem: Last-Mile Delivery
Optimization with AI. Logistics |
Artificial Intelligence.
https://nexocode.com/blog/posts/ai
-in-last-mile-delivery-optimization-
vehicle-routing-problem/ (accessed
29  Sep 2023).
66.
Japanese Industrial Standards
Committee. Japan's Standardization
Policy; JISC: Tokyo, 2017.
67.
Secretaria de Estado do Meio
Ambiente. Resolution SMA Nº 45, of
23 June 2015 that Defines Guidelines for
Implementation and Operationalization of
Post-Consumption Responsibility in the
State of São Paulo, and Provides Related
Measures; São Paulo, Brazil, 2015.
68.
Secretaria de Estado de Infraestrutura
e Meio Ambiente. Terms of Commitment
- Termo de Compromisso para a Logística
Reversa de Medicamentos Domiciliares de
Uso Humano, Vencidos ou em Desuso, e
suas Embalagens; Processo CETESB
no 090201/2020-02. SIMA: São
Paulo, Brazil, 2020.

=== PDF PAGE 49 (content p44) ===
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.) 
An Authorized User of this electronic publication in the purchase. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following: 
•
Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
•
Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
•
Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the
individual use of an Authorized User
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following: 
•
Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to
anyone other than an Authorized User
•
Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites,
either available on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a
license from PDA, Inc.
•
Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA
Electronic Publication
•
Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of
the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA
Electronic Publication or its content
•
Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk
reproduction or distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial
purpose
•
Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
including any texts or graphics
•
Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright
information or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material
To License or purchase Reprints 
•
Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for
a fee.
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
•
Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.
To order reprints, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.

=== PDF PAGE 50 (content p45) ===
Pharmaceutical Products to End Users
About PDA Technical Reports 
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Teams (listed 
on inside front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the 
pharmaceutical/biopharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in 
development, PDA Technical Reports are subjected to a global review of PDA members and other 
topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. 
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Team during the preparation 
of the final working draft. The level of expertise of the Team and those participating in the global 
review ensure a broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.  PDA 
thanks the following peer reviewers for lending their time and expertise to ensure the quality and 
relevance of this technial report. 
Peer Reviewers 
Robert Battista, Modality Solutions 
Prakash Deshmukh, Consultant 
Vaibhav Patel, Elucida Oncology 
Siegfried Schmitt, Parexel 
Elio Vari, Pharmacomitalia 
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the 
project. PDA’s Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products 
Advisory Board, Biopharmaceutical Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality Advisory 
Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and 
determines whether or not to publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report. 
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers 
are encouraged to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, 
or mistakes that might be found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: 
TRfeedback@pda.org. 

=== PDF PAGE 51 (content p46) ===
Pharmaceutical Products to End Users
Sanctioning Advisory Board: SAB 
Gabriele Gori, Independent Consultant (Chair) 
Ivy Louis, VIENNI Training & Consulting LLC 
(Vice-Chair) 
Fred Ayers, ValSource, Inc. 
Marcia Baroni, Emergent BioSolutions Inc. 
Greg Bassett, Bristol Myers Squibb 
Rebecca Brewer, Quality Executive Partners 
Emily Cheah, PhD, Charles River Laboratories 
Tom Damratoski, CivicaRx 
David Exline, Gateway Analytical, LLC. 
Rhonda Ezell, Alkermes 
Mauro Giusti, Eli Lilly Italia 
Austin Kuo, Eli Lilly & Company 
Gitte Letting, Novo Nordisk A/S 
Bruce Loxley, Glaxo Smith Kline 
Martine Nolan, Sanofi 
Vincent O'Shaughnessy, Amgen 
Ken Paddock, Baxter  
Jim Polarine Jr., MA, STERIS Co. 
Matthew Schmidt, Merck & Co., Inc. 
Alexander Stoll, PhD, Fresenius-Kabi 
Luca Tamarindo, Akka 
Kristin Valente, Merck & Co., Inc. 
PDA Officers & Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck 
Chair-Elect: Melissa Seymour, Biogen, Inc. 
Secretary: Bettine Boltres, PhD, West 
Pharmacetuical Services 
Treasurer: Emma Ramnarine, Genenech/Roche 
Immediate Past-Chair: Susan Schniepp, RCA 
President: Glenn Wright 
Directors 
Lisa Bennett, Seer Pharma 
Cristiana Campa, PhD, Glaxo Smith Kline 
Andrew Chang, PhD, Novo Nordisk, Inc. 
Cylia Chen, MA, Amgen 
Mirko Gabriele, PhD, Thermo Fisher Scientific 
Marc Gloglovsky, ValSource Inc. 
Andrew Hopkins, Abbvie 
Stephan O. Krause, PhD, Bristol Myers Squibb 
Ivy Louis, VIENNI Training & Consulting 
LLP 
Amy McDaniel, PhD, Bristol Myers Squibb 
Brigitte Reutter-Haerle, Vetter Pharma 
International GmbH 
Osamu Shirokizawa, Life Scientia, Ltd. 
PDA Publication Production & Editing 
Jessie Lindner, Project Manager, Science 
Josh Eaton, Senior Director, Scientific & 
Regulatory Affairs 
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing & 
Press Relations 
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer 

=== PDF PAGE 52 (content p47) ===
Bethesda Towers 
4350 East West Highway 
Suite 600 
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA 
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900 
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296 
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
