9	 Barrier and Isolator Technology
9.1	
Introduction
For new and renovated aseptic processing facilities, barrier technologies, such as isolators and RABS, are usually 
preferred to protect the product. They are being increasingly used for aseptic filling. Isolators can provide a higher 
safety level and are typically used in new facility designs. RABS are usually used to upgrade existing facilities, when 
existing equipment needs to have better protection.
Both technologies can be applied to batches of all sizes, from small scale filling of clinical trial materials to large, 
automated, high speed processing lines. They can also be applied to research and development, quality control 
(sterility testing), and drug formulation. When the product is hazardous, isolators or RABS, with their reduced air 
overspill into a room, can help to protect the operator and the surrounding environment.
People are considered the greatest source of contamination in the manufacturing of sterile products. Over the past 
decades, substantial progress has been made in separating the operator from the critical areas within the aseptic 
manufacturing suite. Barrier technologies, such as isolators and RABS, continue developing and some aspects are 
likely to change over time.
Physical separation, equipment integration, and the increasing use of automation in these systems can reduce 
the need for personnel involvement inside critical areas. Advantages of these technologies can, however, be 
counteracted by poor design and ineffective operator training. Ergonomic aspects are fundamental to the design 
concept of the production operation. These should be considered in conjunction with:
•	
Mechanical movement (i.e., moving machine parts)
•	
Safe material and product transfers in and out of the barrier
•	
Cleanability
•	
Ability to decontaminate the system
•	
Appropriate background environment in which the system is to be operated
These decisions should be made on a risk-based approach, depending upon the application and specific system 
design.
9.2	
System Definitions
The differences between the types of isolators and RABS used in pharmaceutical aseptic processing should be 
understood. Isolators and RABS can be broadly classified according to the type of separation they provide and the 
assurance of maintaining that separation, although there may be some overlap in the degrees of separation and 
operator protection.
Figure 9.1 (from ISO 14644-7 [20]) illustrates increasing levels of separation assurance moving from purely 
aerodynamic separation (as in a unidirectional airflow hood) to complete physical separation (as in a closed isolator).

Page 168	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Figure 9.1: Increasing Levels of Separation Assurance
©ISO. This material is reproduced from ISO 14644-7:2004 with permission of the American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI) on behalf of the International Organization for Standardization. The complete standard can be 
purchased from ANSI at https://webstore.ansi.org. All rights reserved.
Along the continuum of assurance of maintaining separation:
•	
RABS tend to utilize physical separation and air overspill all around the barrier to separate personnel from the 
aseptic processing critical areas.
•	
Isolators tend to rely on physical separation, positive pressure differentials and mouseholes with air overspill to 
provide the necessary level of separation and protection.
Where hazardous materials are aseptically processed, both product protection and operator protection should be 
considered:
•	
RABS requires personnel to wear PPE and rooms to be fully segregated by airlocks to avoid spreading of 
product throughout the facility and into the environment.
•	
Isolators maintain operator protection by technical measures, such as adequate differential pressure zones and 
the integrity of the isolator. 
9.2.1	
Aseptic Isolators
An aseptic isolator is described as a decontaminated unit which meets ISO 5/Grade A conditions on the inside and 
does not compromise these conditions over a specified period of time, by providing an uncompromised isolation of its 
interior from the surrounding environment.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 169
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
9.2.1.1	
Types of Isolators
Aseptic isolators can be either “open” or “closed”, as defined in PDA TR 34 [54], depending upon their operational 
state and may operate at positive or negative pressures with respect to the surrounding environment:
•	
When “closed”, isolators may exchange air with the surrounding environment only through microbial retentive 
filters.
•	
When “open”, isolators may transfer air directly to the surrounding environment through openings (e.g., 
mouseholes) that prevent the ingress of viable and non-viable particles.
Figure 9.2: Isolator Types and Surrounding Environment Classifications
1.	
Closed Isolators
	
Closed isolators are typically used for batch processes that do not require a high number of components to be 
processed. Material is placed inside the isolator before a decontamination cycle is performed, or material is 
transferred in via decontamination airlocks. Typical applications for a closed isolator are for a formulation process 
or for sterility testing.
2.	
Open Isolators
	
Open isolators are used in continuous process applications. Material is continuously transferred into the isolator 
via appropriate decontamination or sterilization devices. A differential pressure zoning concept guarantees a 
continuous airflow towards the surrounding environment to prevent particulate or microbiological ingress through 
transfer openings.
9.2.1.2	 Considerations
The level of separation provided by isolators (both open and closed) allows for operating an isolator in an ISO 8/
Grade C environment (Grade D or unclassified, but access controlled for sterility testing application), while providing 
ISO 5/Grade A conditions inside the isolator, after performing a surface decontamination.
A surface decontamination cycle is typically capable of six-log spore reduction. A surface decontamination cycle 
should be applied following any event when the enclosure is opened towards the surrounding environment. All 
materials being transferred into the ISO 5/Grade A area should be exposed to a surface decontamination step, before 
entering the enclosure, to avoid contamination of the ISO 5/Grade A area.
The following should be considered for isolators:
•	
Proper surface decontamination should be performed with a sporicidal agent (e.g., hydrogen peroxide).
•	
Continuous positive pressure should be maintained inside the isolator.

Page 170	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
•	
Glove maintenance programs should ensure integrity and decontamination of gloves.
•	
Transfer systems should ensure that the cleanliness of the isolator is not compromised.
•	
Cleaning processes should ensure that all production remains are properly removed after a production batch, to 
a reproducible value allowing an efficient surface decontamination.
9.2.2	
Restricted Access Barrier Systems (RABS)
A RABS is described as an aseptic processing system that provides an enclosed environment to house an aseptic 
processing line and supply it with ISO 5/Grade A unidirectional air. RABS utilize rigid wall enclosure design to provide 
a physical separation of the process. This rigid wall enclosure is decontaminated with sporicidal disinfectant and 
interventions are done using installed barrier gloves. RABS are rarely opened, except as appropriate.
RABS design provide a physical separation of the process through rigid doors and gloves, while keeping air overspill 
into the surrounding (or positive differential pressure versus the surrounding) as the main method of separation. RABS 
can provide ISO 5/Grade A environments on the inside and can be located in ISO 7/Grade B surroundings. RABS 
should be decontaminated with a sporicidal agent and operated within a fully disinfected surrounding ISO 7/Grade B 
cleanroom. RABS can provide an increase in separation when upgrading existing conventional aseptic processes.
9.2.2.1	 Types of RABS
Operations Perspective:
1.	
Open RABS
	
An open RABS is designed to operate with doors closed at all times, except in rare predefined circumstances 
when the doors of the enclosure can be opened to perform specific interventions.
2.	
Closed RABS
	
A closed RABS remains closed at all times during operation. The only acceptable intervention would be for 
machinery setup.
Airflow Design Perspective:
1.	
Active RABS with Air Overspill into the Room
	
An active RABS with air overspill into the room uses an integral HEPA filtered air supply providing UAF to the 
critical process and air overspill into the room below the critical process.
	
RABS are not suitable for hazardous products, as they spill air into the surrounding area.
Figure 9.3: Active RABS with Air Overspill into the Room Classification

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 171
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
2.	
Passive RABS with Air Overspill to the Surrounding
	
In a passive RABS with air overspill to the surrounding, the airflow to the critical area is provided by ceiling 
mounted HEPA filters and the bottom of the enclosure is open to the room to provide for airflow through the 
system.
Figure 9.4: Passive RABS with Air Overspill into the Room and Surrounding Environment Classification
3.	
Active RABS with Air Returns Through HEPA Filters
	
An active RABS with air returns through HEPA filters uses an integral HEPA filtered air supply providing UAF to 
the critical process. It also uses air return through HEPA filters to prevent hazardous product migrating to the 
surrounding or microbial contamination migrating into the RABS.
This type of RABS can be suitable for hazardous products, based on a risk assessment. Safe change filters should 
be used in the returns to help to protect operators and maintenance personnel.
Figure 9.5: Active RABS with Air Returns through HEPA Filters and Surrounding Environment Classification
9.2.2.2	 Considerations
A formal risk management program should be established for RABS to ensure the effectiveness of the design in 
relation with the process, as well as the efficiency of the applied disinfection program.
The following should be considered for RABS:
•	
Gloves and gauntlets attached to the glove ports should be sterile when installed. A glove monitoring program 
should be followed and should ensure that proper disinfection procedures and intervals, as well as glove 
exchange intervals, are maintained to minimize the risk of contamination.
•	
Written procedures should be established and should describe what is done when an open door intervention 
(which should be rare) is performed.

Page 172	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
-	
Open door interventions should be documented, described in batch records, and followed by a disinfection 
step.
-	
Open door interventions may require a line clearance, which should be documented in batch records.
•	
Direct and indirect product contact parts and fluid pathways (such as stopper bowl, feed, and placement 
systems) should be sterilized prior to the filling of each batch.
•	
Product contact equipment should be subject to sterilization.
•	
Sterile components and supplies should be transferred to the RABS without exposing the sterile surfaces to less 
clean environments, such as the use of RTPs or disinfection airlocks.
•	
Robust disinfection of all non-product contact surfaces within the RABS should be performed with a suitable 
sporicidal agent before each batch or campaign.
•	
The effectiveness of the overall disinfection program should be demonstrated and routinely evaluated as part of 
the environmental monitoring program.
9.3	
System Comparisons
In conventional aseptic filling operations, the filling equipment and gowned personnel operate together in a cleanroom 
environment. There is limited defined separation between the personnel and the production environment (e.g., 
flexible plastic curtains). The product and product contact exposure areas are locally protected in an ISO 5/Grade A 
environment.
Figure 9.6: Conventional Filling and Surrounding Environment Classification
Isolators and RABS utilize physical or aerodynamic methods (or both) to achieve separation between the inside of the 
containment and the surrounding environment. There are two primary differences between isolators and RABS:
Decontamination: Isolators are reproducibly decontaminated using an automated system (e.g., using VHP); such 
decontamination can be performed batch-wise. RABS are usually thoroughly manually disinfected. Alternatively, 
decontamination is performed by gassing or fogging processes together with the surrounding room. Typically, this 
cannot be performed batch-wise and manual disinfection may be used in conjunction with the room decontamination.
Pressure differentials: Isolators operate at an established pressure differential with respect to the surrounding 
environment, while RABS utilize air overspill without a defined pressure differential to achieve aerodynamic separation.
Table 9.1 contains points to be considered and highlights areas of differences among traditional cleanrooms, RABS, 
and isolator designs. Each system should be considered in terms of its intended use and the specific circumstances 
related to that use. All consideration points in Table 9.1 assume a proper design according to the latest standards 
of the respective technology. Poor design can have a negative impact (e.g., a poorly designed isolator can be less 
efficient than a well designed RABS).

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 173
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Table 9.1: Points to Consider for Traditional Cleanrooms, RABS, and Isolator Designs6
Issue
Traditional Cleanrooms 
(Unidirectional Airflow 
Systems and Curtains)
RABS
Isolator Systems
Degree of 
Separation 
•	 Separation provided by 
airflow, room pressure 
differentials, and 
cleanroom clothing 
systems
•	 Superior to cleanrooms
•	 Superior to other 
technologies
Initial Facility Costs
•	 Maximized footprint of 
classified environment
•	 Additional cost for barrier
•	 GAAS extensions may 
be required to cover door 
swings
•	 Buffer zones may be 
required for transfer of 
material into RABS
•	 Slightly larger footprint 
is needed than for 
traditional cleanroom
•	 Isolator equipment may 
be more expensive, but 
total capital project costs 
may be similar
•	 Facility capital, air 
handling, and operational 
costs can be significantly 
lower
Facility Lead Time
•	 Similar to RABS
•	 Similar to traditional 
cleanrooms
•	 Equipment more complex
•	 Footprint of the facility 
significantly reduced 
(needs less gowning 
areas, etc.)
Operating Cost
•	 High
•	 May be slightly 
higher than traditional 
cleanroom
•	 Approximately 75% less 
than cleanroom costs, 
mostly related to HVAC 
operating costs
•	 Other savings in gowns, 
supplies, labor utilization, 
and environmental 
monitoring
Operational 
Hurdles
•	 Largely personnel 
dependent
•	 Transfer of format 
parts, components and 
materials into the ISO 
5/Grade A areas is a 
significant operational 
difficulty, and can require 
extra transfer airlocks 
and special care
•	 Restrictions due to 
ergonomic limits, which 
require proper process 
design
•	 Easy adaptation from 
earlier operating modes
•	 Easier to retrofit to 
existing lines than 
isolators
•	 Transfer of format 
parts, components, and 
materials into the ISO 
5/Grade A areas is a 
significant operational 
difficulty, and can require 
extra transfer airlocks 
and special care
•	 Restriction due to 
ergonomic limits, which 
require proper process 
design
•	 Changes from old 
paradigms necessary
•	 Automated 
decontamination airlocks 
allow reproducible 
transfer of format parts, 
components and other 
materials into the isolator
6	 This table has been updated based on the original Table A from Agalloco et al., 2007 [55].

Page 174	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Table 9.1: Points to Consider for Traditional Cleanrooms, RABS, and Isolator Designs (continued)
Issue
Traditional Cleanrooms 
(Unidirectional Airflow 
Systems and Curtains)
RABS
Isolator Systems
Environmental 
Treatment
•	 High level disinfection 
with sporicidal agent 
performed by gowned 
personnel
•	 Reproducibility and 
validation possible 
using automated 
decontamination systems 
with sporicidal agent
•	 High level disinfection 
with sporicidal agent 
performed by gowned 
personnel
•	 Reproducibility and 
validation possible 
using automated 
decontamination systems 
with sporicidal agent
•	 Reproducible 
decontamination using 
automated cycles with a 
sporicidal agent
Impact of 
Personnel
•	 Highly influenced by 
personnel
•	 High separation as 
long as air overspill is 
guaranteed
•	 Operator protection 
limited for hazardous 
compounds
•	 High separation
•	 Enhanced operator 
safety for hazardous 
compounds
•	 Present less risk than 
RABS
Line Operation
•	 Risk of contamination 
dependent on cleanroom 
clothing and personnel 
behavior
•	 Greatly reduced risk of 
contamination compared 
to traditional cleanroom 
technology
•	 Material transfers into 
RABS still provide a high 
risk of contamination if 
performed manually
•	 Less risk of 
contamination due 
to complete and 
uninterrupted separation 
of environments
•	 Offers more rigorous 
material transfer controls 
such as RTP, e-beam, 
and decontamination air 
locks
Cleaning
•	 Manual, not suitable for 
hazardous product
•	 Difficult issue when 
handling hazardous 
compounds
•	 Potential contamination 
is limited to RABS interior 
only for active RABS with 
HEPA returns
•	 RABS with air overspill 
are not suitable for 
handling hazardous 
materials
•	 Hazardous compound 
cleaning substantially 
safer
•	 Complete WIP/CIP 
possible
•	 Potential contamination 
is limited to isolator 
interior
Complexity
•	 Less controls but high 
monitoring efforts
•	 Systems tend to be less 
complex than isolators
•	 Can be retrofitted more 
easily to traditional 
cleanroom process 
equipment
•	 More controls, 
equipment, and 
instrumentation required
•	 Decontamination adds 
extra elements
•	 Depending on isolator 
design, dedicated HVAC 
may be needed

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 175
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Table 9.1: Points to Consider for Traditional Cleanrooms, RABS, and Isolator Designs (continued)
Issue
Traditional Cleanrooms 
(Unidirectional Airflow 
Systems and Curtains)
RABS
Isolator Systems
Format 
Changeover
•	 Access to the equipment 
is easy but requires 
stringent validation and 
monitoring procedures
•	 Disposable sterile flow 
path ease cleaning 
requirements
•	 Change of format parts 
and components is easy
•	 Product change requires 
internal cleaning
•	 Greater risk of bio-
contamination during 
changeover
•	 Disposable sterile flow 
path ease cleaning 
requirements
•	 Change of format parts 
and components is 
relatively easy
 •	 Changeover is easier as 
performed under ISO 8/
Grade C
•	 Product change requires 
internal cleaning
•	 More difficult to correct 
setup issues during the 
process
•	 Disposable sterile flow 
path ease cleaning 
requirements
Novelty
•	 Old technology
•	 Minimal
•	 Well established and 
accepted by industry and 
authorities
•	 There is a learning curve 
to be considered
Intangibles
•	 High risk for product 
contamination, since 
there is no physical 
separation between 
product and operator
•	 Easy to implement, 
especially for retrofit 
applications
•	 Retrofit applications 
are generally of limited 
benefit as filling 
equipment was not 
designed for RABS 
operation, therefore, 
open door interventions 
may be required 
•	 More capable once fully 
operational
•	 Newer technology
•	 Hazardous new products 
may create an advantage 
for isolators
Containment 
Potential for 
Hazardous 
Products
•	 None
•	 Improved if properly 
designed as active 
closed RABS with safe 
change HEPA filtered 
air returns
•	 Excellent, if designed 
for hazardous products 
(features such as safe 
change return HEPA 
filters and adequate 
differential pressure 
zones)
Regulatory 
Perspective
•	 Becoming increasingly 
unacceptable
•	 No longer the design of 
choice
•	 Recognized as a 
significant improvement 
over traditional 
cleanroom equipment, 
but not perceived to 
be equal to isolators 
in terms of product 
separation
•	 Considered superior

Page 176	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Table 9.1: Points to Consider for Traditional Cleanrooms, RABS, and Isolator Designs (continued)
9.4	
Factors to Consider When Choosing Among These Technologies
9.4.1	
Personnel Involvement with the Aseptic Process
Isolator technology removes a major source of bio-contamination by eliminating direct operator intervention from the 
aseptic process, making it superior for aseptic/containment applications. RABS are superior to conventional manned 
cleanrooms for aseptic operation and can approach the superior separation provided by isolators if the doors remain 
closed.
9.4.2	
Labor Efficiency Gains
Isolators eliminate a confining gown, close fitting hood, and face mask, leading to improved operator comfort and 
cost savings in laundry and cleanroom clothing sterilization (each operator can consume 4 to 5 gown sets per day). 
Isolator systems require reduced gowning according to the lower grade surrounding room and allow the same 
operator to serve several different functions on the same line without re-gowning, affording greater labor utilization 
and significantly reducing gowning costs. In general, access to the aseptic processing area is no longer restricted by 
sterile gowning and de-gowning procedures, therefore permitting controlled, multiple access routes.
RABS do not offer these advantages as the operators need to wear full aseptic gowns and are largely restricted to a 
single location/function.
9.4.3	
Containment of Hazardous Product
Isolators and active closed RABS with safe change HEPA filters in the air returns can be particularly useful for 
processing of chemically/biologically hazardous material when operated as closed systems from an operations and 
airflow perspective. RABS with air overspill to the room provide better separation than conventional cleanrooms but 
are not suitable if containment of hazardous materials is required.
Issue
Traditional Cleanrooms 
(Unidirectional Airflow 
Systems and Curtains)
RABS
Isolator Systems
Industry 
Perspective
•	 No longer the design 
of choice within 
major pharmaceutical 
companies
•	 Largely proven 
technology with known 
limitations
•	 Well established and 
considered superior 
concerning product and 
operator safety
•	 Green technology due 
to significantly reduced 
energy consumption
Handling of 
Products Sensitive 
to Oxidation 
•	 Residual concentrations 
of manually applied 
cleaning and sporicidal 
agents are difficult to 
evaluate so residual 
concentrations are hard 
to predict and it is difficult 
to validate product 
impact
•	 Same as traditional 
cleanrooms
•	 Decontamination 
agents are defined and 
validated, therefore, 
an isolator can achieve 
reproducible low level 
residual concentration 
limits

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 177
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
9.4.4	 Setup Time and Facility Start-Up
Enclosing the process inside an isolator means that some early construction and pre-delivery testing can be 
performed offsite, prior to installation, while the surrounding environmental room is being constructed. RABS start-up 
periods are closer to those for conventional cleanrooms, as critical facility environmental systems are required and 
control systems are less complex than for isolators.
Control systems can be designed integrally and placed into operation with the isolator, potentially shortening facility 
start-up time, since isolators are independent units. This can be improved when using isolator air handling concepts 
that operate without interface to the building HVAC and exhaust.
9.4.5	
Capital Costs
Isolator equipment cost usually is higher than conventional equipment and may offset initial capital cost savings 
gained by improved space utilization, compared to a conventional facility. RABS and associated processing 
considerations may be more expensive than conventional cleanrooms but are generally similar to isolators. Isolators 
may be the most cost-effective option for new construction. Individual cost analyses should be performed for RABS 
versus isolators. Consideration should be given to operational as well as capital costs, including the facility.
9.4.6	
Operating Costs
For most applications, the scaled down size of the aseptic process and associated air handling equipment, combined 
with the lower environmental class of the background room and reduced gowning and environmental monitoring 
requirements, results in significantly reduced operating costs for isolator systems. Operating costs for RABS designs 
are comparable to those for traditional cleanrooms, but the additional cost for maintaining and monitoring RABS 
gloves should also be considered.
9.4.7	
Maintenance Access
Maintenance access (from outside the critical environment) is possible with both isolator and RABS designs. It should 
be considered at the start of the design process. Given the freestanding nature of isolators, access may be superior 
and gowning requirements minimal.
A suitable glove management program should be established for both isolators and RABS, as gloves may become 
brittle over time.
9.4.8	
Flexibility of the Equipment
Isolator flexibility is increased by the reduced footprint of the ISO 5/Grade A area; there is also less facility area to 
clean between batches.
Various process equipment may be docked into isolator systems, via direct interfaces between the process 
equipment and isolator system.
9.4.9	 Ergonomics
The position of the glove ports, half-suits, and interfaces with the operator should be considered, as the aseptic 
method may suffer if the operator is uncomfortable. Efficient layouts should be developed for both isolators and 
RABS. Typically, an ergonomic mockup study is performed during the design phase of the project to ensure all 
process steps can be performed properly.

Page 178	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
9.4.10	 Airflow within the Enclosure
Airflow within the enclosure should be unidirectional at the product, container, or closure exposure points wherever 
product is exposed and according to GMP regulations.
The purpose of the UAF is to protect the product from viable and non-viable particles.
Turbulent flow might be applied in specific cases when required by the process, for example:
•	
When the system design can guarantee that no particulates generated during the process can create an out of 
specification result
•	
In quality control applications, such as sterility testing
The airflow can help to achieve faster decontamination cycles, especially to aerate decontamination agents at the 
end of a cycle. Poor airflow design can result in long decontamination cycles that can impact the productivity of the 
facility.
The impact of the airflow on the temperature distribution inside the enclosure should also be considered.
9.4.11	 Pressure Differential
In an open RABS, the air overspill to the surroundings generates a dynamic barrier for contamination.
Isolators should be maintained at positive pressure relative to their surroundings in order to prevent ingress of any 
contamination from the external environment. The differential pressure levels are typically between 15 – 50 Pa to 
avoid ingress of contamination through transfer openings (such as mouseholes) and other potential openings.
Higher differential pressures provide better separation (air velocity should be ≥ 0.2 m/s according to ISO 14644-4 
[29]). High differential pressures also generate high airflows between isolator chambers. This should be accounted for 
when specifying differential pressures, as airflows might compromise the UAF inside the enclosure or have an impact 
on the process itself (e.g., powder dosing, vial falling).
Reverse flow might be generated at mouseholes with high air velocity. The proper design can be shown with smoke 
studies.
When handling hazardous materials, a differential pressure concept should be established, using multiple differential 
pressure zones. The concept needs to ensure that the level of contamination escaping to the surrounding area is 
below any critical limits. One possibility is to add a higher pressure zone at the mousehole of the critical zone. This 
can prevent airflow from this additional zone into the critical zone, to avoid any contamination of the surroundings.
If out of specification results occur, a risk assessment should be performed to define necessary actions. Appropriate 
microbial monitoring results may prevent loss of a batch.
Figure 9.7 shows a typical open isolator configuration.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 179
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Figure 9.7: Example of Arrangement for an Isolator Facility
9.5	
Equipment Design for Inside an Isolator or RABS
Equipment should be designed with the ergonomics of operating through glove ports in mind. The use of robotics or 
manipulators should be part of the design of isolators and RABS. This helps to minimize the potential for microbial 
contamination, by assuring better protection of the sterile product during aseptic processing. Considerations for 
equipment design inside an isolator or RABS include:
•	
Format parts should be accessible via glove ports and the change should be designed as a one hand operation 
and tool-less, if possible.
•	
Tools, such as forceps, should be used to separate the glove from the process.
•	
Critical areas, where product is exposed to the surrounding, should not be covered with any parts or moving 
equipment, to allow proper UAF over the product.
•	
Large components (e.g., stopper bowls) should be perforated to allow the airflow to penetrate as much as 
possible.
•	
Obstructed surfaces should be avoided.
•	
The interface of the equipment to the isolator should be gas tight. Penetrations (e.g., shafts and drives) should 
be sealed.
•	
If the equipment requires shaft movements up and down through the base plate, such shafts should be protected 
by either a specific dynamic air barrier or bellows, to avoid ingress of contamination during operation.
•	
Parts that undergo maintenance should be designed to be external to the ISO 5/Grade A environment.

Page 180	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
•	
The use of automated equipment should be considered, where feasible, to minimize human involvement within 
the controlled environment.
•	
Half-suits may help operators to access equipment. Half-suits should be of good ergonomic design, cleanable, 
able to be decontaminated, and should undergo integrity testing.
•	
For isolators and RABS that are decontaminated by gassing or fogging using sporicidal agents, the following 
should be considered for exposed equipment materials:
-	
Chemical/corrosion resistance against decontamination agents used
-	
No catalytic effect on decontamination agents
-	
Potential impact on the decontamination efficiency of the surface structure of materials
The surface structure of materials can have an impact on the decontamination efficiency. Material studies should 
be performed to show the impact on the D-value of different surface materials. The results should be taken into 
consideration when validating decontamination efficiency inside an isolator (see study cited in US FDA guidance [3], 
Reference 13: Sigwarth and Stark, 2003 [56]).
The control system for the filling equipment should be configured to permit slow motion movement during 
decontamination of the isolator, to expose all the equipment surfaces to the decontamination agent.
Ergonomic design should allow access for all surfaces to be cleaned effectively, prior to gaseous surface 
decontamination. Before a decontamination cycle begins, the isolator should be mechanically clean (and dry, 
depending on the decontaminating agent). This may necessitate a manual cleaning and a drying step prior to 
decontamination.
9.5.1	
Component and Equipment Transfers
Transfer systems are used to transfer containers, product, monitoring material, and tools in and out of the enclosure. 
Ingress of contamination through transfer systems should be avoided. Weaknesses of transfer systems (e.g., ring of 
concern in RTP) should be considered. Proper manipulation and suitably trained operators can help to control risk 
associated with transfer systems.
Types of transfer systems include:
•	
Dry heat tunnels to sterilize glass containers in-line into the ISO 5/Grade A environment
•	
Electron beam (e-beam) tunnels to sterilize heat sensitive products in-line (e.g., pre-sterilized syringes in tubs)
•	
RTPs designed for batch transfer of externally sterilized materials (e.g., filling pumps, stoppers, single-use 
assemblies)
-	
A wide variety of sterilizable containers or bag systems allow sterilizing goods to transfer off-line, either with 
steam (autoclave), ethylene oxide, or gamma irradiation
-	
Typical transfer applications include ready-to-use stoppers, filling pumps/kits, microbiological sampling 
materials, and tools
•	
Liquid transfer systems to connect bulk containers to the filling system inside an isolator
•	
Transfer air locks, with the use of VHP as a surface decontamination method, to transfer heat sensitive materials, 
non-direct product contact parts, and bagged sterilized goods

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 181
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
•	
Special consideration should be given to all interfaces for product transfer. If supply material is introduced from 
a lower grade area into a higher grade area by shedding an outer layer, an additional bioburden reduction step 
should be applied.
Other transfer methods are used in the industry. Table 9.2 provides an overview of the transfer method options, 
applicability for batch or continuous transfer, and the achievable log reduction. The log reduction provided in this table 
is indicative only. Any log reduction should be proven during validation.
Table 9.2: Overview of Transfer Method Options
When selecting appropriate transfer methods, the bioburden reduction each method provides should be considered. 
For isolator applications, a 6-log reduction is typically required (a minimum of 4-log can be satisfactory for very low 
bioburden surfaces); for RABS, a 3-log reduction is typically acceptable.
When transfers involve toxic compounds, a thorough risk assessment is required to define appropriate cleaning 
procedures.
The efficiency of aseptic connectors should be validated during media fill.
9.5.2	
Glove Systems and Half-Suits
The type of glove to be used depends on the application and on the replacement cost of different assemblies. Gloves 
can be:
•	
One-piece gloves
•	
Two-piece gloves with sleeves
•	
Half-suits with arms and gloves (if required by the process)
Inspection, cleaning, and disinfection should be considered for gloves and half-suits mounted in both isolators and 
RABS. Maintenance can be difficult for a half-suit, as it has a large surface area. Care should be taken when cleaning 
and integrity testing half-suits.
Gloves, gloves with sleeves or half-suit system are considered the weakest part of the system and can develop leaks. 
Automation of the process can minimize operator interventions that necessitate the use of gloves and half-suits. The 
impact of any leakage requires thorough investigation and evaluation.
Transfer Method
Batch/Continuous
Safety
No Treatment
Continuous
? = very low
Sporicidal (sporicidal tunnel)
Batch (Continuous)
~ 2- to 3-log reduction 
Pulse Light/UV
Batch
~ 3- to 4-log reduction
Plasma Chamber
Batch
> 4-log reduction 
VHP Airlock
Batch
> 6-log reduction
Dry Heat Tunnel
Continuous
> 6-log reduction
Steam Autoclave
Batch
> 6-log reduction
E-beam
Continuous 
> 6-log reduction

Page 182	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Occurrences of leakages can be reduced by using robust materials in conjunction with appropriate maintenance 
and inspection regimes. The use of a thin sterile glove liner worn by the operator, as part of a gowning regime and 
coupled with hand disinfection, may protect the glove from bio-contamination and reduce risk in case of damage.
Bioburden data may be collected on the non-process side of the gloves, for both isolators and RABS. All media 
should be removed from the glove after sampling.
Daily visual inspection and regular physical glove testing should demonstrate that the gloves retain their integrity and 
are, therefore, acceptable for continued use. This can significantly reduce the risk of an undetected pinhole (Gessler 
et al., 2011 [57]).
The physical test is typically performed on open isolator/RABS doors before the enclosure is closed and 
decontaminated. Commercially available test systems typically use the pressure decay method, measuring a 
pressure drop inside the glove/sleeve, or the constant pressure method, measuring the leak rate as a flow. Physical 
test methods cannot detect holes measuring down to several micrometers and, therefore, cannot completely prevent 
microbiological contamination.
Studies show that a visual test by a trained operator can detect holes on white gloves with a high precision [57]. This 
is a convenient method and should be performed frequently.
A preventive glove replacement program can help to avoid sudden out of specification results. How frequently gloves, 
sleeves, and half-suits need to be replaced depends on the frequency of use, the cleaning agents used, and the 
mechanical stress applied during the process.
Cleaning of Gloves
Gloves are a potential source to transport contamination from one point to another; therefore, a proper cleaning 
process should be applied. Cleaning has the following purposes:
•	
New gloves are typically covered with a lubricant layer caused by the manufacturing process. This layer 
can cover contamination and prevent an efficient decontamination process. New gloves need to be cleaned 
thoroughly before being installed.
•	
In the case of a pinhole, a high bioburden load on the outside of the glove may increase the risk of contamination 
on the inside; therefore, gloves need to be manually wiped and cleaned regularly on the inside and the outside.
•	
As gloves, especially finger tips, are touching different surfaces inside an isolator/RABS, the risk of enabling 
bioburden contamination can be significant. A regular manual wipe and cleaning process needs to be applied.
9.5.3	
Background Environment
The classification of the background environment in which the enclosure is located should be based on a risk 
assessment that considers the design choice and operational characteristics of the chosen system and its associated 
transfer mechanisms and discharge ports (e.g., mouseholes).
For a globally compliant facility, the isolator background should be ISO 8/Grade C. A Grade D environment which 
is classified as ISO 8 “in operation” as well as “at rest” is also possible. Quality control isolators providing aseptic 
conditions for test environments (e.g., sterility test) with no dynamically sealed openings to the surrounding room 
can be situated in CNC areas. CNC spaces should be described as having controlled access with a regular cleaning 
schedule, but they are not monitored for particulate or microbial growth.
RABS designs require an aseptic processing environment external to the enclosure, typically ISO 7/Grade B.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 183
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
9.5.4	
Background Monitoring
Monitoring of cleanliness classes should be applied as specified for the relevant ISO/Grade classification. The 
monitoring efforts with isolators are normally significantly lower than for RABS, due to the reduced foot print and the 
surrounding environment being a cleaner grade for RABS as compared to isolators.
9.5.5	
Enclosure Classification
The inner environment should meet ISO 5/Grade A.
9.6	
Decontamination Cycle Development (Isolators)
9.6.1	
Cleaning and Surface Decontamination
Before any bio-decontamination is performed, an efficient cleaning needs to be applied to critical surfaces. Cleaning 
can either be performed manually or, if applicable, with automated WIP/CIP cycles.
The design of the enclosure and all integrated equipment needs to be compatible with cleaning processes and 
cleaning agents.
Cleaning validation needs to prove the efficiency of the cleaning process and its ability to avoid cross-contamination 
or exposure of hazardous substances to the surrounding when opening the enclosure. Removal of cleaning residuals 
after the cleaning process should be considered, as they may impact bio-decontamination efficiency or may be of 
concern to the product handled inside the isolator or RABS. Failure or incomplete cleaning can prevent exposure of 
hydrogen peroxide and may lead to failure of the bio-decontamination cycle.
Cycle development should be performed to establish the parameters and bio-decontamination capabilities and limits 
that reflect the different volumes, contours, and loading patterns within an isolator or RABS. Validation should prove 
that developed parameters are accurate.
The necessary level of bio-decontamination should be determined on the basis of risk assessment and analysis. For 
further information on a method for decontamination determination, refer to Sigwarth and Moirandat, 2000 [58].
To measure the decontamination efficiency inside the isolator, biological indicators (Geobacillus stearothermophilus) 
are typically used to demonstrate a 6-log reduction during validation and revalidation.
In isolators, surface bio-decontamination is performed after cleaning and closing the enclosure. This is typically a fully 
automated process using vaporized or fogged hydrogen peroxide. After achieving the specified bio-decontamination 
efficiency, the bio-decontamination agent is aerated out of the isolator by either venting the isolator with HEPA filtered 
fresh air or by using catalytic converters to break down the hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen.
In RABS, bio-decontamination can be performed manually with sporicidal agents via open doors. In newer RABS, 
automated decontamination systems using vaporized or fogged hydrogen peroxide may be used. In RABS 
applications, typically only a 3 to 4-log reduction is demonstrated.
The main difference between an isolator and a RABS is that a RABS is located in an ISO 7/Grade B environment 
and, therefore, the decontamination also needs to include the surrounding environment.
Although bio-decontamination is performed on the isolator and RABS, the indirect product contact parts (e.g., stopper 
tracks) should preferably be SIP or autoclaved. Where such parts cannot be sterilized in an autoclave (e.g., vibratory 
feeding bowls), a hydrogen peroxide decontamination system can be utilized after a thorough manual cleaning 
has been performed. The process should be validated and achieve a 6-log reduction of an appropriate challenge 
organism.

Page 184	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
9.6.2	
Bio-Decontamination Systems
There are several types of bio-decontamination systems available for use with isolators or RABS. Methods using 
vaporized or fogged hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) are most commonly used. Other methods such as chlorine dioxide 
(ClO2) or nitrogen dioxide (NO2) are available.7 The following criteria should be considered when selecting the bio-
decontamination method:
•	
Resistance of surface materials to the selected decontamination agent
•	
Decontamination efficiency on all surfaces inside the enclosure
•	
Integrity of the enclosure based on the Threshold Limit Value (TLV) of the decontamination agent (e.g., 0.5 ppm 
for H2O2, 0.1 ppm for ClO2)
•	
Ability to aerate or neutralize the decontamination agent after the process
As all bio-decontamination systems target a bio-load reduction on surfaces, an individual validation needs to be 
performed to prove the efficiency of the decontamination cycle.
Precautions should be taken at the design stage to define load volume, configuration, and packing materials. 
Particular attention should be paid to areas where there is poor vapor circulation and poor accessibility for prior 
cleaning (e.g., masked surfaces such as beneath bottles and component packs, dead ends caused by the presence 
of sensors and pipework).
9.6.3	
Surface Finishes
Considerations for surface finishes include:
•	
Cleanability of the surfaces before and after the process, to allow a proper cleaning in order to avoid cross-
contamination. The cleaning process is product dependent and may vary from simple manual wipe down to fully 
automated CIP with suitable cleaning agents
•	
Guaranteeing an efficient bio-decontamination with vaporized, fogged, or gaseous decontamination agents, 
as cracks and crevices might shadow potential biological contamination that may not be exposed to the bio-
decontaminant. Studies show different D-values of the same type spores on different surface materials (see 
study cited in US FDA guidance [3], Reference 13: Sigwarth and Stark, 2003 [56]). This should be considered 
during validation.
9.6.4	
Removal of the Decontaminant – Aeration
The aeration phase after the decontamination cycle is important to reduce the level of decontamination agent to 
acceptable levels to expose to the environment (e.g., through open mouseholes), as well as to the product. Some 
products are very sensitive to oxidation; in such cases it might be necessary to aerate the inside of the enclosure 
down to low levels (parts per billion (ppb)). Aeration studies may be required to avoid impact of decontamination 
residuals in isolators, as well as RABS and cleanrooms.
Aeration is typically achieved by diluting the inside of the enclosure with HEPA filtered air until the specified residual 
levels have been reached. Fresh air can be taken from the surrounding room or provided by makeup air units to 
aerate the decontamination agent out through the roof. Catalytic converters allow aerating of the enclosure in a 
circulation loop and can provide significant HVAC cost savings. The efficiency of the catalytic converter material can 
have a significant impact on achievable aeration times.
7	 Older technologies using formaldehyde or peracetic acid are no longer the preferred choice, due to the known carcinogenic and corrosive effects.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 185
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Aeration time studies should consider that decontamination agents can be adsorbed by some materials, such as 
gloves and other plastic materials. Packed materials (e.g., steam sterilized components packed in Tyvek® paper) 
should also be considered, as the decontamination agent may penetrate the packaging material and aeration can be 
more challenging.
The aeration cycle should be performed at a positive differential pressure to the surrounding environment.
9.6.5	
Airflow Modeling
Air handling systems are fundamental to the performance of decontamination processes. Air handling systems should 
provide:
•	
Even distribution of the decontamination vapor
•	
Efficient aeration
The design of an air handling system should consider half-suits, gauntlets, wrist collars, and gloves in regard to 
areas likely to be shadowed from the decontaminant vapor. Frames inserted into the suit or gauntlet can ensure 
the garment is fully deployed. Gauntlets, wrist collars, and gloves, including fingers, should be fully extended and 
separated, and should not mask any surface during decontamination.
9.7	
Environmental Monitoring
Environmental monitoring schedules for isolators and RABS are similar to those for a classified cleanroom. The 
aseptic quality of the sampling apparatus should be considered, in order to avoid false contamination of the sample. 
Non-invasive sampling is preferred, for example:
•	
Sampling heads inside and equipment located outside the containment
•	
Use of equipment exposed to the same decontamination regime as the isolator
Use of environmental monitoring equipment should be validated to ensure the results are comparable to those 
obtained by local sampling, because of the potential for microorganism capture in the sampling tubing. In addition, 
swab samples and contact plates can provide useful data. Environmental monitoring positions should be determined 
during ergonomic studies for both isolators and RABS, to ensure that manipulations can be performed without 
compromising the integrity of the containment.
It may be possible to reduce the number of sample locations and/or frequency, depending on the level of separation 
of the operator from the process. This should be supported by a risk assessment.
The transfer of materials and liquids to and from the enclosure can present a significant challenge to the sterility of 
the system, in addition to the background challenge of the surrounding environment.
Additionally, the special requirements of glove systems should be considered, especially since a number of operators 
using the same gloves presents a challenge to the hygiene of the glove system.

Page 186	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
9.8	
Leak Rate
The integrity of the enclosure should prevent:
•	
Hazardous decontamination agents to escape during the decontamination process
•	
Hazardous product escape during production
•	
Ingress of contamination that could harm the product quality
During the decontamination process, the isolator needs to be kept in constant positive pressure to the surrounding 
environment. A potential leak in the enclosure can generate an increased concentration in the surroundings. The 
maximum allowable size of such a leak depends on the following parameters:
•	
Differential pressure
•	
Concentration inside enclosure
•	
Volume of the surrounding area
•	
Fresh air exchanges of the surrounding area
•	
Acceptable concentration for an operator
Where hazardous products are used, similar considerations (i.e., those for decontamination agents) can be applied 
to determine an acceptable leak rate during production. Only airborne contamination can escape. In enclosures with 
UAF, only surfaces on the downstream side of the airflow and return ducts are exposed to such contamination.
The ingress of contamination can be prevented by providing a continuous positive pressure to the enclosure. Airflow 
around mouseholes may generate turbulence and cause inflow of air; therefore, mouseholes are usually protected by 
HEPA filtered airflow on the outside of the enclosure.
9.8.1	
Leak Rate Test Methods
Leak rates can be determined by closing the enclosure with gas tight flaps and applying a pressure drop test or a 
constant pressure test. Both tests are typically performed at double operating pressure.
As for aseptic isolators that are not in contact with potent or hazardous products and for RABS applications, the only 
risk is the leakage of decontamination agent during decontamination. Continuous monitoring of the decontamination 
agent concentration in the surrounding room can be sufficient, if openings (such as doors) are position controlled and 
gloves are leak tested individually.
During installation, a tracer gas (such as helium or ammonia) or soap solutions can be used to identify a leak. 
Although these methods may be an efficient way to find a leak, they are not useful for routine operation.
9.9	
Maintenance
An adequate, condition-based, preventative maintenance program should be used to assist in sterility assurance.
Ergonomic modeling should consider the requirements of maintenance personnel who perform ongoing running 
adjustments to the equipment. Designs should consider the maintenance aspects of the enclosure, its support 
services, and also the equipment contained therein. Provision of maintenance access panels should be considered.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 187
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Maintenance should also consider:
•	
Filters
•	
Gaskets
•	
Seals
•	
Items specific to an enclosure, such as door seals, transfer port gaskets, and the attachment of glove rings to 
glazing panels
HEPA filters and gloves should be replaced on a regular and scheduled basis, along with other components, as part 
of a maintenance program.
Protocols should be developed for the calibration of sensors on an ongoing basis. Test equipment to calibrate 
dedicated probes (e.g., temperature and humidity sensors, pressure transducers) should be provided.
Maintenance personnel should use PPE for maintenance of critical areas where hazardous substances might be 
present or could not be cleaned by another method.
9.10	
Training
Reliance only on the enclosure to preserve the aseptic processing environment may not be sufficient and may give a 
false sense of security. The selection, training, and motivation of personnel are fundamental to GMPs.
Operators should be given a thorough understanding of how to operate the control system and perform aseptic 
operations within the enclosure. Operators are required to have knowledge of transfer devices, decontamination 
systems, and their interrelationship with the overall aseptic process.
Operators should adhere to aseptic techniques in performing manipulations for any aseptic process. Failure events 
and how operators are to react should be considered during training.
Operator procedures should not permit inappropriate manipulation by gloves or gauntlets in the critical zone and 
should stress the use of sterile tools during aseptic operations. Training should consist of both theoretical and 
practical aspects, concluding with a formal, documented assessment and authorization to work with the system.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 189
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
