13	 Appendix 3 – Glossary
13.1	
Acronyms and Abbreviations
ACH	
Air Changes per Hour
ACR	
Air Change Rate
AHU	
Air Handling Unit
API		
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient
AQL	
Acceptable Quality Limit
ASHRAE	
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air Conditioning Engineering
ASME BPE	 American Society of Mechanical Engineers Bioprocessing Equipment
ASTM	
American Society for Testing and Materials
BFS	
Blow-Fill-Seal processing
BMBL	
Biosafety Manual for Biological Laboratories
BMS/BAS	
Building Management System/Building Automation System
BPC	
Bulk Pharmaceutical Chemical
BSL	
Biosafety Level
C&I		
Control and Instrumentation
CCI		
Container Closure Integrity
CCIT	
Container Closure Integrity Testing
CDER	
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (US FDA)
CFD	
Computational Fluid Dynamics
CFM	
Cubic Feet per Minute
CFR	
Code of Federal Regulations
CFU	
Colony Forming Unit
cGMP	
current Good Manufacturing Practice
CIP		
Clean-in-Place
CNC 
Controlled Not Classified
CPP	
Critical Process Parameter
CQA	
Critical Quality Attribute
DCS	
Distributed Control System
DEHS	
Diethylhexyl Sebacat
DOP	
Dioctyl Phthalate (or equivalent, i.e., Dispersed Oil Particulate)
DP	 	
Differential Pressure
EH&S	
Environmental, Health and Safety
EM	 	
Environmental Monitoring
EMA	
European Medicines Agency (formerly known as EMEA)
EMS	
Environmental Monitoring Systems
ERP	
Enterprise Resource Planning
EtO		
Ethylene Oxide
EU	 	
European Union
FDA	
Food and Drug Administration (US)
FIT	 	
Filter Integrity Testing

Page 228	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Appendix 3	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
FMEA or FMECA	
Failure Modes and Effects (Criticality) Analysis
FTIR	
Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
GAMP®	
Good Automated Manufacturing Practice
GEP	
Good Engineering Practice
GLSP	
Good Large Scale Practices
GMP	
Good Manufacturing Practice
HACCP	
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
HAZOP	
Hazard and Operability
HEPA 
High Efficiency Particulate Air
HSA	
Headspace Analysis
HVAC	
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
HVLD	
High Voltage Leak Detection
ICC		
International Code Council
ICH		
International Council for Harmonisation
IEEE	
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IEST	
Institute of Environmental Sciences and Technology
IMP		
Investigational Medicinal Products
IPC		
In-Process Control
ISO		
International Standards Organisation
LED	
Light Emitting Diode
LP/GAAS	
Local Protection/Grade A Air Supply
MAL	
Material Airlocks
MERV 
Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value
MVI		
Manual Visual Inspection
NCG	
Non-Condensable Gases
NIR		
Near Infrared
ODS	
Ozone Depleting Substance
OSHA	
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
PAL	
Personnel Airlocks
PAO 
Polyalphaolefin
PAT		
Process Analytical Technology
PIC/S	
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention and Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme
PLC	
Programmable Logic Controller
PNSU	
Probability of a Non-Sterile Unit
POD	
Probability of Detection
PPE	
Personal Protective Equipment
PQLI®	
Product Quality Lifecycle Implementation
PVC	
Polyvinyl Chloride
QA	 	
Quality Assurance
QbD	
Quality by Design
RABS	
Restricted Access Barrier System
RH	 	
Relative Humidity
RPN	
Risk Priority Number

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 229
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Appendix 3
RSF	
Residual Seal Force
RSR	
Room Side Replaceable
RTD	
Resistance Temperature Detector
RTP	
Rapid Transfer Port
RZE 
Reject Zone Efficiency
SCADA	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SIP		
Sterilize-in-Place or Steam-in-Place
SMS	
Spunbond/Melt-blown/Spunbond
TLV		
Threshold Limit Value
TOC	
Total Organic Carbon
UAF 
Unidirectional Airflow
UC  
Unclassified
UFH 
Unidirectional Flow Hood, also called Unidirectional Airflow (UAF) or Laminar Flow Hood
ULPA	
Ultra Low Penetration Air
UPS	
Uninterruptible Power Supply
URS 
User Requirements Specification
USP	
United States Pharmacopeia
VAV	
Variable Air Volume
VHP	
Vapor-phase Hydrogen Peroxide
VOC	
Volatile Organic Compound
WFI		
Water for Injection
WHO	
World Health Organization
WFI		
Water for Injection
WIP		
Work In Progress
13.2	
Definitions
Acceptance Criteria
Measurable terms under which a test result will be considered acceptable.
Action Level
A requirement or condition set by the user, which, when exceeded, requires immediate intervention, including the 
investigation of cause and corrective action.
Air Change Rate (ACR)
The number of times the total air volume of a defined space is replaced in a given unit of time. This is computed by 
dividing the total volume of the subject space (in cubic feet) into the total volume of air exhausted from (or supplied 
to) the space per unit of time.
Airlock
Intermediate room or area that is normally ventilated and used to minimize the transfer of airborne contamination 
from one area to another. A room or space designed to act as a means of transfer between areas of different air 
classification or quality.

Page 230	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Appendix 3	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Alert Point
Used in determining when a parameter is drifting toward the extremes of the operating range.
Ampoule
A heat sealed all glass or all plastic container for sterile, injectable pharmaceutical products.
As-Built (ISO 14644-1 [4])
Condition where the cleanroom or clean zone is complete with all services connected and functioning, but with no 
production equipment, materials or personnel present.
Aseptic (PDA TR 22 [69])
Free from disease-producing microorganisms.
Aseptic Core
(See: Aseptic Processing Area)
Aseptic Process Simulation
(See: Media Fill)
Aseptic Processing (PDA TR 22 [69])
Handling sterile materials in a controlled environment, in which the air supply, materials, equipment, and personnel 
are regulated to control microbial and particulate contamination to acceptable levels.
Aseptic Processing Area
Area in which the product is formulated, filled into containers, and sealed. Also known as the aseptic core.
At Rest (ISO 14644-1 [4])
Condition where the cleanroom or clean zone is complete with equipment installed and operating in a manner agreed 
upon, but with no personnel present.
Autoclave
An apparatus into which moist heat (steam) under pressure is introduced to sterilize or decontaminate materials 
placed within (e.g., filter assemblies, glassware, etc.).
Automated System
Any facility system or piece of equipment that is PLC or computer controlled.
Background Environment
The environment that surrounds a critical area.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 231
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Appendix 3
Barrier System
A system of physical partitions that affords ISO 5/Grade A protection by partially separating its interior from the 
surrounding environment utilizing airflow.
Bidirectional (Traffic)
Traffic pattern such that materials and personnel may enter and leave through an area.
Bioburden
The concentration of microbial matter per unit volume. Microbial matter includes viruses, bacteria, yeast, mold, and 
parts thereof.
Calibration
A comparison of a measurement standard or instrument of known accuracy to detect, correlate, report, or eliminate 
by adjustment, any variation in the accuracy of the unknown standard or instrument.
Campaigning
(See: Temporal Separation)
Classified Space
An area with airborne viable and non-viable particle contamination controlled within preset limits. A cleanroom 
designated by ISO Standard 14644-1 volume units (“in operation”) or European Community (EC) Grades A, B, C, 
D (“at rest” and “in operation”). For pharmaceutical manufacture, a classified space implies ongoing environmental 
monitoring.
Clean Area
An area where particulate and microbial levels are specified (e.g., a filling room – ISO 7/Grade B).
Clean Steam
(See: Pure Steam)
Cleaning
Action of removing and dissolving or dispersing soiling from a surface.
Note: Cleaning may be effected by one or more of the following means: physico-chemical (detergent action); 
chemical (e.g., sodium hydroxide); biochemical (e.g., enzymes); physical (e.g., shear forces caused by brushing or 
hosing). Cleaning efficiency is also dependent on the length of time and temperature of application, etc.
Cleanroom (ISO 14644-1 [4])
Room in which the concentration of airborne particles is controlled and which is constructed and used in a manner 
to minimize the introduction, generation, and retention of particles inside the room, and in which other relevant 
parameters, e.g., temperature, humidity, and pressure, are controlled as necessary.

Page 232	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Appendix 3	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Closed Process
A process condition when the product, materials, critical components or container/closure surfaces are contained 
and separated from the immediate process environment within a closed/sealed process equipment or enclosure. A 
process step (or system) in which the product and product contact surfaces are not exposed to the immediate room 
environment.
Colony Forming Unit (CFU)
A measure of the number of bacteria present in the environment or on the surfaces of an aseptic processing room; 
measured as part of qualification and ongoing monitoring.
Commissioning
Commissioning is the documented process, verifying that equipment and systems are installed according to 
specifications, placing the equipment and systems into active service, and verifying its proper operation.
Compendial
Official; purported to comply with USP, EP, or JP.
Compounding
The bringing together into a homogenous mix of active ingredients, excipient, and solvent components.
Concurrent Processing
Two or more products being processed at the same time.
Contamination
The undesired introduction of impurities of a chemical or microbiological nature, or of foreign matter, into or onto a 
raw material, intermediate, or API during production, sampling, packaging or repackaging, storage or transport. (See: 
Cross-Contamination)
Controlled Not Classified (CNC)
An area without airborne particle limits, but with filtered ventilation.
Critical Area (FDA 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance [3])
An area designed to maintain sterility of sterile materials. Sterilized product, containers, closures, and equipment may 
be exposed in critical areas. Also known as critical zone.
Critical Process Parameter (CPP)
A process parameter whose variability has an impact on a critical quality attribute and therefore should be monitored 
or controlled to ensure the process produces desired quality.
Critical Process Step
For sterile products, this normally is an activity where product or product contact parts are exposed to the surrounding 
environment.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 233
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Appendix 3
Critical Quality Attribute (CQA)
A physical, chemical, biological, or microbiological property or characteristic that should be within an appropriate limit, 
range, or distribution to ensure product quality.
Critical Zone
(See: Critical Area)
Cross-Contamination
Contamination of a starting material, an intermediate product, or a finished product with another starting material or 
product during production. (See: Contamination)
Decontamination (FDA 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance [3])
A process that eliminates viable bioburden via use of sporicidal chemical agents.
Depyrogenation
Removal or destruction of endotoxins. (See: Dry Heat Sterilization)
Design Limit
The specified range, or accuracy of a controlled variable, used by the designer to determine the performance 
requirements of an engineered system.
Differential Pressure (DP)
Between adjoining rooms or zones, measured in Pascals (Pa) (1" wg = 254 Pa).
Disinfection
Removal, destruction, or deactivation of microorganisms on objects or surfaces. (See: Sanitization)
Disposables
Pre-sterilized products, equipment, and packaging designed to be used once (single-use) or a few times, depending 
on specific circumstances, and discarded.
Documented
The parameter value (or evidence that the value is within control limits) is recorded at some predefined frequency for 
future reference.
Dry Heat Sterilization
Sterilization utilizing a heating oven or continuous tunnel (gas or electric heated) as opposed to steam sterilization in 
an autoclave usually used for glassware and metal parts. In depyrogenation, temperatures of 250°C (482°F) result in 
sterilization and the inactivation of endotoxin present on the surface of the equipment. (See: Depyrogenation)
Dynamic
(See: In Operation)

Page 234	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Appendix 3	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Endotoxin
Cell wall debris (lipopolysaccharide) from Gram-negative bacteria. (See: Pyrogen)
Environmental Process Limits
Environmental limits that, if exceeded, may affect product quality adversely.
Excipient
An inactive ingredient used in the formulation of a drug product.
Extractables
Chemical substances that can be removed from polymeric materials using appropriate solvents (e.g., polar and non-
polar).
Flow
Architectural terms for material or personnel traffic pattern in the facility.
Formulation
1.	
(noun) The chemical and physical composition of a drug product.
2.	
(verb) The act of compounding a drug product.
Functionality
Suitability for the intended purpose.
Gowning
Protective garments and the act of donning protective garments.
High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) Filter
A filter with an efficiency in excess of 99.97% for 0.3 µm particles.
Humidifier
A device for adding moisture to room air.
Hydrophilic
Having a strong affinity for water; attracting, dissolving in, or absorbing water; readily absorbing moisture; having 
strong polar groups that readily interact with water. Its opposite is hydrophobic.
Hysteresis
The difference between the readings obtained when a given value of the measured variable is approached from 
opposite directions.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 235
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Appendix 3
In Operation (or In-Use)
Room condition in which processing is being performed with operators present.
In-Process Control (IPC)
Checks performed during production to monitor and, if appropriate, to adjust the process to ensure that the 
intermediate or API (drug substance) conforms to its specifications and/or other defined quality criteria.
Isolator
A decontaminated unit meeting ISO 5/Grade A conditions that provides uncompromised, continuous, isolation of its 
interior from the surrounding environment. Isolators can be “open” or “closed”.
Leachables
Typically, a subset of extractables; chemical substances that migrate into the drug product from process equipment or 
its container under normal conditions of use and/or storage.
Local Protection
Measures, such as hoods providing HEPA filtered air or other appropriate devices, procedures, or equipment design 
features, to protect the product from potential environmental contaminants.
Lyophilizer
A freeze dryer.
Lyophilization
The creation of a solid from a liquid by means of freezing, sublimation, and desorption.
Maintainability
The ease with which maintenance can be performed.
Media Fill
Method used to evaluate the efficacy of an aseptic process by substituting microbiological media for the normally 
processed product. Also known as Process Simulation Test or Aseptic Process Simulation.
Medical Device
A diagnostic or therapeutic article that does not achieve any of its principal intended purpose through chemical action 
within or on the body. Such devices include diagnostic test kits, crutches, electrodes, pacemakers, arterial grafts, 
intraocular lenses, and orthopedic pins or other orthopedic equipment.
Monitoring (ISO 14644-2 [42])
Observations made by measurement in accordance with a defined method and plan to provide evidence of the 
performance of an installation. Note: This information may be used to detect trends in operational state and to 
provide process support.

Page 236	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Appendix 3	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Non-Viable
Opposite of viable, not alive.
Normal Operating Condition
Values of a parameter that are normally observed while a process is operating. The normal operating condition 
should be within the alert and action limits.
Open Process
A process condition when the product, materials, or container/closure surfaces are exposed to the immediate process 
environment at a stage/time when such exposure could influence the quality or purity of the product.
Operational (“In Operation”) (ISO 14644-1)
Agreed condition where the cleanroom or clean zone is functioning in the specified manner, with equipment operating 
and with the specified number of personnel present.
Ozone Depleting Substance (ODS)
Chemical substance, usually consisting of some combination of chlorine, fluorine, or bromine plus carbon, such as 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFC) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFC).
Overseal
Capping and crimping.
Particle Count
Airborne particle count of both viable (living) organisms and non-viable (inert) particles. Measured in particles per 
cubic foot (multiply by ~35.3 to obtain particles per cubic meter).
Particulate
Usually a solid particle large enough to be removed by filtration.
Parison
The hollow melted plastic tube extruded from the die head of a blow molding machine. The parison is expanded 
within the mold by air pressure to form a container.
Permeability
The ability of a body to pass a fluid under pressure.
Physical Separation
The separation of materials, spaces, or operations by means of physical barriers to prevent their mixing or overlap. 
Also known as Spatial Separation.
Potent
A substance that is active in relatively low doses or concentrations.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 237
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Appendix 3
Pre-filter (HVAC)
Air filter placed ahead of a more efficient air filter to reduce the loading and extend the life of the higher efficiency 
filter.
Procedural Separation
The separation of materials, spaces, or operations by means of operational controls to prevent their mixing or 
overlap.
Process Contact Surface (ASME BPE Standard [21])
A surface under design operation conditions that is in contact with, or has the potential to be in contact with, raw 
materials, in-process materials, APIs, clean utilities (e.g., WFI, CIP, pure steam, process gases), or components (e.g., 
stoppers) and where there is a potential for the surface to affect product safety, quality, identity, strength, or purity.
Process Gases
Gases which can affect product quality.
Process Simulation Test
(See: Media Fill)
Process Support Systems
Systems that do not contact product; they are generally engineering systems.
Process Systems
Systems that may contact the drug substance or could otherwise directly impact product quality.
Process Validation
A documented program that provides a high degree of assurance that a specific process will consistently produce a 
result meeting pre-determined acceptance criteria.
Product Contact Surface
A process contact surface that is in contact with, or has the potential to be in contact with, a product where the 
product is defined by owner/user. Examples of product contact surfaces may include the interior surfaces of 
bioreactors, transfer tubing, chromatography columns, vessels, and recirculating segments of CIP systems.
Pure Steam (USP [70])
Water that has been heated above 100°C (212°F) and vaporized in a manner that prevents source water entrainment. 
It is prepared from water complying with the US EPA Primary Drinking Water Regulations [71], or with drinking 
water regulations of the European Union or Japan, or with WHO [10] drinking water guidelines. It contains no added 
substance. The level of steam saturation or dryness, and the amount of non-condensable gases are to be determined 
by the pure steam application.
Note: Pure steam is intended for use where steam or its condensate comes in contact with the article of the 
preparation.

Page 238	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Appendix 3	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Purified Water
Water for the preparation of medicinal products, other than those that require the use of water which is sterile and/
or apyrogenic. Purified water which satisfies the test for endotoxins may be used in the manufacture of dialysis 
solutions. Purified water is prepared by distillation, by ion exchange, or by any other suitable method that complies 
with the regulations on water intended for human consumption laid down by the competent authority.
Pyrogen
An agent capable of inducing an increase in body temperature; usually refers to fever caused by bacterial endotoxins.
Q8, Q9, Q10
ICH guidance documents dealing with pharmaceutical development, quality risk management, and pharmaceutical 
quality systems, respectively.
Qualification
Action of proving and documenting that equipment or ancillary systems are properly installed, work correctly, and 
actually lead to the expected results. Qualification is part of validation, but the individual qualification steps alone do 
not constitute process validation.
Quality Assurance (QA)
The activity of, or group responsible for, ensuring that the facility and systems meet GMP requirements.
Quality by Design (QbD) (PQLI®)
A systematic approach to development that begins with predefined objectives and emphasizes product and process 
understanding based on sound science and Quality Risk Management.
Quality Risk Management
A systematic process for the assessment, control, communication, and review of risks to the quality of the drug 
(medicinal) product across the product lifecycle.
Recovery Time
The time after an upset in a room’s HVAC environmental parameters for the room to return to “normal” conditions, 
such as a return to acceptable humidity levels after a room wash down. This occurs within a certain number of air 
changes after the upset source is removed, minimally six to ten, depending on the severity of the upset, the quality of 
the air supply, and the degree of mixing of room air.
Restricted Access Barrier System (RABS)
An aseptic processing system that provides an enclosed, but not closed, environment meeting ISO 5/Grade A 
conditions utilizing a rigid wall enclosure and air overspill to separate its interior from the surrounding environment.
Relative Humidity (RH)
A measure of the water vapor content of room air, expressed as a percentage.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 239
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Appendix 3
Risk Assessment
A systematic process of organizing information to support a risk decision to be made within a risk management 
process. It consists of the identification of hazards and the analysis and evaluation of risks associated with exposure 
to those hazards.
Sanitization
That part of decontamination that reduces viable microorganisms to a defined acceptance level; normally achieved by 
using a chemical agent or heat to reduce microbial levels.
Spatial Separation
(See: Physical Separation)
Sporicidal Agent
An agent that destroys bacterial and fungal spores.
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
Instructions that specify how an activity is to be accomplished.
Sterile
Absence of life; usually refers to absence of viable microorganisms.
Sterilization
The act or process (physical or chemical) that destroys or eliminates all forms of life (e.g., microorganisms); despite 
being stated as an absolute, the action of sterilization usually is stated in terms of probability.
Sterilizing Filter
A filter that, when challenged with the microorganism Brevundimonas diminuta, at a minimum concentration of 107 
organisms per cm2 of filter surface, produces a sterile effluent.
Temporal Separation
The separation of products or process ingredients such that two materials do not exist in the same space at the same 
time. Also known as Campaigning.
Terminal Filter
HVAC air filtration located at the entry point of air supply to the room (usually at the ceiling).
Terminal Sterilization
The process applied to product sealed in its final container that transforms a non-sterile product into a sterile one.
Toxic
A substance which is harmful.

Page 240	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Appendix 3	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Unclassified Area
Support area peripheral to manufacturing (e.g., warehouse, office).
Unidirectional Airflow (UAF) (ISO 14644-4 [29])
Controlled airflow through the entire cross-section of a clean zone, with a steady velocity and approximately parallel 
streamlines. Note: This type of airflow results in a directed transport of particles from the clean zone.
User Requirements Specification (URS)
Generally, the first in a series of specification documents. It provides a high-level description of the user’s expectation 
of the project scope, with emphasis on product parameters and process performance parameters.
Validation
(See: Process Validation)
Verification
The act of reviewing, inspecting, testing, checking, auditing, or otherwise establishing and documenting whether 
items, processes, services, or documents conform to specified requirements.
Vial
A final container for a parenteral or diagnostic product. Sealed with a rubber closure and overseal. Generally required 
to be class I borosilicate glass.
Viable
Living.
Volatility
A measure of how quickly a substance forms vapors at ordinary temperatures. The more volatile the substance is, the 
faster it evaporates, and the higher the concentrations of vapor (gas) in the air.
Water for Injection (WFI) (USP [69])
Water purified by distillation or by reverse osmosis, it contains no added substance, and it meets the purity 
requirements of purified water. Although not intended to be sterile, it meets a test for a limit of bacterial endotoxin 
(less than 0.25 USP Endotoxin Units/ml).

600 N. Westshore Blvd., Suite 900, Tampa, Florida 33609 USA 
Tel: +1-813-960-2105, Fax: +1-813-264-2816  
www.ISPE.org