
ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 9
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
1	
Introduction
1.1	
Background
The design, construction, commissioning, and qualification of pharmaceutical facilities present significant challenges 
to manufacturers, engineering professionals, and equipment suppliers. These facilities are required to meet GMP 
regulations while remaining in compliance with other governing codes, laws, and regulations.
Lack of understanding of regulatory requirements may cause investment and operational costs to escalate. This 
Guide is intended to offer a consistent interpretation, while allowing a flexible and innovative approach to facility 
design, construction, commissioning, and qualification.
This Baseline® Guide takes into account the FDA Pharmaceutical GMPs for the 21st Century – A Risk-Based 
Approach [2] and the FDA September 2004 Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic 
Processing – Current Good Manufacturing Practice [3] (which supersedes the 1987 Guideline on Sterile Drug 
Products Produced by Aseptic Processing). It also refers to Annex 1 of the European Union GMPs [1], which was last 
updated in November 2008. Another significant change since the original ISPE Sterile Guide was published, is that 
ISO 14644-1 [4] has replaced US Federal Standard 209E Airborne Particulate Cleanliness Classes in Cleanrooms 
and Clean Zones. The reader also should be aware that there are other standards and guidance available in this 
subject area, such as ISO 13408 1 [5].
This Guide is based on US and European Union (EU) requirements. This third edition has harmonized these 
requirements as much as possible, based on the experience of the authors. For further information regarding 
changes associated with the third edition, see Section 1.5.
1.2	
Scope and Purpose of This Guide
This Guide may be used by industry for the design, construction, commissioning, and qualification of sterile product 
manufacturing facilities. It is neither a standard nor a GMP regulation. It is not intended to replace governing laws, 
codes, guidelines, standards, or regulations that apply to facilities of this type. The use of this document for new or 
existing facilities is at the discretion of the facility owner or operator.
The purpose of this Guide is to focus on facility engineering issues and how to provide cost effective facilities which 
make best use of available modern technologies to ensure that products of the highest quality are consistently 
manufactured. Where non-engineering issues are covered (e.g., microbiological topics, operational issues unrelated 
to the facility), the information is included to show engineers the importance of such topics and the impact they have 
on facility design. Therefore, these non-engineering topics are not covered comprehensively. Specific advice from 
Quality Assurance (QA) should be sought where additional information is required.
This Guide covers facilities for aseptic processing and terminal sterilization of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients 
(APIs)1 and formulated products, generally for parenteral use. It is applicable to formulations that use APIs devised 
from either conventional chemistry or biopharmaceutical processing.
This Guide is focused on commercial scale medicinal sterile production. It does not cover medical devices. It does 
cover the facility aspects of sterile APIs but it does not cover the upstream process controls and equipment aspects 
of sterile APIs, details of which are covered in ISPE Baseline® Guide: Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (Second 
Edition, Revision to Bulk Pharmaceutical Chemicals) [8].
1	 The term API, as defined in ICH Q7 [6], is equivalent to drug substance. Drug substances, as delineated in ICH Q11 [7], includes chemical entities 
and biotechnological/biological entities.

Page 10	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Note: Many aspects of the guidance contained in this document (e.g., environmental and engineering matters) 
may be applicable to the manufacture of clinical supplies, Investigational Medicinal Products (IMP), sterile medical 
devices, and sterile drug/device combinations, as well as veterinary injectable products. Specific “specialty” sterile 
products (e.g., radiopharmaceuticals) are not covered in this Guide and may require additional controls, safeguards 
and regulations.
It is a principle of US and European GMP that when sterile APIs are manufactured, and the sterility is carried forward 
into the dosage form without change, then the dosage form GMP apply to both the sterile API manufacture and 
dosage form formulation. Figure 1.1 shows the boundary between this ISPE Baseline® Guide and the ISPE Baseline® 
Guide on APIs [8]. Figure 1.1 describes sterile APIs and dosage forms produced by both aseptic processing and 
terminal sterilization.
Figure 1.1: Diagram to Illustrate Boundary between this ISPE Baseline® Guide and the ISPE Baseline® Guide: 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (Second Edition)
Notes for Figure 1.1:
•	
The dashed line shows where the Baseline® Guide for APIs versus the Baseline® Guide for Sterile Products 
applies. The API Guide applies to the left of the line. The Sterile Products Guide applies to the right of the line.
•	
The Terminally Sterilized Products section applies to APIs and dosage forms produced using terminal sterilization 
in the final packaging.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 11
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
•
The Aseptically Produced Products section applies to APIs and dosage forms produced using aseptic processing
(i.e., sterilization of the components) followed by aseptic assembly into the final primary packaging.
•
The solid line shows where the sterilization unit operation is applied in the process sequence. The sterilization
process can be thermal, irradiation, filtration, etc.
•
Manufacturing operations may not all be performed in the same facility. The need to transfer sterile bulk products
to external facilities, or partners, requires special handling not covered by this Guide.
This Baseline® Guide takes into account the similar requirements of the GMPs of regulatory agencies from the US, 
EU, and those expressed in the Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention and Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation 
Scheme (PIC/S) [9] and World Health Organization (WHO) [10].
It is also recognized that some International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) documents, which are applicable to 
products that may supply the US, EU, or Japan, should be considered for sterile product facilities. Since the original 
Sterile Manufacturing Facilities Baseline® Guide was published, several papers and references have been produced, 
such as ICH Q8 [11], ICH Q9 [12], and ICH Q10 [13].
This is the third edition of ISPE Baseline® Guide: Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities, which was originally issued 
in January 1999. It has been updated to reflect changes in regulations and industry practice, but it also takes into 
account that over the past few years several new ISPE Baseline® Guides have been issued or re-issued. Where 
appropriate, it makes reference to these documents rather than repeating details.
1.3	
Key Features of This Guide
The following key principles are integral to this Guide:
•
The need to understand product and process requirements
•
Use of risk-based approaches
•
Concept of Good Engineering Practice (GEP)
•
Role of terminal sterilization and aseptic processing as mechanisms for producing sterile products
•
Protection of the product and the importance of understanding the most critical process steps
•
Management of flow and movement of personnel and materials
•
Importance of an integrated facility design approach
•
Understanding the principles of “open processing” and “closed processing”, and how they affect the specification
of the surrounding controlled environment
•
Role of barrier and isolator technology
•
Role of automation and robotics
•
Use of consistent Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) terminology
•
Principles and understanding of “in operation” and “at rest” conditions for classified environments
•
Selection of appropriate materials and finishes
•
Importance of Environmental, Health and Safety (EH&S) issues as part of the design and operation

Page 12	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
•	
Reference to sterile APIs and link to ISPE Baseline® Guide: Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (Second Edition) [8]
A brief explanation of these follows:
Product and process requirements normally drive the fundamental layout of a sterile product manufacturing facility. 
The Critical Quality Attributes (CQA) of the product should be understood. Significant sources of variability, which 
are Critical Process Parameters (CPP), can be determined from the CQA. For example, terminal sterilization is 
recommended wherever it can be applied; but where the product is affected significantly by this process step, product 
requirements may take precedence and other controlled methods of manufacturing may be used. This Guide seeks to 
make distinctions, where relevant, between aseptically processed products and those that are terminally sterilized.
The processing department (normally made up of the support areas and the processing core area) is the area where 
the product is formulated, filled into containers (usually vials, ampoules, pre-filled syringes, flexible bags, etc.), and 
the containers are sealed and secured. Protection of the product and container/closures from bio-contamination 
during these operations is considered critical.
Personnel are normally the greatest potential source of particulate and microbiological challenge to the process; 
therefore, any interface between personnel and the environment where sterile materials, products, components, 
and contact surfaces are exposed should be minimized. Consideration of all features should be taken into account, 
to produce an integrated facility design and to achieve a logical separation of clean and dirty operations. Available 
environmental control technologies should be used where possible, including:
•	
Restricted Access Barrier Systems (RABS)
•	
Isolators
•	
Blow, Fill, and Seal (BFS) technology
•	
Personnel gowning
The use of so-called conventional cleanroom technology may be acceptable for the processing of terminally sterilized 
products and APIs and products where there are technical issues which prevent the use of barrier technology for 
aseptic processing. Such choices have a fundamental effect on the design and operation of a facility, and should 
be considered at an early stage. Additional consideration should also be given to other sources of potential product 
contamination in the process design (e.g., back siphoning).
Documents that provide information on sterile products manufacturing facilities may use different terminology, 
particularly for environmental classifications (e.g., Class 100, ISO 5, or Grade A). This third edition of the Guide is 
intended to harmonize environmental classifications to help manufacturers to comply with regulations.
Facilities should be designed to ensure that the “in operation” condition during manufacture is met. Engineers and 
designers should also consider ensuring that the “at rest” condition is met. Although the principles behind the US 
and EU (and those of other countries) air classification terminologies are similar (particularly for the “in operation” 
condition), there is no commonly agreed global nomenclature to cover both the “at rest” and “in operation” conditions. 
Precautions should be taken to ensure correct understanding. Therefore, this Guide has harmonized this terminology, 
with the intention of providing international consistency and bridging the nomenclature between the US, EU, and 
other countries. Further details are given in Chapters 2 and 5.
This Guide provides a tabular comparison of these various standards and guides and, in order to achieve clarity in 
the text, uses a single nomenclature to define the different process areas.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 13
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Fundamental requirements for facilities used for the manufacture of sterile products are the control principles 
offered by HVAC systems. In particular, engineers should understand that the environmental performance during “in 
operation” conditions is the time when the product and sterile package components are most likely to be exposed. 
The HVAC design and area classifications should ultimately relate to this condition. It is also useful to consider the “at 
rest” condition, as this provides a benchmark for system performance and may also form part of logical engineering 
system acceptance criteria. Engineers should understand the sources of particulate and bio-contamination, and the 
various ways that air quality can be maintained during manufacturing, such as:
•
Air filtration
•
Airflow uniformity control and direction
•
Differential cleanliness cascades
•
Room pressure differentials
•
Effective bio-contamination dilution
Engineers and designers should understand the importance of avoiding cross-contamination, which is a key factor 
that can influence HVAC design.
This Guide also is applicable to the selection of materials and finishes. A lifecycle approach should be taken when 
selecting materials to ensure a balance between the initial cost and expected life; for example, some less costly 
finishing materials can give good service compared to expensive alternatives.
From a product point of view, it is important to understand the following concepts of Pharmaceutical Development (as 
embodied in ICH Q8 [11], ICH Q9 [12], and ICH Q10 [13]) and how they relate to product quality:
•
Quality by Design (QbD)
•
Quality Risk Management
•
Pharmaceutical Quality Systems
This Guide refers to these guidelines, as appropriate, to the design of facilities. It also supports taking a risk-based 
approach as this helps to assure the final facility meets the often demanding product requirements.
GEP should be applied to a facility to ensure that the most effective and efficient design solution is found, consistent 
with meeting manufacturing and quality needs.
An overview of the chapter structure of this Guide is given in Figure 1.2.

Page 14	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Figure 1.2: Overview of Chapter Structure
1.4	
Terminology Used in This Guide
The terminology for environmental classification levels, used throughout this Guide, is described in Chapter 2.
The conventions for referring to Good Manufacturing Practices differ in various regulatory communities. In the US, the 
acronym cGMP is used, while in Europe, Japan, and other areas the acronym is simplified to GMP. The “c” in cGMP 
stands for “current.” For purposes of simplicity and harmonization, this Guide uses GMP. Where this term applies to 
US facilities or regulations, it is understood to mean cGMP.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 15
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
1.5	
Changes Since the Previous Edition of This Guide
There are numerous changes within this Guide. An overview of the major changes for the third edition of this Guide is 
listed below:
•
A global facility design approach is now the basis for this Guide, with examples of RABS, full isolator, and BFS
recommended layouts (see Chapter 4).
•
Area classifications have been normalized and harmonized to show the alignment of FDA and EU requirements.
This mirrors the approach used in ISPE Baseline® Guide: Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing Facilities (Second
Edition) [14]:
-
ISPE classification grades have been deleted and replaced with harmonized dual designations (e.g., Grade
5 has been replaced with ISO 5/Grade A).
-
Area classification terms “Controlled Not Classified” (CNC) and “Unclassified” (UC) are no longer defined in
the harmonized designations (Table 2.2). These terms are not part of the regulations, but are designations
commonly used in the industry to differentiate respective areas (see Chapter 2).
	
Note: Users of this Guide should consider that in some circumstances, cost or single market focus could depart 
from the harmonized room classification design.
•
Local Protection/Grade A Air Supply (LP/GAAS) for areas within lower classified areas has been added to
Chapters 2 and 5.
•
Practical guidelines and practices for particulate monitoring have been added to this Guide.
1.6	
Considerations for Legacy Facilities
While the premise and focus of this Guide is directed at best practices for designing and constructing new facilities, 
the Guide can be useful in the renovation of older facilities to reduce the risk of non-sterility in order to comply with 
regulations.
Facility renovations and equipment upgrades/replacements can be a challenge to validated legacy systems. This 
Guide should serve as reference for updating facility and equipment to comply with these regulations.
For further insight into upgrading and replacing systems, see ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: The Validation of 
Legacy Systems [15].

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 17
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
