8	 Control and Instrumentation
8.1	
Introduction
This chapter considers the various functions of Control and Instrumentation (C&I) systems for sterile products 
manufacturing facilities and focuses on those facility and environment controls which affect patient safety and product 
quality. The objective is to provide design guidance for cost effective system which can be qualified.
C&I systems are used in many facility related systems. They may be deemed to affect patient safety and product 
quality if they control, monitor, or record a CPP, or directly affect a CQA. Components of C&I systems may also be 
considered critical if they come into direct physical contact with the product.
The functions described may be combined within a single C&I system or be performed by several independent systems.
Specific design advice has been given where possible, but it is stressed that each application has different priorities 
and operational preferences that influence the adopted solution.
Designers should also consider other relevant design criteria, such as safety, reliability, data integrity, and design for 
maintenance.
8.2	
Critical Process Parameters – Environmental
8.2.1	
Environmental Conditions within the Production Area
The production of sterile products requires a clean classified work environment for open, exposed processes. 
Processes and products vary greatly. Specific environmental parameters should be considered, specified, monitored, 
and recorded, as discussed in Chapter 5.
Several requirements for particulate and microbiological cleanliness, DP, and airflow are required in the GMPs for 
typical process steps and unit operations. These are discussed in Chapters 2 and 5.
If manufacture of several products is considered, the design team should ensure that the design accommodates the 
most demanding product requirements.
8.2.2	
Monitoring and Documenting
CPPs should be monitored and documented.
Monitoring means that a parameter is continuously or periodically measured to ensure it is within its defined 
limits. This can be accomplished with either permanently installed, portable, or disposable instruments. When 
determining whether to monitor a CPP continuously or periodically, it is recommended to perform a comprehensive 
risk assessment and develop a mitigation plan to fully define the rationale. The appropriate response to the alarm 
condition should be determined as part of the risk assessment and the duration of the alarm condition should be 
considered as part of the mitigation strategy.
Documented means that the parameter value (or evidence that the value is within control limits) is recorded at some 
predefined frequency for future reference. The frequency should be based on a documented rationale which reflects 
the following:
•	
Consequences of manufacturing outside required (process) limits
•	
Probability and frequency of temporary parameter control loss

Page 158	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
•	
Duration and frequency of activities such as process interventions
The probability that a parameter can go out of control depends upon the control system’s reliability, complexity, 
dynamics, and whether it is an active or passive control system.
An active control system is deemed to have a control loop with direct feed-back or feed-forward. A passive control 
system is where a condition is monitored, and management action is implemented, if needed, to rectify the deviation 
in conditions.
When CPPs are monitored, the monitoring regime should, where possible, be established with alert and action limits. 
Alert limits provide early warning of a potential deviation enabling corrective or preventative measures to be taken 
prior to an action limit being reached; in some conditions, alarm condition delays may be appropriate in setting these 
limits. See Section 8.2.3 for details.
Table 8.1: Typical Environmental Process Parameters, How They are Controlled, and Monitoring 
Recommendations
Environmental 
Process Parameter
Active or Passive 
Control
Monitoring Recommendation
Room temperature
Always active
•	 Continuous recording is recommended.
Room RH
Always active
•	 Continuous recording is recommended.
Room differential 
pressure
Active
•	 Active control of pressure differences using actuated control 
dampers is not recommended by this Guide (see Chapter 5).
•	 Where this approach is taken, continuous recording of each 
pressure differential is recommended.
Passive
•	 Where pressure differences are passively controlled via 
proportional air volume balancing and room pressure relief 
dampers, they could be documented less frequently (i.e., 
less than continuously for ancillary aseptic processing area 
rooms).
•	 Excursions should be recorded.
Particle count
Passive
•	 Particle count is controlled passively, through means such 
as filters, low leakage ductwork, personnel control, and air 
change rates.
•	 Continuous recording may not be necessary; however, it 
is recommended to set and maintain particle monitoring 
schedules based on the classification of the environment that 
is claimed.
•	 See Section 8.6.2 for particle monitoring in critical classified 
spaces.
Temperature of 
process environment
Always active
•	 Continuous recording is recommended.
Relative humidity of 
process environment
Specifically controlled 
or limited by the 
HVAC psychrometrics
•	 Continuous recording is recommended.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 159
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Table 8.1: Typical Environmental Process Parameters, How They are Controlled, and Monitoring 
Recommendations (continued)
Airborne particle levels (viable and non-viable) reflect the effect of achieving and maintaining the control parameters 
in Table 8.1. Particle levels are also influenced by internal operations (personnel).
8.2.3	
Alert and Action Alarms
CPPs should remain within specified values. Where monitoring and documenting is necessary, the monitoring system 
should provide an:
•	
Alert Alarm to indicate that the parameter has deviated from the normal operating range (i.e., outside the 
Normal Operating Conditions – a possible control problem)
•	
Action Alarm to indicate that the parameter has deviated from Process Limits (i.e., may result in a product 
quality issue)
Alarms should latch and not self-cancel (i.e., the alarm remains active even after the condition has been corrected) 
until acknowledged by the user/operator. All alarm conditions should be documented and corrective actions recorded.
Where momentary parameter deviation outside specified limits is acceptable, appropriate time delay intervals can be 
incorporated into the alarm logic. These should be thoroughly tested, with the rationale documented as part of the 
system qualification.
8.2.4	 Environmental Process Limits, Facility Design Limits, and Normal Operating Conditions
Environmental Process Limits are the upper and lower limits demanded by the production process(es).4 The 
Facility Design Limits are used to calculate HVAC facility or utility capacity, and are based upon a number of 
factors, such as:
•	
Operator comfort
•	
Energy conservation
•	
Regulatory requirements
Environmental 
Process Parameter
Active or Passive 
Control
Monitoring Recommendation
Room/enclosure 
pressure differential
Both active control 
and passive (static 
air balancing) 
techniques can be 
deployed.
•	 Where the pressure differential is an essential part of space 
separation for different cleanliness classes or contamination 
risk, then the pressure differential should be continuously 
monitored, recorded, and alarmed.
•	 The frequency of monitoring can be related to the criticality 
of the controlled space. For example, aseptic processing 
areas are considered more important than clean preparation 
or formulation areas and, therefore, should be continuously 
monitored and recorded.
•	 Passive (locked damper) control with continuous monitoring 
is considered to be the technical baseline for room pressure 
differentials.
4	 There may be several sets of process limits for the same production area.

Page 160	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
•	
Process limits
•	
What is technically and practically possible
Facility Design Limits should be set to operate within Normal Operating Conditions, where the extremes of these 
conditions are defined by the Alert Limits.
For example, assume that Process Limits are 22°C ± 4°C (71.6°F ± 7.2°F). The HVAC system facility is designed 
to provide 22°C ± 2°C (71.6°F ± 3.6°F); however, control to within 22°C ± 1°C (71.6°F ± 1.8°F) is usual. Alert Limits 
can be set at a lower limit of 21°C (69.8°F) and an upper limit of 23°C (71.4°F), as deviation outside these conditions 
indicates a situation which may require investigation. This relationship between the limits is illustrated in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: Alert and Alarm Limits
8.3	
Instrumentation
8.3.1	
Physical Design
Instruments in process areas should be located to allow cleaning and sanitization of exposed surfaces and should 
be designed and installed to prevent accumulation of particulate matter. Computer screens and keyboards located in 
processing areas should be cleanable, such as by utilizing touch membrane technology.
Instruments in direct contact with the product, its components, or associated with a critical manufacturing process 
should be designed and installed to:
•	
Prevent accumulation of any matter (including product)
•	
Withstand required cleaning/sanitization processes and agents without degradation
•	
Not present a contamination risk to the product or its components
•	
Not be degraded (physically or in performance) by contact with the product, its components, or the processes to 
which it is subjected

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 161
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Many instruments have sensing elements remote from their data processing components. The use of such 
instruments allows isolation, separation, or remote location of the processing components. This may simplify cleaning 
and reduce contamination risk.
8.3.2	
Performance: Accuracy
Instrument performance is defined using such terms as:
•	
Accuracy
•	
Uncertainty
•	
Resolution
•	
Repeatability
•	
Hysteresis
•	
Response time
•	
Stability
General discussion of instrument selection is outside the scope of this Guide.
When assessing an instrument’s accuracy, several factors should be considered:
•	
Fitness for purpose
•	
Instrument cost increases with accuracy
•	
How misleading the instrument can be without threatening product quality
•	
Higher accuracy instruments reduce the risk of manufacture under unsuitable conditions because of instrument 
drift
For each CPP, there are usually Process Limits within which a product should be produced or a process operates. 
These limits should be defined in pharmacopeias, product registration documents, company standards, or process 
validation documents.
C&I systems should be designed to control conditions to a set point within the Process Limits, usually with a margin 
of safety or reserve (see Section 8.2.4); these are the Normal Operating Conditions.
An indicated value on an instrument is subject to uncertainty5 (i.e., subject to the instrument accuracy). For the true 
condition to remain within Process Limits, at the indicated extremes of the Alert Limits, the instrument’s accuracy 
should give a measurement whose uncertainty is no greater than the difference between the Process and Alert 
Limits. This difference defines the instrument’s minimum accuracy requirement, and is the Instrument Permitted 
Limit.
Using an instrument with an accuracy greater than the Instrument Permitted Limit allows instrument drift while still 
remaining within Process Limits, as illustrated in Figure 8.2.
5	 Accuracy is a characteristic of instruments and uncertainty is a characteristic of measurements.

Page 162	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Figure 8.2: Instrument Permitted Limits
For example, consider a temperature control loop associated with a production process. The Process Limits are 
22°C ± 2°C (71.6°F ± 3.6°F), and Alert Limits are 22°C ± 1°C (71.6°F ± 1.8°F). At the extremes of the Alert Limits, the 
instrument measuring temperature should be accurate to at least ± 0.5°C (± 0.9°F), to guarantee that the temperature 
remains within the Process Limits.
When using the minimum (i.e., poorest) accuracy, calibration may need to be checked more frequently or a higher 
risk of operating outside the Process Limits may need to be accepted, consequently risking product quality. Both 
options have cost implications that often justify using a more accurate instrument. This selection process may be 
executed under a formal risk assessment where criticality of instruments is addressed. For example, instruments of 
higher accuracy may be selected for equipment deemed part of a critical support system, whereas instruments of 
lower accuracy may be selected for equipment that is non-critical.
The instrument manufacturer’s performance claims should be verified. In general, selecting commonly used 
instruments from internationally known suppliers should provide a satisfactory confidence level.
8.3.3	
Location
Instrument sensors measuring the critical process or environmental parameter(s) for a product or component should 
be located at a point representative of the condition to be measured. Ease of calibration should also be considered.
Where separate sensors are used to control and monitor the same CPP, they should be co-located to ensure the 
parameter is equally measured.
8.3.4	
Calibration
The calibration method and its cost should be considered when selecting any instrument. Comprehensive calibration 
guidance should be obtained from the suppliers before an instrument is chosen.
8.4	
Production Process Parameters
The number and diversity of production processes that can be used in sterile product manufacturing facilities are 
such that a comprehensive discussion of their parameters is not practical within the scope of this Guide.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 163
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Detailed knowledge of the production process in question and application of rigorous design and operation review 
methods are necessary to identify appropriate systems of control and monitoring. This can be achieved through 
detailed PAT and application of process control to achieve proper parameters or conditions that mitigate product 
quality issue and avoid impact on patient safety.
8.5	
General Design Issues
Computerized system lifecycle activities, such as specification, design, and verification should be scaled according to:
•	
Potential for system to impact patient safety, product quality, and data integrity (risk assessment)
•	
System complexity and novelty (architecture and categorization of system components)
•	
Outcome of supplier assessment (supplier capability)
Refer to ISPE GAMP® 5 [52] for further details of these considerations and the scaling of lifecycle activities.
The following sections discuss cost effective separation of system functions (i.e., monitoring and control) and system 
choice in the context of typical supplier capabilities.
8.6	
HVAC
8.6.1	
Control System Choice
Commercially available Building Management Systems/Building Automation Systems (BMS/BAS) are encouraged to 
be installed in all facilities to monitor critical facility control systems.
There may be some safety-critical systems that should utilize Distributed Control Systems (DCS) and Programmable 
Logic Controllers (PLC) with Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA); however, these are primarily 
targeted at controlling processes.
HVAC may be monitored and controlled using several control system types. Those designed specifically for HVAC 
include conventional controllers (typically single loop controls) and, more appropriately, BMS/BAS.
When specifying systems to control HVAC, the following should be considered:
•	
HVAC’s industrial nature in cleanroom applications may not justify use of PLC or DCS based solutions; however, 
personnel safety issues may justify their use.
•	
Pharmaceutical HVAC can be controlled satisfactorily using HVAC industry control systems.
Where control is needed for a few simple systems, conventional controls may provide a marginal cost advantage. 
This advantage is offset by the fact that conventional controls cannot be integrated readily into any future BMS/BAS 
demanded by site development.
As the application scale, complexity, and remote monitoring demands increase, the use of BMS/BAS rapidly becomes 
more cost effective.
Monitoring of critical environmental parameters can be accomplished via the Process Control System, which should 
be qualified. The qualification of the BMS/BAS may then become simpler. (See “Use of Building Management 
Systems and Environmental Monitoring Systems in Regulated Environments,” Pharmaceutical Engineering, 
September/October 2005 [53]).

Page 164	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
8.6.2	
Airborne Particle Counting
The act of classification of a space environment, and of monitoring that environment “in operation”, should be 
differentiated:
•	
The method for formal classification is specified in ISO 14644-1 [4]. This standard defines the minimum number 
of sample locations, the minimum sample size at each location, the class limits, and the method for evaluation of 
the data in order to define the class achieved.
	
Note: In the context of sterile product manufacture, EU Annex 1 [1] sets some class limits that are different from 
those found in FDA guidance [3] and ISO 14644-1 [4].
•	
Monitoring may use similar instrumentation; in this case, specific critical or most important locations are 
determined from investigation and studies, and these are monitored to demonstrate the performance of critical 
parts of the controlled environment.
Particle counting instruments (used to measure the airborne non-viable particle concentration) operate by taking a 
sample of the air in the space and measuring the particle concentration by evaluation of scattered light in a special 
optical chamber. Such instruments can measure both the number and size of particles in the size range 0.1 µm to 5.0 
µm. Particle counting systems can be incorporated into a BMS/BAS, and can be configured in different ways:
•	
Single portable instruments are usually located close to the environment being classified or monitored. These 
instruments can be used for both classification and monitoring. Such instruments are suitable for evaluating 
particles in the size range 0.1 µm to 5.0 µm.
•	
Single fixed instruments are connected to multiple sample locations by way of tubing arrays and a manifold 
system. Each location is sampled in turn. The particle counter is connected to a data acquisition system. These 
systems are used for monitoring only. Such instruments are suitable for evaluating particles only in the size range 
0.1 µm to 0.5 µm due to the potential drop out of larger particles in the transport tubing.
•	
Multiple miniature point of use particle counters are each located close to a location to be monitored and 
connected to a data acquisition system. These systems are used for monitoring particles only in the size range 
0.1 µm to 5.0 µm.
Major points to consider when evaluating particle monitoring systems include:
•	
The difficulty of correlating the data from the relatively small number of sample points of a monitoring system 
compared to the larger number of data points used to carry out classification in the “at rest” or “in operation” 
states
•	
Identifying the room “worst case” points and relating them to overall room conditions
•	
Determination of an appropriate sampling frequency for monitoring systems
•	
Management and interpretation of potentially large amounts of data acquired from automated monitoring systems 
to identify problems
•	
Determination of alert and action levels
•	
Procedures to be followed in the event of excursion beyond alert and action levels
•	
Re-evaluation of the sample points if there is a change in the layout of the room

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 165
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
•	
Special attention to be paid to the distance between air collection point and the counter, in terms of:
-	
Inner diameter of connecting tubing
-	
Airflow throughput and the occurrence of turbulences (Reynold numbers)
-	
Impact in the drop out of particles
-	
Material of the tubing (inner surface roughness, electrostatic charge)
-	
Geometry of the flow paths (kinks, obstructions, sharp curves)
Where particle concentrations are very low, monitoring system alert and action levels may be better expressed using 
frequency (pattern) of seeing low counts rather than trying to discriminate between very low numbers.
The 2004 FDA guidance [3] states:
	
“Regular monitoring should be performed during each production shift. We recommend conducting nonviable 
particle monitoring with a remote counting system. These systems are capable of collecting more comprehensive 
data and are generally less invasive than portable particle counters.”
The 2009 EU Annex 1 [1] states:
	
“For Grade A zone, particle monitoring should be undertaken for the full duration of critical processing, including 
equipment assembly, except where justified by contaminants in the process that would damage the particle 
counter or present a hazard, e.g. live organisms or radiological hazards) … It is recommended that a similar 
system be used for Grade B zones although the sample frequency may be decreased.”

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 167
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
