7	 Electrical Services
7.1	
Introduction
This chapter focuses on electrical services that may have GMP implications. It outlines the critical characteristics of 
systems appropriate to the manufacturing environment.
7.2	
General Requirements
When designing, selecting, and installing electrical equipment within aseptic processing areas, GMP considerations 
are limited to ensuring that equipment is cleanable, ledge and crevice free, non-shedding, sealed, and compatible 
with sanitization agents.
The selection and installation of all electrical equipment and wiring should, at a minimum, be in accordance with 
applicable local codes. All electrical components and materials should be compatible with the manufacturing process 
and operations.
Table 7.1: Typical GMP Requirements for Electrical Systems
Although the criteria for equipment appear to be identical from ISO 5/Grade A to ISO 8/Grade C environments, the 
degree of these aspects may differ (e.g., equipment in ISO 5/Grade A environments will require a higher standard). 
Recessed electrical devices may help achieve the standard required in each of these areas.
Sealed components are specified, not only to alleviate the risk of contamination, but also to cope with the different 
pressure regimes of adjacent rooms. In ISO 5/Grade A environments, the term “sealed” refers to being hermetically 
sealed, whereas in ISO 8/Grade C environments, the term “sealed” refers to a high degree of protection against the 
ingress of water and dust.
Electrical equipment within ISO 5/Grade A environments should be kept to an absolute minimum. Any services that 
can achieve their function by being located in an adjacent room or area should be so located. For example, a light 
switch for the room could be located outside the access door in the corridor.
Regarding the manufacturing process, electrical services normally do not affect patient safety and product quality; 
however, for business continuity and ensuring uninterrupted product supply, these systems should be designed in 
accordance with GEP.
Electrical System
Room Classification
Pharmaceutical
ISO 8/Grade C 
Environments
ISO 5/Grade A and ISO 7/
Grade B Environments
Power Distribution
None, outside area
None, outside area
None, outside area
Lighting
Cleanable, ideally non-
shedding
Cleanable and 
sanitizable, minimum 
ledges, non-shedding, 
sealed, crevice free
Cleanable and sanitizable, 
minimum ledges, non-
shedding, sealed, crevice 
free
Outlets and 
Miscellaneous 
Equipment
Cleanable, ideally non-
shedding
Cleanable and 
sanitizable, minimum 
ledges, non-shedding, 
sealed, crevice free
Cleanable and sanitizable, 
minimum ledges, non-
shedding, sealed, crevice 
free

Page 152	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
7.3	
Control System Power
The prevalence of digital controls in HVAC and process equipment requires strong consideration of reliable and 
continuous power to the control units. Considerations should be made with regard to:
•	
How multiple power sources affect equipment (e.g., equipment may have multiple power sources, such as line 
voltage motors, or the control system may operate on Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) while the fan motor 
operates on three phase line voltage)
•	
Providing for orderly shutdown or planned restarts on loss of main equipment power
•	
Programming of the systems to prevent tripping of main breakers on simultaneous restart of all equipment
•	
Power needs for associated instruments
7.4	
Power Distribution
Both reliability and stability of the power supply are important.
The impact of surges, dips, or total power loss on the overall manufacturing process, HVAC/mechanical services, or 
individual equipment items, should be studied to determine risk and effects. Generally, the impact is economic (loss of 
production capacity). If these impacts are considerable, then a standby generator or UPS should be considered.
For HVAC systems, momentary power losses may be significant; impact could be mediated if there are provisions for 
fan rotation to continue and room pressures are maintained within acceptance criteria for short periods. The impact of 
any power loss potentially affecting the sterility of the product should be evaluated.
Power for monitoring of DP is a critical issue, as loss of differential or the ability to monitor differential pressure during 
outages may result in significant product quality impact.
Consideration for UPS or emergency generators can be considered for critical processes, equipment, and systems 
that may provide, maintain, or record critical parameters as part of GMP operations.
Power quality is equally important as precision equipment has a narrow bandwidth to operate within. Special 
consideration should be given to:
•	
Power factor correction
•	
Phase balance
•	
Harmonics from digital equipment
7.5	
Lighting
There should be good uniform lighting levels in all manufacturing areas. Minimum levels in the personnel work areas 
should be no less than 500 lux, one meter from the floor.
Light fixtures in manufacturing areas should:
•	
Be designed and selected to be cleanable, non-shedding, ledge free, or sealed, as appropriate for the different 
classifications of areas

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 153
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
•	
Be arranged to prevent accumulation of dust, and be air tight and sealed to ensure no foreign matter is released 
into the manufacturing environment
•	
Be located so they are not directly above the work area when the manufacturing process is open to the room
•	
Have sealing properties which can withstand water jet pressure in wash down areas
•	
Be constructed of materials that are compatible with room cleaning agents, which may be corrosive (stainless 
steel or aluminum fixtures may be considered appropriate because they are non-shedding and resistive to 
corrosive environments)
In ISO 5/Grade A environments, recess mounted or teardrop fixtures may be appropriate. The installation of surface 
mounted lighting in unidirectional ISO 5/Grade A airflow zones may interfere with airflow patterns and should be 
avoided.
In ISO 7/Grade B environments, recess mounted fixtures are beneficial because they can be installed through the 
ceiling, with maintenance access provided from a walkable ceiling or floor (facility room) above.
Lamps or fixtures, maintained from within the room, may be changed on an annual basis to reduce the effects of 
unplanned disturbances to production due to occasional lamp failures. Considerations for lighting include:
•	
Redundant lighting units
•	
Upgraded light types (e.g., T-5 fluorescent or Light Emitting Diode (LED)) which allow for longer life and reduced 
maintenance intervention
•	
Adjustable lighting (adjusted in lux output) for night time operation, as increased light levels have demonstrated 
to improve night time work performance—if increasing light output, consideration for product impact (photo 
stability) should be evaluated
If color rendition and intensity of lighting equipment used for inspection, cleaning, etc., is considered critical, 
appropriate provisions should be made.
Emergency lighting should be provided in accordance with applicable local codes. Combining emergency fixtures with 
normal fixtures helps to limit the amount of electrical equipment on ceilings or walls.
Since priority needs to be given to the HVAC systems (e.g., air supply diffusers) and services to process equipment, 
lighting fixtures cannot always be positioned to achieve ideal lighting distribution. Therefore, careful coordination of 
ceiling services should be considered at the design stage.
7.6	
Hazardous Environments
The selection and installation of electrical equipment within hazardous environments (due to dust or solvent vapor) 
should comply with applicable local codes. Classification of an area to require explosion proof electrical equipment 
is likely to be very rare, because of the high air change requirement and monitoring of the area; however, design 
should also take into consideration loss of HVAC fan rotation and reduction of room air changes (e.g., failure mode 
operations with regards to volatiles).
Hazardous area classification is not a GMP issue, but the class of room may affect the location of production 
equipment and it also may affect the selection of the electrical equipment. Some electrical equipment may suit a 
higher class of area in terms of cleanliness.

Page 154	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Electrical equipment within these areas should be kept to an absolute minimum. Any devices that can achieve their 
function while located in an adjacent room should be located externally and do not need to be classified.
Provisions should be made in these areas to dissipate possible static build-up on personnel, equipment, and 
materials. Conductive floors should be installed, if necessary.
7.7	
Wiring
If possible, wiring and wiring accessories should be hidden within the building fabric to improve cleanliness, 
particularly in higher classification areas. Recessed boxes also would be appropriate in these instances. The number 
of penetrations through walls, ceilings, or floors for services to equipment should be minimized.
Where wiring is installed on the surface, installation should minimize the accumulation of foreign matter and allow 
easy and effective cleaning.
Enclosing wiring in fully sealed conduit or trunking may improve the level of cleanliness and prevent air leakage from 
a classified room. Trunking, which is not sealed, may appear clean but act as a reservoir for contaminants. Sealing 
of conduits and trunking may be necessary to reduce the risk of contamination from outside and loss of air from 
pressurized rooms.
Lengths of wiring to mobile equipment should be kept to a minimum and should be kept off the floor.
Where necessary, as part of the process operations, wiring and glands should withstand washing.
7.8	
Door Interlocks
Electrical interlocks for the doors of airlocks or changing rooms assist in maintaining pressure regimes and GMP 
practices. Alternatively, an audible local alarm could be generated to indicate if more than one airlock door is open at 
the same time. If interlocks are provided, override features should be included in case of emergency.
Additionally, provisions should include electronic access control for rooms that require restricted access for aseptic 
operations (e.g., ISO 5/Grade A). It is recommended that door interlocks are verified as part of facility commissioning/
qualification per GEP.
7.9	
Outlets and Miscellaneous Equipment
Electrical components should be designed and selected to be:
•	
Cleanable
•	
Non-shedding
•	
Ledge and crevice-free, or sealed
•	
Appropriate to the classification (HVAC grade) of area
Fittings in process areas should be arranged to prevent accumulation of dust and be air tight and sealed, to ensure 
no foreign matter is released into the manufacturing environment. Recess mounting of fittings in these areas provides 
distinct benefits.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 155
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Aspirated fire detection, or systems able to detect fire within the HVAC extract systems for ISO 5/Grade A 
environments, may avoid installing conventional fire/smoke detection equipment within the room. Flashing lights, in 
place of conventional sounders, also may be beneficial. Additionally, source specific cleanroom appropriate sprinkler 
heads may be used for fire suppression systems.
Sealing membranes on loudspeaker systems located within ISO 5/Grade A and ISO 7/Grade B environments should 
be considered. A membrane in the wall between two adjoining rooms may provide acceptable voice communication 
between those rooms. Consideration for use of appropriate cleanable/sealed wireless communication should be 
given.
Insect light traps should be placed strategically outside of cleanroom areas to reduce contamination risks from flying 
insects.
Since sinks and drains are not permitted in aseptic processing areas (ISO 5/Grade A and ISO 7/Grade B), an 
electronically heated (bio-control) trap beneath sinks in ISO 8/Grade C environments could serve as an alternative to 
routine chemical sanitization.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 157
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
