9.5	
Equipment Design for Inside an Isolator or RABS
Equipment should be designed with the ergonomics of operating through glove ports in mind. The use of robotics or 
manipulators should be part of the design of isolators and RABS. This helps to minimize the potential for microbial 
contamination, by assuring better protection of the sterile product during aseptic processing. Considerations for 
equipment design inside an isolator or RABS include:
•	
Format parts should be accessible via glove ports and the change should be designed as a one hand operation 
and tool-less, if possible.
•	
Tools, such as forceps, should be used to separate the glove from the process.
•	
Critical areas, where product is exposed to the surrounding, should not be covered with any parts or moving 
equipment, to allow proper UAF over the product.
•	
Large components (e.g., stopper bowls) should be perforated to allow the airflow to penetrate as much as 
possible.
•	
Obstructed surfaces should be avoided.
•	
The interface of the equipment to the isolator should be gas tight. Penetrations (e.g., shafts and drives) should 
be sealed.
•	
If the equipment requires shaft movements up and down through the base plate, such shafts should be protected 
by either a specific dynamic air barrier or bellows, to avoid ingress of contamination during operation.
•	
Parts that undergo maintenance should be designed to be external to the ISO 5/Grade A environment.

Page 180	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
•	
The use of automated equipment should be considered, where feasible, to minimize human involvement within 
the controlled environment.
•	
Half-suits may help operators to access equipment. Half-suits should be of good ergonomic design, cleanable, 
able to be decontaminated, and should undergo integrity testing.
•	
For isolators and RABS that are decontaminated by gassing or fogging using sporicidal agents, the following 
should be considered for exposed equipment materials:
-	
Chemical/corrosion resistance against decontamination agents used
-	
No catalytic effect on decontamination agents
-	
Potential impact on the decontamination efficiency of the surface structure of materials
The surface structure of materials can have an impact on the decontamination efficiency. Material studies should 
be performed to show the impact on the D-value of different surface materials. The results should be taken into 
consideration when validating decontamination efficiency inside an isolator (see study cited in US FDA guidance [3], 
Reference 13: Sigwarth and Stark, 2003 [56]).
The control system for the filling equipment should be configured to permit slow motion movement during 
decontamination of the isolator, to expose all the equipment surfaces to the decontamination agent.
Ergonomic design should allow access for all surfaces to be cleaned effectively, prior to gaseous surface 
decontamination. Before a decontamination cycle begins, the isolator should be mechanically clean (and dry, 
depending on the decontaminating agent). This may necessitate a manual cleaning and a drying step prior to 
decontamination.
9.5.1	
Component and Equipment Transfers
Transfer systems are used to transfer containers, product, monitoring material, and tools in and out of the enclosure. 
Ingress of contamination through transfer systems should be avoided. Weaknesses of transfer systems (e.g., ring of 
concern in RTP) should be considered. Proper manipulation and suitably trained operators can help to control risk 
associated with transfer systems.
Types of transfer systems include:
•	
Dry heat tunnels to sterilize glass containers in-line into the ISO 5/Grade A environment
•	
Electron beam (e-beam) tunnels to sterilize heat sensitive products in-line (e.g., pre-sterilized syringes in tubs)
•	
RTPs designed for batch transfer of externally sterilized materials (e.g., filling pumps, stoppers, single-use 
assemblies)
-	
A wide variety of sterilizable containers or bag systems allow sterilizing goods to transfer off-line, either with 
steam (autoclave), ethylene oxide, or gamma irradiation
-	
Typical transfer applications include ready-to-use stoppers, filling pumps/kits, microbiological sampling 
materials, and tools
•	
Liquid transfer systems to connect bulk containers to the filling system inside an isolator
•	
Transfer air locks, with the use of VHP as a surface decontamination method, to transfer heat sensitive materials, 
non-direct product contact parts, and bagged sterilized goods

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 181
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
•	
Special consideration should be given to all interfaces for product transfer. If supply material is introduced from 
a lower grade area into a higher grade area by shedding an outer layer, an additional bioburden reduction step 
should be applied.
Other transfer methods are used in the industry. Table 9.2 provides an overview of the transfer method options, 
applicability for batch or continuous transfer, and the achievable log reduction. The log reduction provided in this table 
is indicative only. Any log reduction should be proven during validation.
Table 9.2: Overview of Transfer Method Options
When selecting appropriate transfer methods, the bioburden reduction each method provides should be considered. 
For isolator applications, a 6-log reduction is typically required (a minimum of 4-log can be satisfactory for very low 
bioburden surfaces); for RABS, a 3-log reduction is typically acceptable.
When transfers involve toxic compounds, a thorough risk assessment is required to define appropriate cleaning 
procedures.
The efficiency of aseptic connectors should be validated during media fill.
9.5.2	
Glove Systems and Half-Suits
The type of glove to be used depends on the application and on the replacement cost of different assemblies. Gloves 
can be:
•	
One-piece gloves
•	
Two-piece gloves with sleeves
•	
Half-suits with arms and gloves (if required by the process)
Inspection, cleaning, and disinfection should be considered for gloves and half-suits mounted in both isolators and 
RABS. Maintenance can be difficult for a half-suit, as it has a large surface area. Care should be taken when cleaning 
and integrity testing half-suits.
Gloves, gloves with sleeves or half-suit system are considered the weakest part of the system and can develop leaks. 
Automation of the process can minimize operator interventions that necessitate the use of gloves and half-suits. The 
impact of any leakage requires thorough investigation and evaluation.
Transfer Method
Batch/Continuous
Safety
No Treatment
Continuous
? = very low
Sporicidal (sporicidal tunnel)
Batch (Continuous)
~ 2- to 3-log reduction 
Pulse Light/UV
Batch
~ 3- to 4-log reduction
Plasma Chamber
Batch
> 4-log reduction 
VHP Airlock
Batch
> 6-log reduction
Dry Heat Tunnel
Continuous
> 6-log reduction
Steam Autoclave
Batch
> 6-log reduction
E-beam
Continuous 
> 6-log reduction

Page 182	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
Occurrences of leakages can be reduced by using robust materials in conjunction with appropriate maintenance 
and inspection regimes. The use of a thin sterile glove liner worn by the operator, as part of a gowning regime and 
coupled with hand disinfection, may protect the glove from bio-contamination and reduce risk in case of damage.
Bioburden data may be collected on the non-process side of the gloves, for both isolators and RABS. All media 
should be removed from the glove after sampling.
Daily visual inspection and regular physical glove testing should demonstrate that the gloves retain their integrity and 
are, therefore, acceptable for continued use. This can significantly reduce the risk of an undetected pinhole (Gessler 
et al., 2011 [57]).
The physical test is typically performed on open isolator/RABS doors before the enclosure is closed and 
decontaminated. Commercially available test systems typically use the pressure decay method, measuring a 
pressure drop inside the glove/sleeve, or the constant pressure method, measuring the leak rate as a flow. Physical 
test methods cannot detect holes measuring down to several micrometers and, therefore, cannot completely prevent 
microbiological contamination.
Studies show that a visual test by a trained operator can detect holes on white gloves with a high precision [57]. This 
is a convenient method and should be performed frequently.
A preventive glove replacement program can help to avoid sudden out of specification results. How frequently gloves, 
sleeves, and half-suits need to be replaced depends on the frequency of use, the cleaning agents used, and the 
mechanical stress applied during the process.
Cleaning of Gloves
Gloves are a potential source to transport contamination from one point to another; therefore, a proper cleaning 
process should be applied. Cleaning has the following purposes:
•	
New gloves are typically covered with a lubricant layer caused by the manufacturing process. This layer 
can cover contamination and prevent an efficient decontamination process. New gloves need to be cleaned 
thoroughly before being installed.
•	
In the case of a pinhole, a high bioburden load on the outside of the glove may increase the risk of contamination 
on the inside; therefore, gloves need to be manually wiped and cleaned regularly on the inside and the outside.
•	
As gloves, especially finger tips, are touching different surfaces inside an isolator/RABS, the risk of enabling 
bioburden contamination can be significant. A regular manual wipe and cleaning process needs to be applied.
9.5.3	
Background Environment
The classification of the background environment in which the enclosure is located should be based on a risk 
assessment that considers the design choice and operational characteristics of the chosen system and its associated 
transfer mechanisms and discharge ports (e.g., mouseholes).
For a globally compliant facility, the isolator background should be ISO 8/Grade C. A Grade D environment which 
is classified as ISO 8 “in operation” as well as “at rest” is also possible. Quality control isolators providing aseptic 
conditions for test environments (e.g., sterility test) with no dynamically sealed openings to the surrounding room 
can be situated in CNC areas. CNC spaces should be described as having controlled access with a regular cleaning 
schedule, but they are not monitored for particulate or microbial growth.
RABS designs require an aseptic processing environment external to the enclosure, typically ISO 7/Grade B.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 183
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
9.5.4	
Background Monitoring
Monitoring of cleanliness classes should be applied as specified for the relevant ISO/Grade classification. The 
monitoring efforts with isolators are normally significantly lower than for RABS, due to the reduced foot print and the 
surrounding environment being a cleaner grade for RABS as compared to isolators.
9.5.5	
Enclosure Classification
The inner environment should meet ISO 5/Grade A.
9.6	
Decontamination Cycle Development (Isolators)
9.6.1	
Cleaning and Surface Decontamination
Before any bio-decontamination is performed, an efficient cleaning needs to be applied to critical surfaces. Cleaning 
can either be performed manually or, if applicable, with automated WIP/CIP cycles.
The design of the enclosure and all integrated equipment needs to be compatible with cleaning processes and 
cleaning agents.
Cleaning validation needs to prove the efficiency of the cleaning process and its ability to avoid cross-contamination 
or exposure of hazardous substances to the surrounding when opening the enclosure. Removal of cleaning residuals 
after the cleaning process should be considered, as they may impact bio-decontamination efficiency or may be of 
concern to the product handled inside the isolator or RABS. Failure or incomplete cleaning can prevent exposure of 
hydrogen peroxide and may lead to failure of the bio-decontamination cycle.
Cycle development should be performed to establish the parameters and bio-decontamination capabilities and limits 
that reflect the different volumes, contours, and loading patterns within an isolator or RABS. Validation should prove 
that developed parameters are accurate.
The necessary level of bio-decontamination should be determined on the basis of risk assessment and analysis. For 
further information on a method for decontamination determination, refer to Sigwarth and Moirandat, 2000 [58].
To measure the decontamination efficiency inside the isolator, biological indicators (Geobacillus stearothermophilus) 
are typically used to demonstrate a 6-log reduction during validation and revalidation.
In isolators, surface bio-decontamination is performed after cleaning and closing the enclosure. This is typically a fully 
automated process using vaporized or fogged hydrogen peroxide. After achieving the specified bio-decontamination 
efficiency, the bio-decontamination agent is aerated out of the isolator by either venting the isolator with HEPA filtered 
fresh air or by using catalytic converters to break down the hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen.
In RABS, bio-decontamination can be performed manually with sporicidal agents via open doors. In newer RABS, 
automated decontamination systems using vaporized or fogged hydrogen peroxide may be used. In RABS 
applications, typically only a 3 to 4-log reduction is demonstrated.
The main difference between an isolator and a RABS is that a RABS is located in an ISO 7/Grade B environment 
and, therefore, the decontamination also needs to include the surrounding environment.
Although bio-decontamination is performed on the isolator and RABS, the indirect product contact parts (e.g., stopper 
tracks) should preferably be SIP or autoclaved. Where such parts cannot be sterilized in an autoclave (e.g., vibratory 
feeding bowls), a hydrogen peroxide decontamination system can be utilized after a thorough manual cleaning 
has been performed. The process should be validated and achieve a 6-log reduction of an appropriate challenge 
organism.

Page 184	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
9.6.2	
Bio-Decontamination Systems
There are several types of bio-decontamination systems available for use with isolators or RABS. Methods using 
vaporized or fogged hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) are most commonly used. Other methods such as chlorine dioxide 
(ClO2) or nitrogen dioxide (NO2) are available.7 The following criteria should be considered when selecting the bio-
decontamination method:
•	
Resistance of surface materials to the selected decontamination agent
•	
Decontamination efficiency on all surfaces inside the enclosure
•	
Integrity of the enclosure based on the Threshold Limit Value (TLV) of the decontamination agent (e.g., 0.5 ppm 
for H2O2, 0.1 ppm for ClO2)
•	
Ability to aerate or neutralize the decontamination agent after the process
As all bio-decontamination systems target a bio-load reduction on surfaces, an individual validation needs to be 
performed to prove the efficiency of the decontamination cycle.
Precautions should be taken at the design stage to define load volume, configuration, and packing materials. 
Particular attention should be paid to areas where there is poor vapor circulation and poor accessibility for prior 
cleaning (e.g., masked surfaces such as beneath bottles and component packs, dead ends caused by the presence 
of sensors and pipework).
9.6.3	
Surface Finishes
Considerations for surface finishes include:
•	
Cleanability of the surfaces before and after the process, to allow a proper cleaning in order to avoid cross-
contamination. The cleaning process is product dependent and may vary from simple manual wipe down to fully 
automated CIP with suitable cleaning agents
•	
Guaranteeing an efficient bio-decontamination with vaporized, fogged, or gaseous decontamination agents, 
as cracks and crevices might shadow potential biological contamination that may not be exposed to the bio-
decontaminant. Studies show different D-values of the same type spores on different surface materials (see 
study cited in US FDA guidance [3], Reference 13: Sigwarth and Stark, 2003 [56]). This should be considered 
during validation.
9.6.4	
Removal of the Decontaminant – Aeration
The aeration phase after the decontamination cycle is important to reduce the level of decontamination agent to 
acceptable levels to expose to the environment (e.g., through open mouseholes), as well as to the product. Some 
products are very sensitive to oxidation; in such cases it might be necessary to aerate the inside of the enclosure 
down to low levels (parts per billion (ppb)). Aeration studies may be required to avoid impact of decontamination 
residuals in isolators, as well as RABS and cleanrooms.
Aeration is typically achieved by diluting the inside of the enclosure with HEPA filtered air until the specified residual 
levels have been reached. Fresh air can be taken from the surrounding room or provided by makeup air units to 
aerate the decontamination agent out through the roof. Catalytic converters allow aerating of the enclosure in a 
circulation loop and can provide significant HVAC cost savings. The efficiency of the catalytic converter material can 
have a significant impact on achievable aeration times.
7	 Older technologies using formaldehyde or peracetic acid are no longer the preferred choice, due to the known carcinogenic and corrosive effects.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 185
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Aeration time studies should consider that decontamination agents can be adsorbed by some materials, such as 
gloves and other plastic materials. Packed materials (e.g., steam sterilized components packed in Tyvek® paper) 
should also be considered, as the decontamination agent may penetrate the packaging material and aeration can be 
more challenging.
The aeration cycle should be performed at a positive differential pressure to the surrounding environment.
9.6.5	
Airflow Modeling
Air handling systems are fundamental to the performance of decontamination processes. Air handling systems should 
provide:
•	
Even distribution of the decontamination vapor
•	
Efficient aeration
The design of an air handling system should consider half-suits, gauntlets, wrist collars, and gloves in regard to 
areas likely to be shadowed from the decontaminant vapor. Frames inserted into the suit or gauntlet can ensure 
the garment is fully deployed. Gauntlets, wrist collars, and gloves, including fingers, should be fully extended and 
separated, and should not mask any surface during decontamination.
9.7	
Environmental Monitoring
Environmental monitoring schedules for isolators and RABS are similar to those for a classified cleanroom. The 
aseptic quality of the sampling apparatus should be considered, in order to avoid false contamination of the sample. 
Non-invasive sampling is preferred, for example:
•	
Sampling heads inside and equipment located outside the containment
•	
Use of equipment exposed to the same decontamination regime as the isolator
Use of environmental monitoring equipment should be validated to ensure the results are comparable to those 
obtained by local sampling, because of the potential for microorganism capture in the sampling tubing. In addition, 
swab samples and contact plates can provide useful data. Environmental monitoring positions should be determined 
during ergonomic studies for both isolators and RABS, to ensure that manipulations can be performed without 
compromising the integrity of the containment.
It may be possible to reduce the number of sample locations and/or frequency, depending on the level of separation 
of the operator from the process. This should be supported by a risk assessment.
The transfer of materials and liquids to and from the enclosure can present a significant challenge to the sterility of 
the system, in addition to the background challenge of the surrounding environment.
Additionally, the special requirements of glove systems should be considered, especially since a number of operators 
using the same gloves presents a challenge to the hygiene of the glove system.

Page 186	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities
9.8	
Leak Rate
The integrity of the enclosure should prevent:
•	
Hazardous decontamination agents to escape during the decontamination process
•	
Hazardous product escape during production
•	
Ingress of contamination that could harm the product quality
During the decontamination process, the isolator needs to be kept in constant positive pressure to the surrounding 
environment. A potential leak in the enclosure can generate an increased concentration in the surroundings. The 
maximum allowable size of such a leak depends on the following parameters:
•	
Differential pressure
•	
Concentration inside enclosure
•	
Volume of the surrounding area
•	
Fresh air exchanges of the surrounding area
•	
Acceptable concentration for an operator
Where hazardous products are used, similar considerations (i.e., those for decontamination agents) can be applied 
to determine an acceptable leak rate during production. Only airborne contamination can escape. In enclosures with 
UAF, only surfaces on the downstream side of the airflow and return ducts are exposed to such contamination.
The ingress of contamination can be prevented by providing a continuous positive pressure to the enclosure. Airflow 
around mouseholes may generate turbulence and cause inflow of air; therefore, mouseholes are usually protected by 
HEPA filtered airflow on the outside of the enclosure.
9.8.1	
Leak Rate Test Methods
Leak rates can be determined by closing the enclosure with gas tight flaps and applying a pressure drop test or a 
constant pressure test. Both tests are typically performed at double operating pressure.
As for aseptic isolators that are not in contact with potent or hazardous products and for RABS applications, the only 
risk is the leakage of decontamination agent during decontamination. Continuous monitoring of the decontamination 
agent concentration in the surrounding room can be sufficient, if openings (such as doors) are position controlled and 
gloves are leak tested individually.
During installation, a tracer gas (such as helium or ammonia) or soap solutions can be used to identify a leak. 
Although these methods may be an efficient way to find a leak, they are not useful for routine operation.
9.9	
Maintenance
An adequate, condition-based, preventative maintenance program should be used to assist in sterility assurance.
Ergonomic modeling should consider the requirements of maintenance personnel who perform ongoing running 
adjustments to the equipment. Designs should consider the maintenance aspects of the enclosure, its support 
services, and also the equipment contained therein. Provision of maintenance access panels should be considered.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 187
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
Maintenance should also consider:
•	
Filters
•	
Gaskets
•	
Seals
•	
Items specific to an enclosure, such as door seals, transfer port gaskets, and the attachment of glove rings to 
glazing panels
HEPA filters and gloves should be replaced on a regular and scheduled basis, along with other components, as part 
of a maintenance program.
Protocols should be developed for the calibration of sensors on an ongoing basis. Test equipment to calibrate 
dedicated probes (e.g., temperature and humidity sensors, pressure transducers) should be provided.
Maintenance personnel should use PPE for maintenance of critical areas where hazardous substances might be 
present or could not be cleaned by another method.
9.10	
Training
Reliance only on the enclosure to preserve the aseptic processing environment may not be sufficient and may give a 
false sense of security. The selection, training, and motivation of personnel are fundamental to GMPs.
Operators should be given a thorough understanding of how to operate the control system and perform aseptic 
operations within the enclosure. Operators are required to have knowledge of transfer devices, decontamination 
systems, and their interrelationship with the overall aseptic process.
Operators should adhere to aseptic techniques in performing manipulations for any aseptic process. Failure events 
and how operators are to react should be considered during training.
Operator procedures should not permit inappropriate manipulation by gloves or gauntlets in the critical zone and 
should stress the use of sterile tools during aseptic operations. Training should consist of both theoretical and 
practical aspects, concluding with a formal, documented assessment and authorization to work with the system.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 189
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities	
