B. Provisions from the drug CGMPs specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b)(2) 

This section provides a brief description of the provisions from the drug CGMPs with 

which single-entity and co-packaged combination product manufacturers must demonstrate 
compliance when using the device QS regulation-based streamlined approach established under 
21 CFR 4.4(b)(2), including considerations specific to applying these requirements to 
combination products.  This discussion is not meant to be a comprehensive analysis, but rather to 
help manufacturers—particularly device manufacturers, who may be less familiar with drug 
CGMPs—understand the purpose and basic elements of the provisions of the drug CGMPs 
specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b)(2), as well as to direct such manufacturers to additional guidance. 

The specified provisions of the drug CGMPs include requirements for testing and other 

verification procedures for batches or lots, whether of drug components, drug containers and 
closures, drug constituent parts, or the whole combination product.  Combination product 
manufacturers should establish procedures defining a “batch” or “lot” in all phases of production 
and describe all batch and lot numbering systems used for incoming material, in-process 
material, and finished products.  These procedures allow manufacturers to connect specific 
batches or lots of constituent parts, components, and in-process material to the specific batches 
or lots of the combination product for which they are used.  These procedures enable traceability 
of sampling and testing, packaging, and labeling activities, and can be important when assessing 
and responding to issues including complaints and adverse events.  Master production and 
control records should be designed to enable this traceability.  An explanation of batch and lot 
definitions, controls, and tracking should be available for review on inspection.  

1.  Testing and approval or rejection of drug product components, containers, and 

closures (21 CFR 211.84) 

Drug product components, containers, and closures must be tested in accordance with 21 
CFR 211.84.  A drug component is any ingredient intended for use in the manufacture of a drug 
product, including those that may not appear in the drug product.76  A container closure system is 
the sum of packaging components that together contain and protect the drug product.  This 
includes primary packaging components and also secondary packaging components if the latter 
are intended to provide additional protection to the drug product.77  Examples of packaging 
components are ampules, vials, screw caps, stoppers, and stopper overseals.  As discussed in 
section III.C.3, container closure systems and elements of container closure systems may also be 
regulated as devices.     

Combination product manufacturers do not need to demonstrate compliance with this 

provision for device constituent parts or materials used in the manufacture of a device constituent 
part, unless the device constituent part is also the drug container or closure or a part thereof.  For 
example, for a CGMP operating system established in accordance with 21 CFR 4.4(b)(2) (device 

76 See 21 CFR 210.3(b)(3). 
77 See the Guidance for Industry on Container Closure Systems for Packaging Human Drugs and Biologics: 
Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls Documentation (May 1999). 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

QS regulation-based streamlined approach), if materials are used solely for manufacture of a 
device constituent part that is not part of the drug container or closure (e.g., a co-packaged 
device), the manufacturer need only demonstrate compliance with applicable provisions of part 
820 to show appropriate control of such materials for that device constituent part (including 21 
CFR 820.30, 820.50, 820.80, and 820.86). 

21 CFR 211.84 details how to sample, test, examine, and accept or reject drug product 
components, containers, and closures.  In lieu of such testing, 21 CFR 211.84 allows for some 
reliance on a supplier’s report of analysis, provided that certain identity testing is conducted and 
that the reliability of the supplier’s analysis is established by the manufacturer through 
appropriate validation of the testing results at appropriate intervals.  These duties augment and 
elaborate upon acceptance activity requirements expressly established under 21 CFR 820.80.  
Accordingly, if a facility already has 21 CFR 820.80-based acceptance procedures, it would be 
appropriate to provide for compliance with 21 CFR 211.84 requirements by augmenting these 
existing procedures as needed to incorporate 21 CFR 211.84 compliant measures. 

Each lot of drug components, containers, and closures must be withheld from use until it 
has been sampled, tested, or examined, as appropriate, and released for use by the quality control 
unit.78,  The samples collected for each lot must be representative of the entire lot.79  These 
representative samples must be collected and tested or examined in accordance with the 
procedures specified in 21 CFR 211.84.  These procedures require, among other things, 
appropriate sampling technique to prevent contamination of the sampled component or of other 
materials.80  In addition, the number of containers to sample and the amount of material to be 
taken from each container must be based on appropriate criteria (e.g., component variability, 
confidence levels, degree of precision desired, past quality history of the supplier, and the 
quantity needed for analysis).81, 82 

2.  Calculation of Yield (21 CFR 211.103) 

Actual yields and percentages of theoretical yield for the drug constituent part(s) of a 

combination product must be determined as described in 21 CFR 211.103.  Excess or low yields 
may suggest problems in the production process, including equipment failure, that may affect 
product quality and that may not be discovered, or not be discovered as quickly, using sample-
based release testing alone.  Actual yield discrepancies outside of established and documented 
allowable variation from theoretical yield should be investigated.    

78 See 21 CFR 211.84(a). 
79 See 21 CFR 211.84(b). 
80 See 21 CFR 211.84(c). 
81 See 21 CFR 211.84(b). 
82 Some references that may be useful for sampling by variables and sampling by attributes include “American 
Standards for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard E2709, Standard Practice for Demonstrating Capability to 
Comply with an Acceptance Procedure” and “ASTM Standard E2334, Standard Practice for Setting an Upper 
Confidence Bound For a Fraction or Number of Non-conforming Items, or a Rate of Occurrence for Non-
conformities, Using Attribute Data, When there is a Zero Response in the Sample,” respectively. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Yield calculation requirements under 21 CFR 211.103 apply to the drug constituent parts 

of combination products.  Data on the number of device constituent parts and components used 
and lost during the manufacture of a combination product may be necessary to ensure 
appropriate control of the manufacturing process in accordance with 21 CFR 211.100 or 21 CFR 
820.70, but yield calculation in accordance with 21 CFR 211.103 is not required for device 
constituent parts.  However, problems with the device constituent part during combination 
product manufacturing may affect drug yield and result in further investigation.  For example, 
prefilled syringes that are rejected due to nonconformity of the syringe needle may result in 
corresponding loss of drug from the batch/lot.  Any loss would be captured as part of the yield 
calculations for the drug constituent part, and investigation of the cause of that loss should 
identify the manufacturing problem that is leading to these device nonconformities.     

Yield determinations must be made at the conclusion of each appropriate phase of 

manufacturing, processing, packaging, and holding for the drug constituent part(s) and for the 
combination product as a whole.83  Accordingly, calculation of yield should be determined at 
each phase at which component, in-process material, or product loss may occur, including during 
the formulation of the drug prior to incorporation into the combination product, during 
incorporation into the combination product (e.g., filling or coating), and, possibly, during the 
packaging process.  These calculations must be performed by one person and independently 
verified by a second person, unless the yield is calculated by automated equipment in accordance 
with section 21 CFR 211.68, in which case it must be independently verified by one person.84    

For each appropriate phase of the manufacturing process performed, the formula used 

and the data generated for the yield calculation for the phase should be documented.  For 
manufacturers operating under a device QS regulation-based system, documentation of yield 
calculations may be incorporated into existing part 820 documentation (for example, as part of 
the device history record, 21 CFR 820.184).  These records should include actual yields, 
percentages of theoretical yields, and the maximum and minimum percentages of theoretical 
yield beyond which investigation is required for the drug constituent part, including as it is 
processed and combined with the other constituent part(s) of the combination product.   

If a third party is manufacturing the drug for the combination product, that manufacturer 
is responsible for complying with the calculation of yield requirement at the appropriate phases 
of the drug manufacturing process it performs, but the combination product manufacturer is 
responsible for ensuring that the supplier satisfies these requirements, as a part of the 
combination product manufacturer’s purchasing controls for its product in accordance with 21 
CFR 820.50.   

3.  Tamper-evident packaging requirements for over-the-counter human drug 

products (21 CFR 211.132)  

Manufacturers of OTC combination products must comply with the requirements of 21 

CFR 211.132.  The required controls include tamper-evident packaging and labeling alerting 

83 See 21 CFR 211.103. 
84 See 21 CFR 211.103. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

customers to these protective features of the product’s packaging.  These controls are important 
to help improve the security of OTC combination product packaging and help ensure the safety 
and effectiveness of OTC combination products.   

For single-entity combination products, tamper-evident packaging requirements apply to 
the packaging for the combination product as a whole.  For co-packaged combination products, 
these requirements can be met through appropriate packaging of the drug constituent part(s) 
within the larger co-package so long as such an approach is otherwise permissible under the 
packaging and labeling requirements applicable to that combination product. 

Certain combination products may be exempt from OTC tamper-evident packaging 

requirements85 (e.g., toothpaste co-packaged with a toothbrush) or from bearing a statement of 
tamper-evident features on the package86 (e.g., aerosol saline nasal spray). 

An exemption from tamper-evident packaging and labeling requirements for an OTC 

combination product may be requested in accordance with 21 CFR 211.132(d).  If the 
manufacturer makes changes to packaging and labeling of an approved OTC product to comply 
with the requirements of 21 CFR 211.132, it must notify the lead center for the combination 
product before distributing it.87  

4.  Expiration dating (21 CFR 211.137) 

21 CFR 211.137 helps ensure that drug products (drug constituent parts in the case of 

combination products) meet applicable standards of identity, strength, quality, and purity at the 
time of use, by requiring that the product labeling bear an expiration date.  This date must take 
into account any storage conditions stated in the labeling and be based on appropriate stability 
testing as described in 21 CFR 211.166 (See section IV.B.6).88  The expiration dating also 
should take into account any other applicable shelf-life considerations (e.g., for a product that is 
to be provided sterile, the length of time that its packaging material can be ensured to retain its 
integrity and, thereby, maintain a sterile barrier).  In some cases, the drug constituent part might 
not have an expiration date because current regulations exempt it from this requirement.89  
Similarly, some device constituent parts may not have expiration dates. 

When expiration dating is required, the constituent parts of combination products may 

have individual expiration dates or an expiration date for the entire combination product may be 
appropriate.  Generally, when constituent parts of a co-packaged combination product can be 
used independently, expiration dating should be addressed separately for each constituent part.  
If a single expiration date is listed for a co-packaged combination product, this date should be the 
earliest expiration date/shortest shelf-life for any constituent part.  The expiration date for a 
combination product may be shorter than the expiration date or shelf life for its constituent 

85 See 21 CFR 211.132(b)(1). 
86 See 21 CFR 211.132(c)(1). 
87 See 21 CFR 211.132(e).  
88 See 21 CFR 211.137(b).  
89 See 21 CFR 211.137. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

part(s) if marketed independently.  Reasons for a shorter expiration period could include 
interactions between the constituent parts when combined, the effects of additional 
manufacturing steps, or other differences arising from the combination of the constituent parts. 

5.  Testing and release for distribution (21 CFR 211.165) 

Testing and release for distribution are critical in drug product manufacture and quality 
control.  21 CFR 211.165 requires that an appropriate laboratory determination of satisfactory 
conformance to final specifications (including the identity and strength of each active ingredient) 
is made for each batch of drug product prior to release.  21 CFR 211.165 also requires 
appropriate laboratory testing, as necessary, of each batch of a drug product required to be free of 
objectionable microorganisms.  In addition, sampling and testing plans must be described by 
written procedures.90 

Accordingly, manufacturers must test each batch of their combination product to 
determine satisfactory conformance to final written specifications for the drug constituent part.91  
For single-entity combination products, laboratory testing must be performed on every batch of 
the combination product; for co-packaged combination products, laboratory testing must be 
performed on every batch of the drug constituent part(s). 92  This testing ensures that all batches 
meet appropriate specifications for their approval and release.93  A detailed listing of all the tests 
performed and the acceptance criteria used should be maintained and be available for 
inspection.94   

In some cases, for single-entity combination products, in lieu of using actual units from a 

finished combination product batch for testing to determine whether the drug constituent part 
meets final specifications, manufacturers may wish to use samples that are not finished 
combination products (but that are representative of the finished combination product with 
respect to the characteristics and attributes being tested).  The Agency does not intend to object 
to such an approach where the manufacturer can establish, including where appropriate through 
bridging studies and other quantitative means, that any differences in the manufacturing process 
for the samples and the finished combination product do not affect the drug constituent part.  
Such approaches should be supported by appropriate justification and data and discussed with 
the lead Center, and OCP as needed. 

90 See 21 CFR 211.165(c). 
91 See 21 CFR 211.165(a). 
92 See 21 CFR 211.165(a). 
93 See 21 CFR 211.165(a), (b). 
94 21 CFR 211.165 addresses testing and release for “drug products”; appropriate controls for intermediate stages 
(e.g., in-process materials) in the manufacture of combination products are addressed under separate provisions of 
the drug CGMPs and device QS regulation that are not specified in part 4.  If a manufacturer operates under a 
streamlined approach under 21 CFR 4.4(b), it should take into consideration the materials and manufacturing steps 
for the combination product as a whole in determining how to demonstrate compliance with obligations for in-
process materials, and may find it helpful to refer to the corresponding requirements under the other regulation (that 
it did not choose as the base for its CGMP operating system).  For example, if the facility operates under a device 
QS regulation-based streamlined approach, in determining how to comply with duties under 21 CFR 820.70, 820.80, 
and 820.86 for the combination product as a whole, reference to 21 CFR 211.110 and guidance relating to in-process 
materials for drug products may facilitate appropriate consideration of the controls for drug constituent parts.   

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

If one facility is manufacturing a drug product as a constituent part to be supplied to 
another facility or manufacturer for inclusion in a co-packaged combination product, appropriate 
and adequate laboratory testing should be conducted by the drug product manufacturing facility 
prior to release of the drug constituent part(s) for distribution in accordance with 21 CFR 
211.165.  For combination products that include a device constituent part, the combination 
product manufacturer is responsible for ensuring through purchasing controls in accordance with 
21 CFR 820.50 that the drug constituent part conforms to specified requirements, including 
laboratory testing requirements.  Appropriate testing or examination (such as visual inspection) 
should also be conducted throughout the remaining manufacture of the finished co-packaged 
combination product to ensure that the drug constituent part(s) continues to conform to its final 
specifications. 

6.  Stability testing (21 CFR 211.166) 

21 CFR 211.166 requires a testing program designed to assess the stability characteristics 

of drug products.  Furthermore, 21 CFR 211.166 sets forth required elements of the testing 
program, including elements concerning sample size, storage conditions for samples retained for 
testing, and other elements related to testing methodology and frequency.95 

Stability testing is performed to determine appropriate storage conditions and expiration 
dates (see section IV.B.4).  Among other considerations, this testing must enable evaluation of 
any effects on the stability of the drug due to storage in its marketed container closure system, 
which may be a device constituent part (or component of a device constituent part).96  For a 
single-entity combination product, testing must be performed on the drug constituent part as 
incorporated into the finished combination product.97   

The Agency does not intend to object to the use of bracketing and matrix approaches for 

stability studies where the approach has been adequately justified and, where applicable, 
reviewed by FDA.98  The Agency also does not intend to object to leveraging stability data for an 
already marketed combination product during new product development, with adequate 
justification and, where applicable, review by FDA.  In particular, for purposes of establishing an 
expiration date for a new combination product, such leveraging may be acceptable if the new 
product represents a modification to the existing marketed combination product that would not 
impact the stability of the drug constituent part (for example, a change to the catheter length for a 

95 For further information on stability testing considerations, see, for example, the Guidance for Industry on 
Q1A(R2) Stability Testing of New Drug Substances and Products (November 2003). 
96 See 21 CFR 211.166(a)(4). 
97 See 21 CFR 4.3, 4.4, and 211.166.  In addition, while stability testing requirements under 21 CFR 211.166 do not 
apply to device constituent parts of a co-packaged combination product, under design control requirements, testing 
must be performed to demonstrate that device functionality (i.e., mechanical performance of the device constituent 
part) is maintained until the specified expiration date for the combination product. See 21 CFR 820.30.   
98 For further information on bracketing and matrixing considerations, see, for example, the Guidance for Industry 
on Q1D Bracketing and Matrixing Designs for Stability Testing of New Drug Substances and Products (January 
2003). 

33 

 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

drug-coated balloon, where the balloon component remains unchanged) and is not otherwise 
material to the expiration date.99 

If a new product has minor differences that present a low risk of affecting the stability of 

the drug (for example, a different size of a drug-coated balloon that is bracketed within the 
balloon size matrix previously used to establish the expiration date, and without other changes 
relevant to stability, for example, in the coating application process),100 the Agency does not 
intend to object, in appropriate cases, to: i) the use of previously generated stability data for the 
existing product (or family of products) to support reduced stability data requirements for the 
new product (for example, generation of only short-term accelerated data) or ii) to incorporating 
the product into the ongoing stability program for the existing marketed product(s), provided that 
stability data trends and stability history for the existing product or product family are 
sufficiently robust for this purpose.  Applicants should contact the lead center for their product, 
or OCP as needed, regarding such approaches.101 

The need for new stability studies should be evaluated when there are changes to any 

constituent part of a combination product.  For example, changes to the manufacturing process, 
including changes based on the size or shape of the device constituent part that holds the drug or 
that is coated with the drug, or changes in material of construction of such a device constituent 
part, may impact drug stability. 

Manufacturers are responsible for establishing and managing the stability program.  If a 

combination product manufacturer purchases a drug product from another manufacturer for 
inclusion in its co-packaged combination product, the combination product manufacturer is 
responsible for ensuring the stability of the drug product as marketed in the co-packaged product 
through appropriate mechanisms, such as by implementing purchasing controls to ensure the 
adequacy of the drug product manufacturer's stability testing or by conducting additional 
stability testing (see 21 CFR 820.50).  Documentation of such oversight should be included in 
the CGMP records. 

If a drug constituent part of a co-packaged combination product has an expiration date, 

the combination product manufacturer may be able to rely on that labeled expiration date in lieu 
of conducting new stability studies, if it can be documented that any additional manufacturing 
operations conducted on the co-packaged product would not be expected to impact the 
constituent part, including its container-closure system. 

99 Note that shelf life testing to evaluate the impact of the modification to the device constituent part may still be 
appropriate. 
100 This might also be the case for a family of products that vary in shape from one another, provided, again, that 
these variations pose a low risk. 
101 Note that shelf life testing to evaluate the impact of a modification on the device constituent part may still be 
appropriate. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

7.  Special testing requirements (21 CFR 211.167) 

21 CFR 211.167 establishes requirements for batch testing applicable to drug products 

having particular characteristics.  Specifically, 21 CFR 211.167(a) requires appropriate 
laboratory testing of drug products purporting to be sterile and/or pyrogen-free to determine 
conformance with such requirements; 21 CFR 211.167(b) requires appropriate testing of 
ophthalmic ointments to determine conformance to specifications regarding the presence of 
foreign particles and harsh or abrasive substances; and 21 CFR 211.167(c) requires appropriate 
laboratory testing of controlled-release dosage forms to determine conformance to the 
specifications for the rate of release of each active ingredient.   

A special testing requirement specified in 21 CFR 211.167 applies to a combination 

product only if the combination product or a drug constituent part of it falls into one or more of 
the three categories described above.  Special testing may be required for the drug constituent 
part, or the combination product as a whole, depending on the product.   

With respect to 21 CFR 211.167(a), batch testing requirements would apply both to the 

drug constituent part and to the finished combination product for a single-entity combination 
product (such as a prefilled syringe) to ensure the combination product is sterile and pyrogen-
free when distributed.  In contrast, if a vial of a vaccine were co-packaged with an empty 
syringe, the requirements in 21 CFR 211.167(a) would apply only to the vial of vaccine.102  A 
similar analysis would apply for compliance with 21 CFR 211.167(b) for a single-entity versus a 
co-packaged combination product that includes an ophthalmic ointment. 

For purposes of conducting pyrogen and endotoxin testing, it may be permissible in some 

circumstances to define a “batch” based on the finished drug product rather than the finished 
combination product.  For example, it may be acceptable to define a batch as a subcomponent of 
the combination product that incorporates the drug constituent part.  However, the viability of 
such an approach would depend on many factors including:  appropriate upstream controls to 
reduce/limit pyrogens and endotoxins; the chemical or materials-mediated pyrogenicity of the 
constituent parts, and the risks of pyrogen and endotoxin introduction to the combination product 
by manufacturing operations that occur after the step at which the batch is defined.  For instance, 
for some products, it may be possible to test material for endotoxin during an in-process 
manufacturing step and there may be no need to test for endotoxins in the single entity 
combination product. 

21 CFR 211.167(c) would apply both to a controlled-release drug constituent part of a co-
packaged combination product and also to a controlled release single-entity combination product, 
to confirm rate of release of the active ingredient. For example, a transdermal drug patch or drug-

102 The requirements related to sterility and non-pyrogenicity of the empty syringe would be addressed through 
compliance with other provisions (for example, process controls requirements under 21 CFR 211 or 21 CFR 820, 
design controls requirements under 21 CFR 820.30, and purchasing controls requirements under 21 CFR 820.50).  
For additional information on pyrogen and endotoxin testing, see the Guidance for Industry on Pyrogen and 
Endotoxins Testing: Questions and Answers (June 2012)). 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

eluting disc or stent would be subject to 21 CFR 211.167(c).  

As with drugs and devices, parametric release may be acceptable for some combination 

products when supported by appropriate data.  Such approaches should be discussed with the 
lead Center, or OCP as needed, prior to implementation and included in premarket 
submissions.103 

8.  Reserve samples (21 CFR 211.170) 

Reserve samples are needed to help ensure the safety and effectiveness of combination 

products in distribution, as they are for drugs and biological products.  They are used, for 
example, to address certain product complaints, evaluate stability concerns, and assess the causes 
of adverse events.  The reserve sampling requirements of 21 CFR 211.170 must be met for the 
drug constituent parts of combination products.   

Under 21 CFR 211.170, reserve samples must be kept that are representative of both: 

• 
• 

each lot of the active ingredient (21 CFR 211.170(a)), and  
each lot or batch of the drug product (21 CFR 211.170(b)).   

All reserve samples must consist of at least twice the quantity necessary to perform all 
required tests, except those for sterility and pyrogenicity.104  Furthermore, reserve samples of 
drug products must be retained and stored under conditions consistent with product labeling and 
stored in the same immediate container-closure system in which the drug product is marketed or 
in one that has essentially the same characteristics.105    

Accordingly, single-entity and co-packaged combination product manufacturers alike 

must keep reserve samples of each lot of the active ingredient, if any, that they receive, in 
whatever form it arrives at their facility (e.g., as bulk active pharmaceutical ingredient or 
incorporated into an in-process material).   

For co-packaged combination products, the requirement to keep reserve samples of drug 

products can be met by maintaining samples of the drug constituent part in its immediate 
container-closure system, without the need to retain any samples of the device or portions of 
it.106  For single-entity combination products, the drug product reserve samples should be of the 
drug constituent part in or upon the device constituent part or components thereof that come into 
contact with the drug product as packaged for distribution. 

103 See, for example, Guidance for Industry Submission of Documentation in Applications for Parametric Release of 
Human and Veterinary Drug Products Terminally Sterilized by Moist Heat Processes (February 2010) . 
104 21 CFR 211.170. Stability is not required to be assessed on every drug batch. See 21 CFR 211.166(b).   Drug 
product reserve samples must be visually examined at least once a year while in storage as an ongoing check on the 
quality of the material in distribution, unless a visual examination would affect the integrity of the reserve sample. 
21 CFR 211.170(b). 
105 21 CFR 211.170(b). 
106 See 21 CFR 211.170(b). 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Manufacturers must examine drug product samples for deterioration, investigate evidence 

of deterioration, and record and maintain the results of such examination.107  Drug product 
reserve samples generally must be maintained for 1 year after the expiration date for the drug 
product; different time periods apply to certain radioactive and OTC products.108  Active 
ingredient samples generally must be kept for 1 year after the expiration date for the last lot of 
the combination product containing the active ingredient.109  Accordingly, manufacturers should 
retain samples from each lot of bulk drug substance for 1 year after the expiration date of the last 
lot of the combination product that uses that lot of the active ingredient.   

Combination product manufacturers may choose to have their reserve samples of the 

API, drug/biologic constituent part, or finished combination product at a location other than the 
combination product manufacturing facility.  In these cases, the combination product 
manufacturer should have appropriate controls in place to ensure that requirements under 21 
CFR 211.170 continue to be met.  Such controls could include agreements with the facilities 
holding the reserve samples to ensure appropriate storage conditions, access to the samples by 
the combination product manufacturer, ability to analyze the reserve samples, if needed, and 
maintenance of adequate numbers of samples for each lot. 

For combination products, it is generally sufficient to maintain the appropriate number of 

reserve samples from each lot of the active ingredient and from each lot or batch of the drug 
constituent part in the immediate container/closure in which it is marketed.  For single-entity 
combination products, the device constituent part may be the drug’s container/closure or a part of 
it, or the container/closure may be distinct from the device constituent part.  For a drug-eluting 
stent or disc, or a prefilled syringe, for example, reserve samples should generally be kept of the 
entire combination product.  In contrast, if, for example, the combination product consists of an 
injector system (device constituent part) into which the user inserts a prefilled cartridge 
containing the drug, reserve samples of the prefilled cartridge alone would generally suffice to 
comply with the drug product sample retention requirements.  An injector may need to be 
available, however, to enable testing of reserve samples.    

Manufacturers that want to retain and store reserve samples that are representative of, but 

not identical to, a finished drug constituent part or combination product, as appropriate, should 
include adequate justification and data to support that:  

•  Any differences in the manufacturing process for the reserve sample and the 
finished combination product do not affect the drug constituent part (see 
discussion in IV.B.5 above);  

•  The immediate container/closure has essentially the same characteristics as the 

immediate container/closure for the drug as packaged in the combination product 
for distribution (if the actual immediate container closure is not being used), and  

•  The proposed representative samples are suitable for all required testing of the 

drug constituent part for which those reserve samples are being kept.   

107 See 21 CFR 211.170(b). 
108 See 21 CFR 211.170(b).  
109 See 21 CFR 211.170(a). 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

It may be possible to keep properly defined and validated surrogates for some testing 

while retaining complete samples of the combination product for other tests as an alternative to 
retaining complete samples for all testing.  Bracketing and matrixing approaches also may be 
acceptable, as may use of samples from representative lots of a larger batch (for example, 
representative samples of each size from within a broadly defined batch that includes multiple 
sizes from the same family of coated combination products).110 

Manufacturers considering use of novel approaches to comply with reserve sampling 

requirements are advised to discuss them with the lead center for their combination product, or 
OCP, as needed.   

C. Combination products that include biological products and HCT/Ps  

In addition to complying with drug CGMP and device QS regulation requirements as 
applicable in accordance with part 4, a manufacturer of a combination product that contains a 
biological product or an HCT/P must comply with the requirements that would apply to the 
biological product or HCT/P if it were not part of a combination product. 

1.  Complying with CGMP requirements for biological products 

It is important to remember that a biological product regulated under section 351 of the 
PHS Act is also, by definition, a drug or a device.  Accordingly, in addition to the requirements 
in parts 600 through 680, a biological product is always either subject to the drug CGMPs or 
subject to the device QS regulation, regardless of whether the biological product is a constituent 
part of a combination product.  The CGMP requirements for biological products in parts 600 
through 680 augment the drug CGMPs and device QS regulation to ensure adequate 
consideration of issues for biological products.  The CGMP requirements for biological products 
in parts 600 through 680 address the particular challenges biological products pose, including 
challenges arising from their relative complexity.  For biological products, consistency of 
manufacturing procedures can, in fact, be a primary means by which to ensure the safety, purity, 
and potency of the product. 

The CGMP requirements for biological products in parts 600 through 680 must be 
satisfied if a combination product includes a biological product constituent part.  However, many 
requirements in parts 600 through 680 are applicable only to certain types of biological products.  
For example, while part 600 facially addresses biological products in general, only products 
manufactured using a spore-forming microorganism would be subject to 21 CFR 600.11(e)(3) 
(work with spore-forming microorganisms).  Similarly, only blood and blood components are 
subject to the CGMP requirements for such products under part 606.  In addition, the CGMP 
requirements for biological products applicable to a given product can vary based on 
considerations specific to the particular biological product. 

110 FDA notes that approaches that depend upon retaining samples against more broadly defined batches may 
increase the number of distributed products implicated when corrective actions are necessary to address postmarket 
issues. 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

In short, the specific requirements in parts 600 through 680 that must be met to comply 

with 21 CFR 4.3 and 4.4(c) for a particular combination product that includes a biological 
product constituent part will depend on the type of biological product it includes.  The Agency 
welcomes the opportunity to discuss these requirements with manufacturers to ensure sound, 
effective CGMP operating systems.  If manufacturers have questions regarding these 
requirements, they may contact the lead center for the combination product or OCP, as needed, 
for assistance.   

2.  Complying with CGMPs for HCT/Ps 

An HCT/P that is not regulated solely under section 361 of the PHS Act and Part 1271 is 

also regulated as a drug, device, or biological product. 111  The drug CGMPs, device QS 
regulation, and the requirements in parts 600 through 680 may apply to an HCT/P depending on 
whether the product is regulated as a drug, device, or biological product.112  CGMPs and the 
CGTPs for HCT/Ps supplement one another and do not supersede each other unless the 
regulation specifically provides otherwise.  In the event that a regulation in part 1271 is in 
conflict with a requirement in parts 210, 211, 600 through 680, or 820, the regulations more 
specifically applicable to the product in question will supersede the more general.113 

The CGTPs, including donor eligibility requirements for the manufacture of HCT/Ps 

under part 1271, are designed to prevent the introduction, transmission, and spread of 
communicable diseases, and thereby are essential to protecting the public health.  Accordingly, 
the current CGTPs apply to combination products that include an HCT/P.  However, 
requirements under some sections of part 1271 overlap with the requirements under the drug 
CGMPs and the device QS regulation.  These overlaps are addressed in part 1271 and in the 
Guidance for Industry on Current Good Tissue Practice (CGTP) and Additional Requirements 
for Manufacturers of Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue-Based Products (HCT/Ps) 
(CGTP Guidance).   

111 The HCT/P regulations at part 1271 distinguish between HCT/Ps regulated solely under section 361 of the PHS 
Act (42 U.S.C. 264) and part 1271 and those that are also regulated as drugs, devices, and/or biological products.  
Section 1271.10 provides that an HCT/P is regulated solely under section 361 of the PHS Act if it meets all of the 
following criteria:  (1) it is minimally manipulated; (2) it is in intended for homologous use only, as reflected by the 
labeling, advertising, or other indications of the manufacturer's objective intent; (3) manufacturer of the HCT/P does 
not involve the combination of the cells or tissues with another article (other than water, crystalloids, or a sterilizing, 
preserving, or storage agent) provided that the addition of water, crystalloids, or the sterilizing, preserving, or 
storage agent does not raise new clinical safety concerns with respect to the HCT/P; and (4) Either: (i) The HCT/P 
does not have a systemic effect and is not dependent upon the metabolic activity of living cells for its primary 
function; or (ii) The HCT/P has a systemic effect or is dependent upon the metabolic activity of living cells for its 
primary function, and is for autologous use, is for allogeneic use in a first-degree or second-degree blood relative; or 
is for reproductive use.  Refer to 21 CFR 3.2(e), 1271.10, 1271.15, and 1271.20, to determine whether an HCT/P is 
regulated as a drug, device, or biological product constituent part of a combination product.  
112 See 78 FR 4317. 
113 See 21 CFR 1271.150(d).  Also see the Guidance for Industry on Current Good Tissue Practice (CGTP) and 
Additional Requirements for Manufacturers of Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue-Based Products 
(HCT/Ps) (December 2011). 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

21 CFR 1271.150(d) explains that for HCT/Ps regulated as biological products, drugs or 
devices, the procedures contained in subpart D and in subpart C of part 1271 and the procedures 
contained in parts 210, 211, and 820, supplement one another.  As a consequence, compliance 
with certain provisions of part 211 or 820 may also constitute partial or complete compliance 
with certain provisions of part 1271.  However, for certain issues, the CGTP requirements would 
require additional manufacturing practices.  The adjustments that might need to be made to an 
existing CGMP operating system to be fully compliant with the part 1271 CGTP requirements 
for a combination product that includes an HCT/P may differ if the system being augmented is a 
drug manufacturing system under 21 CFR 211, a device manufacturing system under part 820, or 
a combination product manufacturing system that demonstrates compliance with 21 CFR 211 
and 21 CFR part 820 in accordance with 21 CFR 4.4(a)(1), 4.4(b)(1), or 4.4(b)(2). 

For further information, see the CGTP Guidance.  FDA understands the complexity of 

manufacturing considerations and duties for combination products that contain an HCT/P.  
Accordingly, the Agency encourage manufacturers to contact the lead center for their product or 
OCP, as needed, with questions about how to comply with CGMP requirements for their 
particular product. 

