I. 

Introduction 

This guidance describes and explains the final rule on current good manufacturing 

practice (CGMP) requirements for combination products that FDA issued on January 22, 2013 
(final rule).2 (21 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) part 4).  Prior to issuance of the final rule, 
although CGMP regulations were in place to establish requirements for drugs, devices, biological 
products, and Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue-Based Products (HCT/Ps), there 
were no regulations to clarify and explain the application of these CGMP requirements to 
combination products.  The final rule did not establish any new requirements; it was intended to 
clarify which CGMP requirements apply when drugs, devices, and biological products are 
combined to create combination products, and to set forth a transparent and streamlined 
regulatory framework for firms to use when demonstrating compliance with applicable CGMP 
requirements.3   

Section II of this document provides the definition of “combination product,” an 

overview of the final rule, and describes the role of the lead center and other Agency 
components4 with respect to combination product CGMP issues.  Section III addresses certain 
general considerations for CGMP compliance for combination products.  Section IV presents the 
purpose and content of specific CGMP requirements addressed in the final rule.  Finally, Section 
V analyzes hypothetical scenarios that illustrate how to comply with certain CGMP requirements 

1 This guidance was prepared by the Office of Combination Products in the Office of the Commissioner in 
conjunction with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, 
Center for Devices and Radiological Health, and the Office of Regulatory Affairs.   
2 See the Current Good Manufacturing Practice Requirements for Combination Products, 78 FR 4307 (January 22, 
2013). 
3 As stated in the preamble to the final rule, combination products were subject to CGMP requirements that apply to 
each constituent part of their combination product prior to promulgation of 21 CFR part 4.  Although products 
developed prior to promulgation of part 4 are frequently termed “legacy” combination products, FDA deliberately 
does not use this terminology in this guidance because it could be inappropriately interpreted to indicate that 
products developed prior to promulgation of part 4 are therefore subject to fewer CGMP obligations than products 
developed after promulgation of part 4. 
4 “Agency component” is defined at 21 CFR 3.2(b) as “the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, the Center 
for Devices and Radiological Health, the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, or alternative organizational 
component of the agency.” 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

for specific types of combination products.  Throughout this guidance, the Agency also refers to 
existing guidance and additional resources that address CGMP requirements for drugs, devices, 
biological products, and HCT/Ps, to further inform combination product manufacturers on how 
to comply with CGMP requirements.  

FDA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable 

responsibilities.  Instead, this guidance describes the Agency’s current thinking on a topic that 
should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements 
are cited.  The use of the word should in Agency guidance means that something is suggested or 
recommended, but not required.  

II.  Background 

A. Definition of a combination product 

As set forth in part 3 (21 CFR part 3), a combination product is a product composed of 
two or more different types of medical products (i.e., a combination of a drug, device, and/or 
biological product with one another).5  The drugs, devices, and biological products included in 
combination products are referred to as “constituent parts” of the combination product. 

Under 21 CFR 3.2(e), a combination product includes: 

•  A product comprised of two or more regulated components, i.e., drug/device, 
biologic/device, drug/biologic, or drug/device/biologic, that are physically, 
chemically, or otherwise combined or mixed and produced as a single entity (a 
“single entity” combination product, such as a prefilled syringe or drug-eluting 
stent);  

•  Two or more separate products packaged together in a single package or as a unit 
and comprised of drug and device products, device and biological products, or 
biological and drug products (a “co-packaged” combination product, such as a 
surgical or first-aid kit); 

•  A drug, device, or biological product packaged separately that according to its 
investigational plan or proposed labeling is intended for use only with an 
approved, individually specified drug, device, or biological product where both 
are required to achieve the intended use, indication, or effect and where upon 
approval of the proposed product the labeling of the approved product would need 
to be changed (e.g., to reflect a change in intended use, dosage form, strength, 

5 Any reference in this guidance to CGMP requirements as applicable to a combination product that includes a drug 
constituent part should be understood to refer as well to any combination product that includes a biological product 
constituent part that is also subject to regulation under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) as a 
drug, and any reference to CGMP requirements as applicable to a combination product that includes a device 
constituent part should be understood to refer as well to combination products that include a biological product 
constituent part that is also subject to regulation as a device under the FD&C Act. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

route of administration, or significant change in dose) (a “cross-labeled” 
combination product, as might be the case for a light-emitting device and a light-
activated drug); or 

•  Any investigational drug, device, or biological product packaged separately that 
according to its proposed labeling is for use only with another individually 
specified investigational drug, device, or biological product where both are 
required to achieve the intended use, indication, or effect (another type of cross-
labeled combination product). 

B. Quality and Current Good Manufacturing Practice 

One of FDA’s goals is to assure the availability of quality drugs, biologics, devices, and 

combination products that consistently meet applicable requirements and specifications.  The 
drug CGMP and device QS regulations, as well as the CGMPs for biologics and current good 
tissue practices for HCT/Ps, provide a framework of minimum requirements to help assure 
product quality.  The core requirements embedded in these regulations  provide for systems that 
assure proper design, monitoring, and control of manufacturing processes and facilities.  This 
includes establishing a strong quality management system, using appropriate quality raw 
materials, establishing robust manufacturing and control procedures based on sound design 
principles, and detecting and investigating product quality deviations.  In addition, these 
regulations call for ongoing assessment of systems and the implementation of corrective actions 
where appropriate.  

C. Overview of the final rule 

1.  Summary of the Final Rule 

The constituent parts of a combination product retain their regulatory status (as a drug or 

device, for example) after they are combined.  The final rule clarifies that the CGMP 
requirements that apply to each of the constituent parts apply to the combination product they 
constitute. This guidance refers to a “CGMP operating system” to mean the operating system 
within an establishment that is designed and implemented to address and meet the current good 
manufacturing practice requirements applicable to the manufacture of a combination product. 

The final rule on CGMP requirements for combination products applies to all 
combination products.  The CGMP requirements for constituent parts of cross-labeled 
combination products that are entirely manufactured at separate facilities are the same as those 
that would apply if these constituent parts were not part of a combination product (e.g., for a 
drug/device combination product, only parts 210 and 211 (21 CFR parts 210 and 211) would 
apply to the manufacture of the drug constituent part(s) of the cross-labeled combination product, 
and only part 820 (21 CFR part 820) would apply to the device constituent part(s)).  With regard 
to cross-labeled combination products, part 4 was intended to clarify only that the CGMP 
obligations applicable to the drugs, devices, or biological products also apply to these types of 
articles when they are constituent parts of cross-labeled combination products.   

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Because constituent parts of cross-labeled combination products need only comply with 

the requirements otherwise applicable to that type of product (e.g, part 211 for a drug constituent 
part or part 820 for a device constituent part), the “streamlined approach” (discussed below) is 
generally not relevant or applicable to them.  However, to the extent that the constituent parts of 
a cross-labeled combination product are manufactured at the same facility, the manufacturing 
process would be akin to when the manufacture of the constituent parts of a co-packaged 
combination product occurs at the same facility.  Accordingly, for  cross-labeled combination 
products when manufactured at the same facility, the Agency does not intend to object to the use 
of a streamlined CGMP operating system for the manufacture of the combination product rather 
than distinct systems for the manufacture of each constituent part that is occurring at that facility.   
We believe this approach is consistent with the principles of part 4.   

For single-entity combination products and co-packaged combination products, part 4 

identifies two ways to demonstrate compliance with CGMP requirements.  Under the first 
option, manufacturers demonstrate compliance with all CGMP regulations applicable to each of 
the constituent parts included in the combination product.6  Under the second option, 
manufacturers implement a streamlined approach for combination products that include both a 
drug and a device by demonstrating compliance with either the drug CGMPs (21 CFR parts 210 
and 211) or the device Quality System (QS) regulation (21 CFR part 820) and also 
demonstrating compliance with specified provisions from the other of these two sets of CGMP 
requirements.7, 8  In addition, for a combination product that includes a biological product, the 
manufacturer must demonstrate compliance with the CGMP requirements specific to biological 
products in parts 600 through 680 (21 CFR parts 600 through 680). For a combination product 
that includes any HCT/P, the manufacturer must demonstrate compliance with the regulations in 
part 1271 (21 CFR part 1271)—including the current good tissue practice (CGTP) requirements 
and donor eligibility requirements.9, 10, 11  

Specifically, the streamlined approach under 21 CFR 4.4(b) provides that combination 

product manufacturers may meet the requirements of both the drug CGMPs and device QS 
regulation by designing and implementing a CGMP operating system that demonstrates 
compliance with either of the following: 

6 See 21 CFR 4.4(a) 
7 See 21 CFR 4.4(b).   
8 While 21 CFR 211 requirements apply to all combination products because combination products always contain a 
drug and/or a biological product, 21 CFR 820 requirements apply only to combination products which include a 
device constituent part. 
9 See 21 CFR 4.4(a) and (b). 
10 As discussed later in section IV.C, an HCT/P may be a “constituent part” of a combination product when the 
HCT/P is not regulated solely under section 361 of the PHS Act because it fails to meet one or more of the criteria in 
21 CFR 1271.10, and is, therefore, regulated as a drug, device, and/or biological product. See also 21 CFR 1271.20. 
11 For the purposes of part 4, FDA uses the term ‘‘CGMP requirements’’ to include all such requirements found in 
the standards in parts 600 through 680 that may apply to biological products.  We note that biological products and 
combination products that include biological product constituent parts must comply with all applicable requirements 
in parts 600 through 680.  Because many of the requirements in parts 600 through 680 are not considered CGMP 
requirements, such requirements are not addressed in part 4 and are not a focus of this guidance.  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

•  The drug CGMPs and the following provisions from the device QS regulation in 
accordance with 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1) (drug CGMP-based streamlined approach): 

(i) 21 CFR 820.20  
(ii) 21 CFR 820.30  
(iii) 21 CFR 820.50 
(iv) 21 CFR 820.100    
(v) 21 CFR 820.170    
(vi) 21 CFR 820.200   

Management responsibility  
Design controls 
Purchasing controls 
Corrective and preventive action 
Installation 
Servicing 

OR 

•  The device QS regulation and the following provisions from the drug CGMPs in 

accordance with 21 CFR 4.4(b)(2) (device QS regulation-based streamlined approach): 

(i) 21 CFR 211.84  

(ii) 21 CFR 211.103    
(iii) 21 CFR 211.132 

(iv) 21 CFR 211.137   
(v) 21 CFR 211.165 
(vi) 21 CFR 211.166   
(vii) 21 CFR 211.167   
(viii) 21 CFR 211.170  

Testing and approval or rejection of components, drug 
product containers, and closures 
Calculation of yield 
Tamper-evident packaging requirements for over-the-
counter (OTC) human drug products 
Expiration dating 
Testing and release for distribution 
Stability testing 
Special testing requirements  
Reserve samples 

A manufacturer may prefer one approach over the other based, for example, on the details 

of the manufacturing process used at the facility or in light of other manufacturing activities 
undertaken at the facility.  The manufacturer is not required to choose a streamlined approach 
based on the CGMP regulations for the constituent part that provides the primary mode of action 
(PMOA) of the combination product (see II.D below).  For example, if the drug constituent part 
of a drug-device combination product provides the product’s PMOA, the manufacturer of that 
combination product may choose to adopt either the device QS regulation-based or drug CGMP-
based streamlined approach, or choose to develop a CGMP operating system that wholly 
complies with the specifics of applicable provisions of both the drug CGMPs and the device QS 
regulation. 

21 CFR 4.4(c) provides that if a facility manufactures only one type of constituent part 
(e.g., a drug or device constituent part) of a co-packaged or single-entity combination product, 
that facility is subject only to the CGMP regulations applicable to that constituent part (i.e., part 
211 for a drug or part 820 for a device, as well as those under parts 600 through 680 for a 
biological product and part 1271 for an HCT/P).  21 CFR 4.4(d) provides that when two or more 
types of constituent parts to be included in a single-entity or co-packaged combination product 
have arrived at the same facility, or the manufacture of these constituent parts is occurring at the 
same facility, that facility must comply with all CGMP requirements described in part 4 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

applicable to the manufacturing activities at that facility, and a streamlined approach under 21 
CFR 4.4(b) may be used to demonstrate compliance with these requirements.   

Similarly, if a facility manufactures a drug or device that is not a constituent part of a 

combination product and also manufactures a combination product, the CGMP requirements for 
the independently marketed drug or device do not change (compliance with parts 210/211 or part 
820, respectively).  Accordingly, if a facility manufactures an independently marketed device 
that is subject to part 820 and a combination product, it cannot manufacture the device under a 
drug CGMP-based streamlined operating system, even if it is used for the combination product, 
because this operating system only includes limited, specified provisions from the QS regulation.  
However, both the device and the combination product may be manufactured under a device QS 
regulation-based streamlined operating system, with the device that is not part of a combination 
product then being subject only to part 820. 

2.  Documentation of CGMP Approach 

Combination product manufacturers should be able to identify all documentation needed 

to demonstrate compliance with part 4, and make it readily accessible for an FDA inspection.  
The facility’s quality system documentation should identify the CGMP operating system for the 
combination product(s) manufactured at that facility, and the manufacturer should share this 
information with investigators at the initiation of an inspection.  For combination product 
manufacturers implementing a streamlined approach (See Section II.B.1 above), inspection of 
the base CGMP operating system (i.e., 21 CFR part 210/211 or 21 CFR part 820) will typically 
be consistent with existing compliance programs and policies associated with it.  For specified  
provisions from the non-base system, FDA intends to utilize the compliance program and policy 
elements specific to these provisions.12 

Prior to the promulgation of part 4, manufacturers of combination products already had to 

demonstrate compliance with the applicable CGMP requirements for each constituent part of 
their combination product.  Manufacturers should ensure that their CGMP procedures and 
processes are compliant with the regulatory framework provided in part 4.  If the operating 
system requires changes to come into compliance, manufacturers should document the steps they 
take to ensure ongoing product safety and effectiveness.  Manufacturers should be prepared to 
discuss their approach during inspections. 

Combination product manufacturers who are required to address CGMP issues as part of 

premarket review should identify in premarket submissions whether they are operating under a 
streamlined approach, and if so, whether it is a drug CGMP-based or device QS regulation-based 
streamlined approach.13  In premarket submissions, the CGMP approach should be identified for 
each relevant facility.  For NDAs, BLAs and ANDAs, the CGMP approach should be described 

12 For a listing of existing Compliance Program Guidance Manuals (CPGMs) for drugs, devices, and biologics, see 
http://www.fda.gov/ICECI/ComplianceManuals/ComplianceProgramManual/ucm2005382.htm.   
13 Submission of CGMP information is not routinely required prior to clearance of 510(k)’s.  As discussed, 
manufacturers of 510(k) combination products should identify their CGMP operating system in the quality system 
documentation at their facilities. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

in the Common Technical Document.  For additional details on placement within the CTD, see 
eCTD Technical Conformance Guide, Section 3.3.2.14  For PMAs, the CGMP approach should 
be documented in the manufacturing section of the PMA (the manufacturing module for a 
modular PMA). 

D. The role of the lead center and other Agency components 

A combination product is assigned to an Agency center that will have primary 
jurisdiction (i.e., the lead) for that combination product’s premarket review and regulation.  
Under section 503(g)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) (21 U.S.C. 
351(g)), assignment of a combination product to a lead center is based on a determination of 
which constituent part provides the PMOA of the combination product.15 

If the PMOA of a device-biological product combination product is attributable to the 

biological product, for example, the center responsible for premarket review of such a biological 
product would have primary jurisdiction for the regulation of the combination product.  The lead 
center for premarket review of the combination product also has the lead for ensuring 
compliance with CGMP regulatory requirements.  Regardless of the PMOA, Agency 
components will coordinate as appropriate to enable efficient, effective CGMP regulatory 
oversight, including appropriate CGMP inspections.   

The lead center is a manufacturer’s primary point of contact.   Manufacturers may also 

contact the Office of Combination Products (OCP) for assistance, as needed, in identifying 
appropriate contact points (including those in the lead center), resolving substantive issues, or 
otherwise facilitating interactions with the Agency and collaboration among Agency 
components, including centers and the Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA). 

