III.  General Considerations for CGMP Compliance 

This section addresses some general considerations for CGMP compliance for 

combination products.  Note that this guidance addresses only CGMP requirements.  Additional 
requirements may apply including the need for premarket submissions as a result of changes to 
product design, intended use, or manufacture.   

14 Available at 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/FormsSubmissionRequirements/ElectronicSub
missions/UCM465411.pdf.  
15 The “primary mode of action” of a combination product is the single mode of action (drug, device, or biological 
product) that provides the most important therapeutic action of the combination product.  The most important 
therapeutic action is the mode of action expected to make the greatest contribution to the overall intended 
therapeutic effects of the combination product.  See 21 CFR 3.2(k) (which defines “mode of action” and 
“therapeutic”) and (m) (which defines primary mode of action).  For more information on product classification, 
assignment, and PMOA, see the guidance for industry How to Write a Request for Designation (RFD)(April 2011). 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

A. Demonstrating compliance 

The final rule identifies two ways for co-packaged and single-entity combination product 

manufacturers to demonstrate compliance with applicable CGMP requirements.  The Agency 
intends for the term “demonstrate” to apply for part 4 as it would be for purposes of fulfilling the 
underlying CGMP regulations listed in 21 CFR 4.3.  Manufacturers must demonstrate 
compliance with each applicable CGMP requirement for constituent parts and combination 
products.16 

If a streamlined approach is used, the manufacturer must demonstrate compliance with all 

of the relevant provisions of either the drug CGMPs or device QS regulation, and the provisions 
specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b) for the other set(s) of CGMP requirements applicable to the product.   
Further guidance on how to demonstrate compliance with the regulations specified in 21 CFR 
4.4(b) is provided in section IV of this guidance.  A manufacturer who implements a streamlined 
approach is not expected to demonstrate compliance with the specific provisions of the non-base 
set of requirements other than those specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b) (e.g., for a drug CGMP-based 
streamlined approach, the manufacturer must demonstrate compliance with applicable drug 
CGMPs plus the six specified provisions from part 820, as applicable, but the manufacturer does 
not need to demonstrate compliance with the other specific provisions in part 820). 

As provided in 21 CFR 4.4(e), in the event of a conflict between regulations applicable 

under part 4, the regulations most specifically applicable to the constituent part in question  
supersede the more general.  The intent of this provision is to address any potential conflicts 
between regulations.  This provision does not provide a basis for the Agency to require 
manufacturers to demonstrate compliance with provisions not otherwise identified in part 4 as 
applicable to them.   

Some of the provisions specified in part 4 from the drug CGMPs and device QS 
regulation cross-reference other provisions of parts 211 and 820, respectively.  This raises the 
question of whether manufacturers must specifically demonstrate compliance with these cross-
referenced provisions.  FDA believes that manufacturers can adequately address the expectations 
of these cross-referenced provisions through implementation of either a drug CGMP-based or 
device QS regulation-based CGMP streamlined approach.   

For example, 21 CFR 211.170 (Reserve samples) references 21 CFR 211.192 (Production 

record review).  However, 21 CFR 211.192 is not a specified provision in 21 CFR 4.4(b)(2) 
because part 820 encompasses the requirements of that section.  In particular, under the CAPA 
requirements in 21 CFR 820.100, a manufacturer operating under a device QS-based streamlined 
approach should have the systems in place that would satisfy the requirements of 21 CFR 
211.192.  Similarly, 21 CFR 211.103 (Calculation of yield) references 21 CFR 211.68 
(Automatic, mechanical, and electronic equipment) in relation to using automated equipment for 
yield calculations and maintaining appropriate controls over such equipment.  Corresponding 
provisions in 21 CFR 820.70(i), applicable under a QS-regulation based streamlined approach, 

16 21 CFR part 4. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

require that automated data processing systems be validated for their intended uses.  To take 
another example, the definition of design output in 21 CFR 820.3 makes reference to “device 
master record.”  Both part 211 and part 820 have requirements for “master records” (21 CFR 
211.186, Master Production and Control Records and 21 CFR 820.181, Device Master Record).  
FDA believes the substantive expectations of these master record provisions are aligned and 
needed to control product development and manufacture. 

This guidance does not focus on how to demonstrate compliance with provisions of the 

drug CGMPs and device QS regulation other than those specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b).  Other 
provisions of these regulations address a variety of manufacturing considerations regarding, for 
example, in-process materials, facility and equipment, record-keeping, labeling, personnel, 
inputs, testing, and distribution. 

B. Investigational products 

Part 4 does not alter the scope of the underlying CGMP regulations for drugs, devices, 
biological products, and HCT/Ps.  In particular, part 4 does not alter the applicability of these 
CGMP regulations to investigational products.   

An investigational drug for use in a phase 1 study is subject to the statutory requirements 

set forth in 21 U.S.C. 351(a)(2)(B).  The production of such a drug is generally exempt from 
compliance with the regulations in parts 210 and 21117 and, therefore, so is an investigational 
combination product that includes a drug constituent part for use in a phase 1 study.  This 
exemption does not apply to an investigational combination product or drug constituent part, 
however, once it has been made available for use by or for the sponsor in phase 2 or phase 3 
studies, nor does the exemption apply to a drug product that has been lawfully marketed.  For 
additional information on study phases, see 21 CFR 312.21. 

Under 21 CFR 812.1, investigational devices are exempt from part 820 except for design 
control requirements under 21 CFR 820.30.  This exemption also applies to the manufacturing of 
investigational combination products that include device constituent parts.  Investigational 
combination products that include a device constituent part are subject to design controls (except 
when the device constituent part is exempt from design controls, see III.C.3 below), but not to 
the other provisions of part 820.  Design controls should start as early as possible, once a 
company has determined that a product appears to have clinical utility and management has 
committed to further development (see also IV.A.2 below).18   

The Agency considers these exemptions from requirements under parts 211 and 820 

applicable to combination products and constituent parts of combination products whether they 

17 See 21 CFR 210.2(c). 
18 The preamble to the device QS regulation (61 FR 52602) provides additional detail on when design controls apply 
for products early in the design life-cycle:  “The design control requirements are not intended to apply to the 
development of concepts and feasibility studies.  However, once it is decided that a design will be developed, a plan 
must be established to determine the adequacy of the design requirements and to ensure that the design that will 
eventually be released to production meets the approved requirements.” (61 FR 52616, Comment 62) 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

are being studied under an investigational device exemption (IDE) or an investigational new 
drug application (IND).  Even when these exemptions apply, however, methods, facilities, and 
manufacturing controls that are appropriate for the investigational products should be used.  
When developing and applying appropriate manufacturing practices, the Agency recommends 
that the hazards and associated risks from the manufacturing environment that might adversely 
affect an investigational combination product be considered. 

For further information on the CGMP requirements for investigational products, see 21 

CFR 210.2(c), 21 CFR 820.1, 61 Federal Register (FR) 52,616-52,617, and the Guidance for 
Industry on CGMP for Phase 1 Investigational Drugs (July 2008).  Manufacturers who have 
questions about IDE or IND requirements for their combination product should contact the lead 
center or OCP, if needed, for assistance.  

C. Definitions and terminology 

Unless 21 CFR part 4 expressly states otherwise, terms used have the same meaning as 

when used in the underlying, referenced regulations.  This section addresses the meaning and 
significance for combination products of the terms “manufacture” and “manufacturer,” 
“constituent part” and “component,” “device,” and drug “container” and “closure.”  It also 
addresses the meaning of “convenience kit” as a type of co-packaged combination product.  
Other relevant definitions can be found in part 4 and the underlying CGMP regulations (see, e.g., 
21 CFR 210.3, 21 CFR 211.3, 21 CFR 600.3, 21 CFR 606.3, 21 CFR 820.3, and 21 CFR 1271.3) 

1.  “Manufacture” and “manufacturer” 

The definition of the term “manufacture” in part 4 is intended to include all of the 
activities considered within the scope of manufacturing for drugs, devices, biological products, 
and HCT/Ps.  Accordingly, the definition of “manufacture” in 21 CFR 4.2 includes, but is not 
limited to, designing, fabricating, assembling, filling, processing, testing, labeling, packaging, 
repackaging, holding, and storage.  For example, if a company designs a drug-device 
combination product, that activity constitutes manufacture of that product, and the facility at 
which the design work occurs is a manufacturing facility.  That company is a manufacturer 
subject to part 4 for the design activities it performs, even if all other aspects of the combination 
product’s manufacture (e.g., fabricating, labeling, or packaging) are performed by another entity.  
Similarly, a facility responsible for the holding and storage of a combination product would be 
subject to related CGMP requirements such as 21 CFR 211.142 (Warehousing procedures) 
and/or 21 CFR 820.150 (Storage), depending upon whether the facility applies a streamlined 
approach and if so, which approach it applies. 

2.  “Constituent part” versus “component” 

The term “constituent part” is used by the Agency as a succinct way to identify a drug, 

device, or biological product included in a combination product.  Under the drug CGMPs, 
“component” is defined as “any ingredient intended for use in the manufacture of a drug product, 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

including those that may not appear in such drug product.”19  Under the device QS regulation, 
the term “component” is defined as “any raw material, substance, piece, part, software, firmware, 
labeling, or assembly which is intended to be included as part of the finished, packaged, and 
labeled device.”20  Components can include sub-assemblies that are further processed to make a 
finished device.  In contrast, a finished device is “suitable for use or capable of functioning, 
whether or not it is packaged, labeled, or sterilized,”21 as would be the case for a device 
constituent part as incorporated into a combination product.22   

A facility that manufactures only device components, including device components used 
in a combination product, is not made subject to the device QS regulation by part 4.23  Similarly, 
a facility that manufactures solely active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) is not subject to part 
211, though it is subject to statutory CGMP requirements under Section 501 of the FD&C Act 
(21 U.S.C. 351).  Part 4 does not make such a drug component manufacturing facility subject to 
part 211 if those components are for use in a combination product.  However, a facility that 
manufacturers a drug-device combination product formed from components is subject to parts 
211 and 820, and must comply with these two sets of regulations as provided in part 4.24  

In short, the terms “constituent part” in part 4 and “component” in the CGMP regulations 

serve different regulatory purposes.  The use of the term “constituent part” in part 4 refers to 
drugs, devices, and biological products included in combination products and does not alter the 
meaning of the term “component” or alter whether the regulations listed in 21 CFR 4.3 apply to 
component manufacturers.   

3.  Drug containers and closures versus delivery devices  

The Agency draws a distinction between mere drug containers and closures and 
containers and closures that are also devices.  The essential difference is generally whether the 
article is designed to deliver the drug it contains or merely to hold it.  If the article merely holds 
the drug, it is only subject to drug CGMPs as a container or closure.  An article that holds or 
contains a drug, but also delivers it, may also be a device subject to the device QS regulation in 
addition to the requirements relating to drug containers and closures.   

A container closure system is the sum of packaging components that together contain and 

protect the drug product.  This includes primary and secondary packaging components if the 
latter are intended to provide additional protection to the drug product.25  Elements of container 
closure systems that are device constituent parts include piston syringes, metered dose inhalers 
(MDIs), and containers for intravenously-administered (IV) fluids (such as IV bags containing 

19 21 CFR 210.3. 
20 21 CFR 820.3(c). 
21 21 CFR 820.3(l). 
22 21 CFR 4.2. 
23 See 21 CFR 820.1(a). 
24 See 78 FR 4313-4314, Comment 15. 
25 See the Guidance for Industry on Container Closure Systems for Packaging Human Drugs and Biologics: 
Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls Documentation (May 1999). 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

saline or anti-coagulants), which both hold and deliver the drugs or biological products they 
contain.26  In the case of an IV container, the drug is delivered to the patient via the IV line. 

The Agency has exempted some devices from all or certain provisions of the device QS 

regulations.  For example, 21 CFR 880.6430 exempts liquid medication dispensers (cups, 
droppers, etc.) from all provisions of the device QS regulation with the exception of 820.180 and 
820.198.  Such exemptions may extend to device constituent parts of combination products and 
to the combination products of which they are a part.  If the exemptions for a device constituent 
part of a drug-device combination product cover all of the part 820 provisions included in 21 
CFR 4.4(b)(1), then the Agency will consider the combination product manufacturer CGMP 
compliant so long as the CGMP operating system is compliant with part 211 (no demonstration 
of compliance with part 820 will be necessary).  However, if a device that would ordinarily be 
exempt from all or certain provisions in part 820 is incorporated into a container closure system, 
for example if a dropper is incorporated into the cap of a bottle of a drug, this may be a new use 
of the device such that the exemptions from part 820 may not be applicable.27  In any event, 
when incorporated into a container closure system, the device must be addressed as part of the 
container closure system for purposes of part 211 (e.g., requirements under 21 CFR 211.84, 
211.165, and 211.166, discussed in section IV.B). 

Manufacturers should document their evaluation if they believe a container closure 

system that has delivery attributes is not a device, or if they believe a device constituent part is 
exempt from any or all provisions under the device QS regulation.  Manufacturers who have 
questions about whether their container closure system, or an element thereof, is regulated as a 
device, or whether exemptions from part 820 apply, are encouraged to discuss the issue with the 
lead center or OCP, as needed. 

4.  Convenience kits 

A kit that includes two or more different types of medical products (e.g., a device and a 
drug) is a co-packaged combination product and, therefore, part 4 applies to the manufacture of 
the kit.  The CGMP requirements applicable to a kit manufacturer depend on what products are 
included in the kit.   

If the kit includes only products that are 1) legally marketed independently and 2) 

packaged in the kit as they are when independently marketed (including any labeling used for 

26 The Agency notes that other Agency guidance addresses syringes and other devices that contain a drug as 
“container closures” for the drug, and focuses on considerations related to their use as container closures, while 
addressing only in a summary manner other requirements applicable because these container closures are also 
regulated as devices.  See, e.g., Guidance for Industry Container Closure Systems for Packaging Human Drugs and 
Biologics[1999].  As reflected in this section and elsewhere in this guidance, such devices are subject to container 
closure requirements because they hold a drug. However, because they are also devices, they and the combination 
product of which they are a part are subject to additional requirements, including under part 820.    
27 Although outside the scope of this guidance, we note that changes to the intended use of constituent parts of a 
combination product may require premarket review by FDA.  

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

independent marketing), it is a “convenience kit,”28 and the only manufacturing steps for the 
combination product would be the assembly, packaging, labeling, any sterilization, and further 
processing of the kit itself.  Accordingly, the kit manufacturer would only have to demonstrate 
compliance with CGMP requirements with respect to those manufacturing activities.   

Kit manufacturers should carefully analyze what CGMP requirements apply to a kit. 27   

If a kit includes any products that are repackaged, relabeled, or otherwise modified from the 
independently marketed product, then the kit is not a convenience kit.  Likewise, if the kit 
manufacturer includes labeling for the kit that modifies the intended use for a constituent part, 
then the kit is not a convenience kit.  In these cases, the manufacturer would have to demonstrate 
compliance with CGMP requirements for the constituent parts and the overall product.  Also, if a 
device constituent part would be considered exempt from the device QS regulation if marketed 
outside the kit, the kit manufacturer may not be able to claim this exemption from part 820 if the 
intended use of the device constituent part in the kit is new.   

Co-packaged combination product manufacturers, including manufacturers of 

convenience kits, should carefully consider the impact of any sterilization process on the items in 
the co-package.29  For example, a constituent part may be sensitive to further processing, as may 
be the case for surgical sutures.  Similarly, some sterilization methods suitable for devices, such 
as irradiation, are not suitable for many drugs.  Also, additional verification to confirm no 
degradation in safety and effectiveness after any re-sterilization may be necessary.  For example, 
manufacturers should consider whether re-sterilization affects stability, material properties, and 
expiration dating/shelf-life of any of the products within the kit.  Additional issues may need to 
be considered, including validation of the sterilization process to ensure sterility for each 
constituent part within the kit, as appropriate.30  

Manufacturers should document their evaluation if they believe a kit qualifies as a 

convenience kit or that a device constituent part (and, therefore, a kit) should not be subject to 
requirements under part 820.  Kit manufacturers who have questions about whether their kit is a 
convenience kit, or about the applicability of part 820 requirements, are encouraged to contact 
the lead center or OCP, as needed. 

D. What CGMP requirements apply to a product or facility?  

While combination product manufacturers must demonstrate compliance with all of the 

CGMP regulations applicable to their combination product under 21 CFR 4.3, they may, as 
discussed above, demonstrate compliance with the drug CGMPs and device QS regulation 
requirements through one of the streamlined approaches under 21 CFR 4.4(b).  Further, not all 

28 The term “convenience kit” as used in this guidance embraces solely the definition presented in this section, 
initially provided in the preamble to the part 4 regulation (see 78 FR 4310).  The term “convenience kit” is used in 
other FDA regulations for different purposes.  See, for example, 21 CFR 801.3. 
29 See, e.g., 21 CFR 211.166. 
30 See, for example, the Guidance for Industry on Sterilized Convenience Kits for Clinical and Surgical Use (January 
2002). 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

the provisions of the CGMP regulations listed in 21 CFR 4.3 may be applicable to a specific 
combination product or constituent part. 

1.  Applicability of CGMP requirements to a product  

The preamble to the proposed rule addressed which CGMP requirements apply to which 

combination products (see 74 FR at 48426), noting, for example, that only an over-the-counter 
(OTC) combination product must comply with the tamper-evident packaging requirements in the 
drug CGMPs and only combination products that include a type of device constituent part that is 
installed or serviced must comply with installation and servicing requirements in the device QS 
regulation.  The preamble to the final rule addressed similar considerations for combination 
products that include a biological product constituent part, explaining that many of the 
requirements for biological products are applicable only to certain types of biological products.  
For example, blood and blood components are subject to the CGMP requirements for such 
products under part 606 (21 CFR part 606).  In addition, a vaccine manufactured using a spore-
forming microorganism would be subject to 21 CFR 600.11(e)(3).   

Similarly, not all CGMP requirements may apply at a facility that performs only certain 

aspects of the manufacture of a combination product.  As 21 CFR 210.2(b) and 820.1(a)(1) 
describe, an entity that engages in only some operations subject to the regulations in parts 210, 
211, 600 through 680, 820, and 1271, need only comply with the regulations applicable to those 
operations.  For example, a facility that manufactures a co-packaged combination product that 
includes a finished, already-packaged drug manufactured under the drug CGMPs and received 
from another facility need not calculate yield for that drug constituent part. 

2.  What is the meaning of “where appropriate” in the CGMP, QS, and CGTP 

regulations?   

Firms must demonstrate compliance with all regulations applicable to their product and 

facility under part 4.  However, the drug CGMPs, device QS regulation, and CGTPs for HCT/Ps 
use language such as  “where appropriate” or “as necessary” to acknowledge that certain 
measures may not be necessary or applicable under certain circumstances and that manufacturers 
must pursue such measures if they are needed.  Such language indicates that firms have the 
opportunity to document justifications for determining that such a measure or approach is not 
appropriate or necessary for a particular product or the specific manufacturing activity they are 
undertaking.31  Such justifications should generally be maintained within the quality system 
documentation and may warrant Agency review prior to implementation depending on the 
product type and relevant premarket submission obligations. 

31 Under both 21 CFR 820.1(a)(3) and 1271.150(e), a requirement that is qualified by “where appropriate,” is 
“appropriate” if, for example, non-implementation of the requirement could reasonably be expected to result in the 
product not meeting its specified requirements.  In the case of an HCT/P, these may be requirements related to 
preventing introduction, transmission, or spread of communicable diseases, or a manufacturer’s inability to carry out 
any necessary corrective action. Under both provisions, a requirement is deemed to be appropriate unless the 
manufacturer can document justification that it is not. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

For example, 21 CFR 820.30(i) stipulates that each manufacturer establish32 and maintain 

procedures for “the identification, documentation, validation or where appropriate verification, 
review, and approval of design changes before their implementation” (emphasis added).  
Changes to the design, such as changes to properties of the material or dimensional 
specifications, may not need to be validated if they can be verified through appropriate 
measurement and test methods.  However, changes that could impact user needs, such as changes 
to the user interface, may require validation.  Similarly, part 211 requires compliance with 
certain duties “as appropriate” (e.g., 21 CFR 211.84(a) addressing the sampling, testing, or 
examining of components, containers, and closures prior to release by the quality control unit).  
Containers may not need to be tested, for example, if visual examination is sufficient to evaluate 
critical attributes. 

3.  What CGMP responsibilities apply to specific manufacturers and facilities, and 

how should CGMP compliance be coordinated across facilities? 

A facility that manufacturers a constituent part of a combination product or a complete 

combination product must be compliant with the CGMP requirements applicable to each 
manufacturing process that occurs at that specific facility.  In addition, the combination product 
owner (the holder of the marketing authorization for the product) retains overall responsibility 
for the product, even if the owner is not directly engaged in its manufacture.  As outlined below, 
quality agreements and audits can be helpful in assuring compliance with applicable CGMP 
requirements. 

A facility that manufactures only a finished device intended to be a constituent part of a 

combination product (i.e., does not engage in any other manufacturing of the combination 
product) must comply only with the device QS regulation.  Similarly, a facility that manufactures 
only a drug intended to be a constituent part of a combination product (i.e., does not engage in 
any other manufacturing of the combination product), must comply only with the drug CGMPs.  
Even if a facility is manufacturing only one type of constituent part for a combination product, 
the CGMP operating system should take into account considerations for the combination product 
as a whole as appropriate.  Before changes are made to the manufacturing process of a 
constituent part, the CGMP operating system should ensure consideration of whether such 
changes could affect performance and/or interaction with the other constituent part(s) and, if so, 
whether the safety and effectiveness of the combination product could be impacted.  Quality 
agreements with constituent part manufacturer(s) are one way to ensure that changes to a 
constituent part are transparent to a combination product manufacturer or owner. 

Some CGMP requirements concern the product as a whole, such as design controls, and 

some concern overarching considerations for the manufacturing process as a whole, such as 
CAPA requirements.  Take, for example, a manufacturing facility collecting nonconformance 
data that are trended as an input to the CAPA system for a combination product.  If a problem is 
detected that requires a product or process design change, the change may require modification 
of manufacturing activities at another facility or the expertise to develop and implement the 
change may reside at a different facility.  Similarly, a facility that only handles customer calls 

32 21 CFR 820.3(k) states that  “Establish means define, document (in writing or electronically), and implement.” 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
   
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

may provide relevant complaint data to another facility responsible for trending all quality data 
and managing the CAPA system.  A CAPA system that is shared between facilities, or facility-
specific CAPA systems with established links between them, may facilitate handling of issues 
requiring multi-facility collaboration.  Regardless of the approach, the CAPA system(s) should 
allow for adequate flow of information between facilities and manufacturers for the combination 
product and appropriate investigation and resolution of identified CAPA issues.   

Manufacturing activities that occur at multiple facilities and associated CGMP operating 

systems should be coordinated appropriately.  Each manufacturing facility for a combination 
product should have documentation specifying its respective responsibilities, and the 
manufacturer of the finished combination product should have access to this documentation.  For 
example, if the manufacturer of the finished combination product uses a specification developer 
to design the finished product, that manufacturer should have the design control records or have 
access to them if they are held by the specification developer.  In addition, the manufacturer 
should have assurances that the specification developer maintained an adequate design control 
system.  To give another example, if product testing occurs at a contract testing facility, the 
manufacturer of the finished combination product should have documentation of the testing 
conducted and controls applied at the contract facility or have access to the documentation if 
held at the contract facility.  Accordingly, manufacturers should address access to such records 
among other issues as part of supplier evaluation and oversight. 

Measures that might be taken to ensure CGMP compliance at all manufacturing facilities 
for the combination product include auditing and other oversight activities.  For example, when 
multiple facilities participate in the manufacturing process, the owner may facilitate CGMP 
compliance by coordinating interactions among the facilities, including by entering into 
comprehensive quality agreements with the various facilities and suppliers .  These quality 
agreements may, for instance, specify expectations as to which facility will perform what 
activities and develop and maintain what documentation needed to demonstrate compliance with 
particular CGMP requirements (based, for example, on which aspects of manufacture each 
facility conducts).  These agreements may also detail what measures a facility will take to ensure 
compliance with CGMP requirements and any other relevant duties established by the owner for 
that facility.  For example, an owner may contract for the manufacture of the final combination 
product with a contract manufacturing facility, and detail in the supplier agreements the CGMP 
responsibilities and approaches for that facility. 

E. Control of changes to a combination product 

While not an issue unique to combination products, coordination of changes among 
manufacturers participating in the manufacture of a combination product is an important CGMP 
issue.  Appropriate consideration should be given to any implications for the safety or 
effectiveness of the combination product that might arise from changes to the combination 
product or its constituent parts.   

Single-entity and co-packaged combination product manufacturers must establish 
arrangements with their suppliers, contractors, and consultants to receive notice of changes in the 
product or service, where possible, in accordance with 21 CFR 820.50.  This notice should 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

address changes the supplier makes to its process or product—including to an API, other drug 
components, or a container-closure system—that it manufactures, if the change might affect the 
downstream manufacturing process or the quality of the combination product itself.  These 
combination product manufacturers should also establish procedures for acceptance of 
components, containers/closures, and constituent parts to ensure both detection and evaluation of 
any changes that are critical to the safety or effectiveness of the combination product prior to 
incorporating them into the finished combination product.33   

Similarly, if one entity manufactures one constituent part of a cross-labeled combination 
product and another entity manufactures the other constituent part, both should have procedures 
in place to inform one another of changes that may affect the safety or effectiveness of the 
combination product, and to confirm that the specifications for the respective constituent parts 
remain appropriate or are updated as needed to ensure that the combination product remains safe 
and effective.  For example, a change to the drug constituent part of a cross-labeled combination 
product might require a design change to the device constituent part for the combination product 
to remain safe and effective.  Accordingly, awareness and assessment of drug changes to 
determine whether they require a change to the device constituent part(s) of such a combination 
product may be important to compliance with design control requirements for the device under 
21 CFR 820.30.  Similarly, a change to a device constituent part of a cross-labeled combination 
product may necessitate a change to a drug constituent part, which may require a change in its 
chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC).34, 35

