IV.  What do I need to know about the CGMP requirements 

specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b)? 

A. Provisions from the device QS regulation specified in 21 CFR 
4.4(b)(1)  

This section provides summary descriptions of the provisions from the device QS 
regulation with which manufacturers of single-entity and co-packaged combination products that 
include a device constituent part must demonstrate compliance when using the drug CGMP-
based streamlined approach established under 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1), including considerations 
specific to applying these device QS regulation requirements to combination products.   This 
discussion is not meant to provide a comprehensive analysis, but rather to help manufacturers—
particularly drug and biological product manufacturers who may be less familiar with the device 
QS regulation—understand the purpose and basic elements of the device QS regulation 

33 21 CFR 211.84 details how a manufacturer must sample, test, examine, and accept or reject drug product 
components, containers, and closures. 
34 For additional information on guidance related to CMC topics, see FDA’s webpage:  
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm064979.htm. 
35 While beyond the scope of this guidance, it bears noting that product owners may be obligated to notify the 
Agency of changes or seek Agency approval prior to making them, depending upon the nature of the change.  See, 
for example, 21 CFR 314.70, 601.12, 807.81(a)(3) and 814.39.  Accordingly, controlling changes to combination 
products and the processes and facilities used for their manufacture can be important to ensure compliance with 
other regulatory requirements (in addition to CGMP requirements). 

19 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

provisions specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1). This section also includes references to additional 
guidance documents that may be helpful.36  Section V presents hypothetical examples offering 
additional guidance on how to address these provisions for a combination product. 

1.  Management responsibility (21 CFR 820.20) 

Requirements under 21 CFR 820.20 ensure that management with executive 
responsibility (i.e., senior employees of a manufacturer who have the authority to establish or 
make changes to the quality policy and quality system)37 are actively engaged in oversight of the 
quality system, and reflect the expectation that management with executive responsibility 
demonstrate an active, ongoing commitment to quality system development and 
implementation.38  Statutory CGMP provisions and regulations for drugs establish requirements 
related to management responsibility, and the Agency has also issued guidance on this topic.39  
However, there are specific requirements in 21 CFR 820.20 that are not explicitly addressed in 
drug CGMP requirements, and a manufacturer of a combination product that includes a device 
constituent part must ensure that the elements required under 21 CFR 820.20 are satisfied.   

A combination product manufacturer must establish and maintain an adequate 
organizational structure to ensure that the product is designed and produced in accordance with 
CGMP requirements.  This structure must: establish the appropriate responsibility, authority, and 
interrelation of all personnel who manage, perform, and assess work affecting quality; provide 
adequate resources for management, performance of work, and assessment activities; and include 

36 This section does not address 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1)(v) and (vi), which require manufacturers to demonstrate 
compliance with installation and servicing requirements under 21 CFR 820.170 and 820.200, respectively.  These 
requirements are included in 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1) to ensure manufacturers comply with them when applicable to a 
single-entity or co-packaged combination product.  However, the Agency anticipates that installed and serviced 
devices will rarely be constituent parts of such combination products.  If they are constituent parts of a combination 
product, they are more likely to be separately manufactured and marketed as constituent parts of cross-labeled 
combination products.  In such cases, as discussed in Section II.C.1 II.B, each constituent part manufacturer would 
be subject to the CGMP requirements associated with the constituent part it manufactures.  Accordingly, the device 
constituent part of such a cross-labeled combination product would be subject to installation and servicing 
requirements. 
37 21 CFR 820.3(n). 
38

 As stated in the preamble to the device QS regulation, “Management with executive responsibility is that level of 
management that has the authority to establish and make changes to the company quality policy.  The establishment 
of quality objectives, the translation of such objectives into actual methods and procedures, and the implementation 
of the quality system may be delegated.  The regulation does not prohibit the delegation.  However, it is the 
responsibility of the highest level of management to establish the quality policy and to ensure that it is followed … It 
is without question management’s responsibility to undertake appropriate actions to ensure that employees 
understand management’s policies and objectives. Understanding is a learning process achieved through training 
and reinforcement.  Management reinforces understanding of policies and objectives by demonstrating a 
commitment to the quality system visibly and actively on a continuous basis.  Such commitment can be 
demonstrated by providing adequate resources and training to support quality system development and 
implementation.” (61 FR 52602-52612) 
39 See Section 501 of the FD&C Act [21 USC 351], which requires oversight and controls to ensure product quality, 
including to manage risks and establish the safety of raw materials, in-process materials, and the finished drug 
product (establishing that “current good manufacturing practice” includes management oversight of manufacturing 
and controls to ensure quality and lifecycle risk management).  See also 21 CFR 211.22, 211.25, and 211.180; and 
the Guidance for Industry Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System (April 2009). 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

an appointed management member who is responsible for ensuring that quality system 
requirements are effectively established and maintained, and for reporting on the performance of 
the quality system to management with executive responsibility.40  Management with executive 
responsibility must establish the policy and objectives for and commitment to quality.41  These 
policies and objectives are reflected in the quality plan and quality system procedures.42   

The quality plan must define the quality practices, resources, and activities relevant to the 
combination product that is being designed and manufactured and must establish how the quality 
requirements will be met.43  The plan can either be an independent document, or it can reference 
elements of the manufacturer’s quality system.   

The quality system procedures (21 CFR 820.20(e)) ensure compliance with each aspect 
of the CGMPs applicable to the combination product.44  The number, complexity, and structure 
of a combination product manufacturer’s procedures and instructions may vary depending on 
factors such as the manufacturer’s organizational structure and the complexity of the 
combination product being manufactured.  Drug manufacturers may already have some such 
procedures in place as part of the requirements for a quality control unit under 21 CFR 211.22 
and can reference these procedures and augment them as needed to meet the requirements of 21 
CFR 820.20. 

Management with executive responsibility must periodically review the suitability and 

effectiveness of the quality system, including to ensure that the quality system satisfies the 
established quality policy and objectives.45  These reviews must be conducted at defined 
intervals and with sufficient frequency.  Management review procedures should ensure that 
management has adequate access to relevant information from facilities contracted to perform 
manufacturing activities for the combination product. 

2.  Design controls (21 CFR 820.30) 

The preamble to the rule discusses design control requirements for combination products 

at some length.46  This section discusses the design controls that apply to single-entity or co-
packaged combination products that include a device constituent part that is subject to them.47  
Design control activities confirm that there are no negative interactions between constituent 
parts, and ensure that their combined use results in a combination product that is safe and 
effective and performs as expected.   

40 21 CFR 820.20(b). 
41 21 CFR 820.20(a). 
42 See 21 CFR 820.20(d) and (e). 
43 21 CFR 820.20(d). 
44 21 CFR 820.20(e) 
45 21 CFR 820.20(c). 
46 See 78 FR 4314-4315. 
47 If a manufacturer claims that the device constituent part or combination product is exempt from 21 CFR 820.30, 
the manufacturer should document its evaluation to support this determination.  See sections III.C.3 and C.4 of this 
guidance; see also 21 CFR 820.30(a)(1). 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

The following is a description of design control requirements and the documentation that 

must be maintained for co-packaged and single-entity combination products.48  While 
pharmaceutical development focuses on drug considerations, if broadened to take into account 
the other constituent parts of combination products and how they interrelate, many 
pharmaceutical development practices (for example, Quality by Design principles49) can be 
leveraged and built upon when demonstrating compliance with design controls for a combination 
product.  The Agency recognizes that the terminology used in 21 CFR 820.30 can differ from 
that used for pharmaceutical development.  Manufacturers should be able to communicate to the 
Agency how the terminology they use relates to design control principles and requirements.   

Design control requirements apply to activities during product development as well as to 

postmarket changes to the design or manufacturing process.  Accordingly, the activities 
described below may be conducted as part of premarket development and reflected in 
documentation submitted as part of the marketing authorization process.  Regardless of when the 
activity occurs or where related records may reside, the CGMP operating system should include 
or reference appropriate documentation to ensure readily available access to this documentation 
for FDA inspection.50 

The extent and complexity of the design controls process and associated documentation 

will vary based on the product.  For example, consider a drug product that is already legally 
marketed independently that will have the same formulation, route of administration and 
intended use when marketed as part of a combination product that also incorporates a delivery 
device.  Design controls would begin when the delivery device configuration is judged to be 
feasible and appropriate to develop.  The drug properties would be inputs for design control 
activities that would focus on ensuring that the device appropriately delivers the drug and that 
the drug quality is not adversely affected by its contact with the device.  Conversely, for a novel 
combination product with novel drug and device constituent parts, design controls ensure 
coordinated development of the drug and device resulting in a final combination product that 
meets user needs and achieves intended uses.  The extensiveness of design control activities and 
related documentation for products should also be commensurate with the phase of product 
development.    

As part of the design controls, a design and development plan must be established to 

describe or reference the design and development activities and define responsibility for 
implementation. The plans must identify and describe the interfaces with different groups or 
activities that provide, or result in, input to the design and development process.51    

48 While outside the scope of 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1), it bears noting that the design control process and design history file 
for the device constituent parts of cross-labeled combination products should address the suitability of the device for 
use as part of the combination product, including the interactions and interrelationships between it and other 
constituent parts of the combination product.   
49 See the Guidance for Industry on Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical Development (November 2009), 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/.../Guidances/ucm073507.pdf. 
50 See 21 CFR 820.30(j), 820.180, and 211.180. 
51 21 CFR 820.30(b). 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Design input requirements for the combination product should include considerations 

such as performance characteristics, safety and reliability requirements, and expected needs of 
product users and patients.52  Design inputs should be considered early in product development 
to ensure that development efforts are consistent with the product’s intended use, including the 
needs of users, including patients.  Once the design inputs have been established, the design 
outputs (e.g., specifications and engineering drawings) must be developed based on those 
inputs.53  Once design outputs have been established for all design inputs, design verification and 
validation activities must be performed to ensure that the combination product design output 
meets design input requirements, including user needs and intended uses.  Design review is also 
required to ensure that formal and documented reviews of the design are planned and conducted 
at appropriate stages of the product’s design development,54 and all of these activities must be 
documented in the design history file.55  

Design inputs ensure that design requirements are appropriate to address the intended use 

of the product, and design outputs include documentation of the product specifications that can 
be evaluated against the design inputs as development progresses.  Similarly, Quality Target 
Product Profile (QTPP) in pharmaceutical development involves prospective consideration of the 
quality characteristics of a drug product to ensure desired quality taking into account safety and 
efficacy of the drug product.  A manufacturer may identify potential Critical Quality Attributes 
(CQAs) or properties of a drug product that should be within appropriate limits, ranges, or 
distributions to ensure product quality and refine these CQAs as product development continues.  
QTPP and CQA principles may be applied for combination products in a manner consistent with 
design input and output requirements.  In addition, when developing a combination product, the 
QTPP and CQA for the drug constituent part may be helpful in establishing design inputs and 
design outputs for the combination product. 

Verification means confirmation by examination and provision of objective evidence that 

specified requirements have been fulfilled.56  Design verification confirms that the product 
developed is consistent with the assumptions made by the design team when developing design 
inputs, but does not necessarily confirm that the product is safe and effective for its intended use.  
Design verification activities may include, for example, performance tests, safety tests, or visual 
inspections. 

Design validation means establishing by objective evidence that product specifications 

conform to user needs and intended use(s).57  Design validation ensures that the product is 
designed correctly to achieve its intended purpose(s), and includes testing of production units or 
their equivalents (with appropriate justification58) under actual or simulated use conditions.  

52 See 21 CFR 820.30(c). 
53 See 21 CFR 820.30(d). 
54 See 21 CFR 820.30(e). 
55 See 21 CFR 820.30(j). 
56 See 21 CFR 820.30(f) and 21 CFR 820.3(aa). 
57 See 21 CFR 820.30(g) and 21 CFR 820.3(z)(2). 
58 The preamble to the device QS regulation (61 FR 52619) provides additional detail on use of equivalents: “When 
equivalent devices are used in the final design validation, the manufacturer must document in detail how the device 
was manufactured and how the manufacturing is similar to and possibly different from initial production. Where 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Design validation activities, for example, may include simulated use testing or 
clinical/nonclinical evaluation, including human factors59 and software validation.  Some design 
verification (e.g., bench and/or pre-clinical testing) and validation (e.g., human factors testing, 
when appropriate) will typically be completed prior to the initiation of clinical studies of safety 
and efficacy for the combination product, which are also part of design validation.  Clinical 
studies conducted to support safety and/or efficacy of the constituent parts of a combination 
product may be appropriate to be leveraged as part of the cumulative design validation efforts for 
the overall combination product.   

In addition, manufacturers must perform risk analysis where appropriate,60 which should 

begin early in the design process and continue throughout the lifecycle for the product.  Risk 
analysis should enable identification of unacceptable risks so that they can be mitigated.  It 
influences other aspects of design control and additional activities including purchasing controls 
(see section IV.A.3).  Although existing risk analysis for products used as constituent parts of the 
combination products may be relevant, risk analysis should include considerations for the 
combination product as a whole to identify risks associated with its design, manufacturing 
processes, and intended uses.  Some risks may be identifiable during initial design development 
and addressed in design inputs, while others may become apparent later in product development, 
during premarket review, or based on postmarket experience (including adverse event reporting) 
and used to determine whether any aspect of the design should be modified.  Standards and 
guidance addressing conduct of risk management activities such as risk assessment, risk control, 
risk reporting, and risk review for devices and drugs are appropriate references to inform these 
activities for a combination product.61  Also, risk assessment and management activities 
performed for a drug constituent part under pharmaceutical development practices may become 
elements of the overall risk analysis for a combination product. 

Manufacturers must establish and maintain design transfer procedures to ensure effective 
translation of design specifications into production methods and procedures.62  Design transfer is 
the bridge between the design of the product and the manufacturing process to make the 
commercial product. 

there are differences, the manufacturer must justify why design validation results are valid for the production units, 
lots, or batches.”  For a combination product, this documentation and justification must account for considerations 
arising from inclusion of a drug or biological product, including equivalence of the manufacturing process for the 
drug/biologic constituent part or the combination product as a whole.  The rationale for equivalence should be 
documented and may require bridging studies, completion of comparability protocols, or other test data to support 
that products used for design validation are representative of the combination product that the manufacturer intends 
to market. 
59 For more information on human factors for combination products, see Draft Guidance for Industry an FDA Staff 
Human Factors Studies and Related Clinical Study Considerations in Combination Product Design and 
Development (February 2016).  When finalized, this document will represent the Agency’s current thinking on this 
topic. 
60 21 CFR 820.30(g). 
61 For more information on risk analysis and risk management see, e.g.,  ISO 14971 Risk Management – Medical 
Devices and FDA Guidance for Industry Q9 Quality Risk Management  (June 2006).   
62 21 CFR 820.30(h). 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Manufacturers are required to have procedures to ensure that any changes to design 

requirements are identified, documented, validated or verified where appropriate, reviewed, and 
approved prior to implementation.63  Change controls apply once initial design inputs have been 
approved by the manufacturer.64  A change control process is essential to manage design changes 
both during the original design process for the combination product and after the design has been 
transferred to manufacturing. 65  The records of these changes must be maintained as part of the 
design history file (21 CFR 820.30(j)).  They create a history of the evolution of the design, 
which can be important when investigating failures or evaluating the appropriateness of 
proposed, additional changes to the product.  A manufacturer may choose to use different 
processes for premarket (as opposed to postmarket) changes to accommodate the rapid, iterative 
design process that is often present during investigational stages, so long as the design change 
and transfer process is compliant with 21 CFR 820.30.   

The Design History File (DHF) for a combination product captures all design issues 
relating to the combined use of the constituent parts.  The DHF may not need to document design 
and development planning for established characteristics of the individual constituent parts, for 
example the safety and effectiveness of a drug constituent part of a co-packaged combination 
product, if that drug constituent part was previously approved for the same indication.  If a 
finished device, drug, or biological product is purchased, the combination product manufacturer 
is not required to retrospectively “design” that constituent part with respect to such previously 
reviewed characteristics.  Rather, the combination product manufacturer should understand the 
constituent part’s existing design specifications thoroughly in order to perform design controls 
properly for its use in the combination product.66  If a separately developed drug, device, or 
biological product constituent part needs to be modified to be used in the combination product, 
the manufacturer must assess what design control activities must be performed to ensure safety 
and effectiveness of the combination product (e.g., new formulation of a drug or new features of 
a device).67 

It is appropriate for a DHF for a combination product to leverage and cross-reference 
developmental data and data systems.  Manufacturers transitioning from drug development to 
combination product development should evaluate existing development documentation and 
systems and assess what, if any, changes may be needed to demonstrate compliance with 21 CFR 
820.30.  Manufacturers should be able to explain to FDA in premarket submissions and in 
inspections how their practices and terminology align with the requirements in 21 CFR 820.30, 

63 21 CFR 820.30(i). 
64 61 FR 52621, Comment 87. 
65 21 CFR 820.30(h). 
66 Similarly, if a combination product manufacturer is purchasing device components for inclusion in a combination 
product, and the device component supplier is manufacturing a finished device from the same or similar components 
and is therefore subject to the device QS regulation, the combination product manufacturer may be able to leverage 
elements of that supplier’s design controls in developing the overall design controls for the combination product.  
The information leveraged should typically be covered by a formal agreement between the combination product 
manufacturer and supplier defining maintenance and sharing of design information.  If the component supplier does 
not itself comply with the device QS regulation, the combination product manufacturer’s design control activities for 
the device constituent part will likely need to be more extensive.   
67 21 CFR 820.30(c). 

25 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

and be able to identify and readily access for FDA inspection all documentation needed to 
demonstrate compliance with design control requirements.   

If a manufacturer is evaluating the adequacy of their design controls and documentation 

for a currently marketed combination product, it may be helpful to review premarket 
submissions, the product risk profile, and postmarket experience for the combination product.  
The results of this review can inform decisions on whether additional testing and documentation 
is required.  FDA encourages combination product manufacturers to direct specific questions on 
the adequacy of their design control measures and documentation to the lead center for their 
products, and OCP as needed, for assistance.  For further information on design controls, see the 
preamble to the final device QS regulation.68 

3.  Purchasing controls (21 CFR 820.50) 

Manufacturers of single-entity and co-packaged combination products that include a 

device constituent part must control purchased products69 and services as described in 21 CFR 
820.50.  They must establish such purchasing controls for products received at their facility for 
use in the manufacture of the combination product, for all suppliers of these products, and for 
suppliers of services obtained (such as terminal sterilization conducted by an outside entity) (21 
CFR 820.50(a)).  Facilities that have previously manufactured only drugs, rather than devices or 
combination products, will likely have relevant procedures in place in accordance with part 211, 
subpart E.  However, if these procedures do not demonstrate compliance with the specific 
requirements of 21 CFR 820.50, they must be augmented to do so. 

 Manufacturers must evaluate potential suppliers and define the type and extent of control 

to be exercised over them based on the evaluation results.70  Manufacturers may design and 
conduct such evaluations based on factors such as the risks associated with the supplied product 
or service and complexity of the specifications for it.  Manufacturers must establish and maintain 
records of acceptable suppliers for purchased products and services,71 and establish and maintain 
data that clearly describe or reference the specified requirements for products and services 
received (e.g., contracts with relevant terms).72  

One way to facilitate purchasing control is the careful structuring of purchasing 
agreements with suppliers.  Where possible, such agreements are used to ensure that the 
combination product manufacturer is notified of changes to the products, the manufacturing 
process, or the services being provided.73  Such notice of changes facilitates compliance not only 
with purchasing control duties, but also, potentially, with other regulatory requirements, 
including design control obligations to complete additional design verification testing to address 

68 See Medical Devices; Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) Final Rule; Quality System Regulation, 61 
FR 52602-52662 (October 7, 1996). 
69 Under 21 CFR 820.3(r), the term “product” includes components and manufacturing materials, in addition to in-
process and finished articles.  
70 See 21 CFR 820.50(a)(2). 
71 See 21 CFR 820.50(a)(3). 
72 See 21 CFR 820.50(b). 
73 See 21 CFR 820.50(b). 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

the change (e.g., to ensure that the purity and stability of a drug constituent part is maintained 
when the materials change in a device constituent part that is also a container closure).  If it is not 
possible to obtain such notice, the combination product manufacturer should implement 
additional controls to ensure that changes are identified and appropriate measures are taken.  The 
combination product manufacturer should ensure agreements are appropriately structured, 
whether through direct agreements with suppliers and contract manufacturers or through 
confirmation that such parties have adequate agreements between themselves.  For example, a 
combination product manufacturer may choose to maintain a change agreement with a material 
supplier who provides material directly to a contract manufacturing facility. 

Note that regardless of the nature of purchasing controls, combination product 
manufacturers must comply with the testing requirements under 21 CFR 211.84 with respect to 
drug components, and product containers and closures (see IV.B.1 below).   

4.  Corrective and Preventive Actions (21 CFR 820.100) 

Manufacturers of co-packaged or single-entity combination products that have a device 
constituent part must establish and maintain procedures for implementing CAPA in accordance 
with 21 CFR 820.100.  Relevant requirements in the drug CGMPs include 21 CFR 211.192 and 
21 CFR 211.180(e).74  Manufacturers of the combination product must undertake CAPA 
measures, when required, for issues arising at their facilities.  All relevant manufacturers should 
participate in cross-facility efforts, as appropriate, to determine the root-cause of problems and 
the appropriate measures to correct such problems and prevent recurrence.  Manufacturers of 
combination products should document these activities.75  The CAPA process for combination 
products also should consider implications of corrective and preventive actions for all constituent 
parts and for the combination product as a whole.  

While combination product manufacturers have flexibility in coordinating CAPA systems 
across facilities, they maintain responsibility for ensuring that the 21 CFR 820.100 requirements 
are met. Manufacturers should ensure that an appropriately comprehensive review of activities is 
undertaken at relevant facilities to determine the cause of existing or potential problems, which 
could include manufacturing problems, deviations, or nonconformities for a constituent part or 
the combination product as a whole.  The manufacturer should have appropriate mechanisms in 
place to ensure that issues are identified, action(s) needed to correct and prevent recurrence are 
taken, and necessary changes are implemented.  The manufacturer should take appropriate 
measures, which may include CAPAs, with regard to all relevant manufacturing steps at all 
relevant facilities to correct problems and to prevent or mitigate them going forward.   

74 See also FDA Guidance for Industry,  Investigating Out-of-Specification (OOS) Test Results for Pharmaceutical 
Production (October 2006), which discusses appropriate identification, assessment, and investigation of OOS results 
for drug products, including results obtained under 21 CFR 211.165 (a provision specified in 21 CFR part 4).  
Quality data from OOS investigations and any related corrective actions should be addressed through the 
combination product manufacturer’s quality system. Also, FDA guidance for industry, ICH Q10 Pharmaceutical 
Quality System (April 2009), includes additional recommendations for preventive actions and, when failures or other 
issues occur, corrective actions. 
75 For further guidance, see the preamble to the device QS regulation at 61 Fed. Reg. at 52633-52635, Comments 
158-166. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

