V.  Application of CGMP requirements to specific types of 

combination products 

The hypothetical scenarios addressed in this section focus on three types of combination 
products.  While each of these types of combination products is subject both to the drug CGMPs 
and to the device QS regulation, each example is used to focus on particular CGMP 
considerations relating to CGMP provisions specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b).  Specifically: 

•  Section A, a prefilled syringe example, focuses on how to comply with the device QS 
regulation provisions specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1) if a manufacturer adopts a drug 
CGMP-based streamlined approach for its CGMP operating system. 

•  Section B, a drug-coated mesh example, focuses on considerations for complying with 
certain device QS regulations after a drug constituent part is combined with a device.   

•  Section C, a drug-eluting stent (DES) example, focuses on how to comply with the drug 
CGMP provisions specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b)(2) if a manufacturer adopts a device QS 
regulation-based streamlined approach for its CGMP operating system.  

This discussion is intended to highlight only certain issues that a combination product 

might raise relating to the CGMP provisions specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b), and considerations for 
addressing these issues.  The discussion may be helpful to inform understanding of the CGMP 
provisions that are addressed here not only in regard to the types of combination products in the 
scenarios, but for other types of combination products as well.  However, this discussion is not 
intended to reflect a complete analysis of the CGMP issues that need to be addressed for the 
types of products discussed in the scenarios or other types of combination products.  In addition, 
specific products may raise distinct issues that are not taken into account in the hypothetical 
scenarios presented below.  If manufacturers have specific questions relating to their particular 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

products, the Agency recommends that they contact the lead center for the product or OCP, as 
needed, for assistance. 

A. Prefilled syringe 

1.  Scenario Description 

A drug manufacturer (Manufacturer A) plans to sell a drug in a prefilled syringe  
presentation.114  Manufacturer A already has marketing approval for the drug product and 
intends to apply for marketing approval for the prefilled syringe presentation.  No changes to the 
drug formulation will be made.  Manufacturer A will buy off-the-shelf syringe components from 
a supplier (Manufacturer B) who also manufactures finished syringes using the same 
components.  Manufacturer A will assemble the syringe components, prefill the syringe at a 
facility it operates, and then package, label, and distribute the prefilled syringe from this facility.   

Manufacturer A’s facility has an existing drug CGMP operating system.  As the prefilled 

syringe is a single-entity combination product under 21 CFR 3.2(e)(1), Manufacturer A must 
demonstrate compliance with both the drug CGMPs and device QS regulation.115  To do so, 
Manufacturer A opts to establish a CGMP operating system using the drug CGMP-based 
streamlined approach in accordance with 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1).  While Manufacturer A must ensure 
that its operating system fully complies with the drug CGMPs for this product, taking into 
account all of the issues raised by inclusion of the device constituent part, this example focuses 
on considerations for demonstrating compliance with the provisions from the device QS 
regulation specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1).  

2.  Compliance with device QS regulation requirements 

Having chosen to use the drug CGMP-based streamlined approach under 21 CFR 
4.4(b)(1), in addition to demonstrating compliance with the drug CGMPs, Manufacturer A must 
comply with the provisions of the device Quality System (QS) regulation specified in 21 CFR 
4.4(b)(1).  For each such provision, this discussion offers exemplary considerations and activities 
for the combination product manufacturer seeking to meet the device QS regulation 
requirements. 

a)  21 CFR 820.20, Management Responsibility   

While section 501 of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 351) and 21 CFR 211.22, 211.25, and 
211.180 establish requirements relevant to management responsibility, Manufacturer A must 
ensure that its CGMP operating system demonstrates compliance with the specific requirements 
in 21 CFR 820.20 (discussed in greater detail in section IV.A.1). 116 

114 The design control considerations for a prefilled syringe with a biological product are largely similar to those 
covered in the example, although some additional issues may be more common such as the interaction of the 
biological product with the syringe materials and the effect of product viscosity on delivery. 
115 See 21 CFR part 4. 
116 See 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1). 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Manufacturer A should, for example, review its existing CGMP operating system to 

assess whether changes are needed to comply with this provision.  As part of this review, 
management with executive responsibility for Manufacturer A should review the facility’s 
quality policy and develop and implement appropriate oversight procedures, if such procedures 
are not already in place, to ensure that both the policy and oversight are adequate.  The oversight 
procedures should include clear delineation of the personnel to whom management with 
executive responsibility is delegating responsibility for implementing the quality policy 
(including translation into methods and procedures) and the CGMP operating system for this 
product at the facility. 

b)  21 CFR 820.30, Design Controls   

Manufacturer A is responsible for establishing and maintaining procedures for design 

control activities for the combination product.  In this scenario, Manufacturer A is the owner and 
is manufacturing the prefilled syringe.  Accordingly, Manufacturer A is responsible for the 
design control activities for the syringe as part of the combination product, as well as having 
overall responsibility for the combination product.  However, Manufacturer A is buying the 
syringe components from Manufacturer B, another manufacturer, which uses the same 
components to manufacture finished syringes.  As a result, Manufacturer A may be able to 
leverage syringe-specific design control documentation from the design controls Manufacturer B 
uses for its finished syringes.117  Because no changes are to be made to the drug other than being 
put into the syringe, the drug comes into the design control process as an input to the design of 
the syringe to ensure that the syringe’s design reflects adequate consideration of the drug’s 
characteristics, as indicated below.   

An appropriate first step for Manufacturer A would be to review Manufacturer B’s design 

control data to determine what new questions are raised by the use of the syringe with the drug, 
and to assess what additional design control activities may be needed as a consequence.  It may 
be the case, for example, that Manufacturer A can demonstrate that the only new design 
questions that are raised concern the performance of the syringe as a container/closure to store 
the drug and the extent to which the contact between the syringe and the drug may affect its 
performance as a delivery system.  Regardless, Manufacturer A must ensure that all design 
considerations for the combination product are addressed in accordance with 21 CFR 820.30. 

117 If the supplier of the device components did not have design control information, Manufacturer A would likely 
need to undertake more extensive design control activities for the syringe.  For example, Manufacturer A would 
need to perform device-specific verification testing to confirm that the syringe meets necessary specifications for 
plunger force or other parameters if the syringe component supplier has not conducted such testing suitable to enable 
leveraging. 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

i. 

Design inputs and outputs 

The table below includes illustrative examples of design inputs and user needs and 

related design outputs for this prefilled syringe. 

Design Input/User Needs 
Required minimum/maximum dose delivery 
for drug 
Drug viscosity and desired/required delivery 
rate 
Expected use condition (e.g., expected user 
experience/education level) 
Maximum and minimum allowable 
temperature for prefilled syringe 
No degradation of drug or syringe over the 
expected shelf-life as a result of contact with 
one another 
Expected shipping method and appropriate 
storage conditions 

Drug delivery method (e.g., needle or 
needleless delivery) 

Design Output 
Drawing/specification for syringe dimensions, 
markings, etc. 
Drawing/specification for needle bore, glide 
force, etc. 
Content and reading level for the prefilled 
syringe’s labeling 
Packaging/labeling specifications for the 
prefilled syringe 
Specifications for drug-contacting syringe 
materials 

Design drawings/specifications for primary 
and secondary packaging, labeling for 
acceptable storage conditions 
Drawing/specification for needle and/or other 
associated syringe components 

ii. 

Design verification and validation 

Once Manufacturer A has established design outputs for all design inputs, it must 
perform design verification and validation activities to ensure that the combination product meets 
design input requirements, including user needs and intended uses.118  Examples of appropriate 
testing of the prefilled syringe include:  bench testing of the delivery of the drug from the syringe 
to ensure repeatable and accurate drug delivery; shock and vibration testing of the packaged 
prefilled syringe to ensure no damage or loss of integrity in shipping; validation that expected 
users can adequately follow the instructions for use; other human factors studies; 
biocompatibility testing; 119 drug and syringe compatibility studies; leachables and extractables 
testing; and verification that the prefilled syringe works with all expected delivery methods (i.e., 
needle, needleless).  These activities would be documented in the DHF pursuant to 21 CFR 
820.30(j) and would be subject to design change and review requirements pursuant to 21 CFR 
820.30(e) and (i). 

118 See 21 CFR 820.30(f) and (g). 
119 For additional information on biocompatibility, see Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff:  Use of International 
Standard ISO 10993-1, "Biological evaluation of medical devices - Part 1: Evaluation and testing within a risk 
management process" (June 2016).   
 See also, USP Chapter <87> Biological Reactivity, In Vitro and USP <88> Biological Reactivity Tests, In Vivo. 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

iii. 

Risk Analysis 

Manufacturer A should identify risks associated with the prefilled syringe design, its 

manufacturing processes, and intended uses, and also reduce or mitigate any unacceptable 
risk(s).120  The table below lists some potential risks associated with prefilled syringes and 
potential mitigations for these risks. 

Risk 
Syringe filled with incorrect drug dose 
Loss of sterility  

Drug contamination from materials of 
syringe construction 

Syringe failure during use 

Mitigation 
In-process acceptance testing, process validation 
Container-closure integrity testing, packaging 
validation/testing 
Purchasing controls (including receiving 
acceptance activities for components received from 
syringe component manufacturer), in-process and 
finished product testing to ensure no introduction of 
contaminants during manufacture and over the 
product shelf-life  
Design verification testing on syringe, purchasing 
controls over syringe component manufacturer(s) 

iv. 

Design changes  

Manufacturer A must also have procedures in place to ensure that any changes to design 
requirements are identified, documented, validated and/or verified, reviewed, and approved prior 
to implementation.121  Activities should include review of the original risk analysis, review and 
approval of the revised design inputs and outputs, and review and approval of the design change.  
For example, before changing a material used in the syringe that comes into contact with the 
drug, Manufacturer A should conduct verification activities to ensure that no degradation of 
performance characteristics will occur before the expiration date for the combination product as 
a result of the change of materials.122  Likewise, any change to the formulation of the drug 
should include design control activities such as verification to confirm that the new formulation 
does not degrade performance of the syringe.  All of this information would need to become a 
part of the DHF.123   

v. 

Design history file  

The DHF may include references or point to information residing elsewhere so long as 

the reference or pointer is precise enough to allow the necessary information to be readily 

120 See 21 CFR 820.30(g). 
121 See 21 CFR 820.30(i). 
122 Changes to materials that contact the drug may raise drug CGMP considerations, for example, under stability 
testing and expiration dating requirements (21 CFR 211.137 and 21 CFR 211.167).  When possible, manufacturers 
may leverage data collected in meeting these 21 CFR 211 requirements when determining what verification 
activities are required under 21 CFR 820.30.   
123 See 21 CFR 820.30(j).  

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

accessed as needed, including for inspections.  For example, elements of the syringe component 
manufacturer’s design documentation may be relied upon to support the combination product 
DHF.  Such information on the syringe may reside at Manufacturer B’s (syringe component 
manufacturer) facility, so long as the necessary documentation can be accessed in a reasonable 
time during inspection of Manufacturer A.  Manufacturer A should ensure access to such 
documentation through supplier agreements with Manufacturer B under its purchasing controls 
(21 CFR 820.50).  Documentation of development of the drug product that preceded the design 
effort to incorporate the drug product into a prefilled syringe may be referenced in the DHF and 
become an input to the combination product design effort (though such drug-only development is 
not itself subject to design controls). 

c)  21 CFR 820.50, Purchasing Controls   

Manufacturer A is required to control its purchasing activities, including for the syringe 

components, in accordance with 21 CFR 820.50.124  For example, if the syringe barrel and 
plunger material is critical to ensuring that there is no adverse reaction with the drug, 
Manufacturer A should structure purchasing agreements with Manufacturer B to ensure that 
Manufacturer A is notified of any changes to this material prior to implementation of the change.  
Similarly, if Manufacturer A uses an outside facility for terminal sterilization of the prefilled 
syringe, Manufacturer A must also have appropriate controls over that sterilization service 
provider.125   

d)  21 CFR 820.100, Corrective and Preventive Actions   

Manufacturer A is required to establish and maintain CAPA procedures for the 
combination product.  Following are two examples of issues that might arise and exemplary 
steps for addressing them: 

Example 1:  Manufacturer A has implemented in-process manufacturing verification 

procedures to confirm that the syringe is being filled with the correct amount of the drug, and the 
data from this verification are analyzed for potential nonconformities.  Manufacturer A notes an 
increase in nonconformities relating to the volume of drug being put in the syringe and in turn 
opens a CAPA to investigate the problem.  Upon investigation of the cause of the improper fill 
volume, Manufacturer A determines that maintenance procedures on the filling equipment are 
the cause of the incorrect fill volume.  Manufacturer A updates the maintenance procedures and 
performs verification/validation testing to confirm that the changes correct the problem and do 
not cause new ones.   

Example 2:  Manufacturer A begins receiving an increased number of customer 
complaints related to holes or other damage to the syringe’s sterile package and opens a CAPA 
to investigate the issue.  The CAPA reveals that Manufacturer B has made changes to a syringe 
component such that there are sharp edges that can damage the sterile pouch during shipping.  

124 In addition, because the device constituent part (syringe) is also a container/closure for the drug, Manufacturer A 
must perform acceptance testing of the syringe components in accordance with 21 CFR 211.84. 
125 See 21 CFR 820.50. 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Manufacturer A works with Manufacturer B to eliminate the sharp edge or finds a new supplier.  
Manufacturer A also augments purchasing specifications and acceptance test steps to perform 
visual inspection of the syringe components.  Manufacturer A repeats related design verification 
testing to ensure that the new syringe meets all design requirements and does not result in pouch 
damage during shipping.   

e)  21 CFR 820.170, Installation and 820.200, Servicing 

Installation and servicing requirements would not apply to the prefilled syringe because 

the product does not require installation or servicing activities. 

B. Drug-coated mesh 

1.  Scenario Description 

Manufacturer A plans to sell a synthetic surgical mesh coated with a drug.  Manufacturer 

A has a marketing authorization to sell the uncoated mesh.  Manufacturer A wants to coat the 
mesh with a drug to treat infection at the site of the product’s implantation.  Manufacturer B has 
an approval to market a drug for local administration to treat infection at the site of implantation 
of this class of device, but not in a formulation suitable for coating onto the mesh.  Manufacturer 
A has established a business relationship with Manufacturer B to use the drug and develop the 
data needed to support Manufacturer A’s marketing authorization for the coated mesh.  
Manufacturer B will manufacture the drug formulation for spraying onto the mesh, and 
Manufacturer A will manufacture the finished drug-coated mesh combination product. 

2.  Compliance with QS regulation requirements 

The coated mesh product is a single-entity combination product under 21 CFR 3.2(e)(1).  
Therefore, Manufacturer A is subject both to the drug CGMPs and the device QS regulation for 
this combination product.  Accordingly, Manufacturer A must ensure that its CGMP operating 
system complies with both the device QS regulation and drug CGMPs, in accordance with one of 
the approaches permitted under 21 CFR 4.4.  Because Manufacturer A is already marketing the 
uncoated mesh, it has an existing device QS regulation-based operating system, and chooses to 
operate under a device QS regulation-based streamlined approach for the combination product.  
This discussion focuses on design control and purchasing control considerations arising from 
inclusion of the drug constituent part in the combination product. 

a)  21 CFR 820.30, Design Controls 

A focus of the design control process for the drug constituent part of the combination 

product is to ensure that the drug-coated mesh will be safe and effective for treating infection at 
the site of implantation.  Accordingly, if the necessary dose of the drug for effective treatment  of 
infection, for example, is already known, it would be an input (if the precise dose is not yet 
known, then an input would be that the product elute a safe and effective dose); design outputs 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

and validation and verification would need to be established to ensure that the required dose is 
provided when the drug elutes from the mesh.126  In addition, risk analysis must be conducted to 
identify any risks associated with the design, manufacturing, and use of the mesh.127  Mitigation 
measures should then be identified and performed to address any identified risks.  Design 
reviews should cover these and other related design considerations for the product, and personnel 
with expertise in both the drug- and device-specific issues (as well as an individual independent 
from the design stage being reviewed) should be included in these reviews.  The transfer of the 
product design into production specifications should address all important aspects of the drug 
constituent part for use in the combination product.128 

i. 

Design inputs and outputs 

The table below includes illustrative examples of design inputs, including user needs, and 

corresponding design outputs relating to the inclusion of the drug constituent part. 

Design Input/User Needs 
Required delivery dose and delivery rate for 
the drug 

Expected use condition (e.g., anatomical 
location of use, surgical technique) 

Maximum allowable temperature during 
transportation, handling, and storage for the 
combination product 
No unacceptable degradation of the drug 
over the expected shelf-life  

No degradation of the surgical mesh over 
the expected shelf-life 

Design Output 
Drug formulation and concentration, coating 
thickness, uniformity of coating, manufacturing 
process requirements, allowable storage 
conditions 
Labeling (instructions for use), material/drug 
composition to ensure no damage to mesh or 
coating during surgical placement 
Packaging/labeling specifications for the 
combination product 

Specifications for the drug formulation drug-
contacting materials and packaging, shelf-life 
labeling 
Specifications for mesh material, drug 
formulation and packaging, shelf-life labeling  

ii. 

Design verification and validation 

Several examples of design verification and validation activities are described below: 

-  One intended use is that the drug-coated mesh will treat infections.  Manufacturer A 
must develop adequate clinical data (design validation) to ensure that the drug, when 
combined with the mesh, is effective in treating infection and does not raise safety 
concerns.129  Design outputs from this study would include the drug concentration in 
the coating formulation (to be specified in purchasing controls over Manufacturer B) 

126 See 21 CFR 820.30(d), (f), and (g). 
127 See 21 CFR 820.30(g). 
128 See 21 CFR 820.30(h). 
129 See 21 CFR 820.30(g). 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

and the coating thickness (specified in process controls over the application of the 
coating by Manufacturer A). 

−  A user need is that a physician be able to use the mesh product as labeled without 
damaging the drug coating or the mesh material.  Manufacturer A would have to 
verify that the mechanical properties of the coated mesh are such that the product can 
withstand the stresses anticipated during the surgical procedure and still perform as 
intended.130  The results would be used to define and develop design outputs for the 
combination product, including in-process acceptance testing criteria during 
manufacturing, appropriate product specifications for the drug coated mesh, and 
instructions for use. 

−  Another input to the design process is that the product have a shelf-life consistent 
with the stability of the drug formulation and the mesh.  Manufacturer A would 
perform design verification testing such as bench testing after aging to confirm that 
the critical performance properties of the mesh material are not degraded during 
storage or as a result of contact with the drug coating, as well as stability studies131 to 
ensure that the properties of the drug are not degraded over the expected shelf life.  
The design outputs arising from this process would include the labeled expiration date 
and storage conditions for the combination product and packaging design 
specifications.   

iii. 

Risk analysis and mitigation 

The table below lists some potential risks associated with a surgical mesh coated with a 

drug, and potential mitigations for these risks. 

Risk 
Drug concentration in coating not 
sufficient to treat infection (e.g., due to 
insufficient drug coating per surface area 
of the mesh or non-uniformity of 
coating),  inappropriate delivery rate 
Mesh erodes or drug degrades during use 
or storage 

Mitigation 
Clinical testing of the combination product, in-
process acceptance testing, manufacturing process 
validation 

Design verification testing (bench), clinical 
testing, labeling (instructions for use, expiration 
dating), purchasing controls over drug supplier, 
specifications and other process controls 

iv. 

Design history file 

All of the design control activities required by 21 CFR 820.30 (summarized in IV.A.2 

above) must be addressed in the DHF for the drug-coated mesh.  The information developed as a 

130 See 21 CFR 820.30(f). 
131 See the Guidance for Industry on Q1A(R2) Stability Testing of New Drug Substances and Products (November 
2003). 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

result of design control activities will be assessed as part of premarket review of this 
combination product (e.g., the suitability of the drug formulation and the compatibility of the 
mesh with the drug).  Accordingly, much of the information included in the DHF would be 
submitted as part of the premarket review process.  Manufacturer A may opt to incorporate such 
information into the DHF by cross-reference to such premarket documentation.  Whatever 
approach Manufacturer A selects must ensure that all required design history information is 
readily available to FDA for review. 

The DHF for the surgical mesh must include design input, output, verification and 
validation data, and the results of design reviews for the combination product.  In developing the 
design controls related to the drug constituent part, Manufacturer A may rely on the safety, 
efficacy, quality and in situ dose data for the drug as independently marketed.  These existing 
data that supported approval of the drug would be available as a reference for the combination 
product DHF to enable development of design inputs for the drug constituent part and the 
combination product as a whole, and thus facilitate its development process. 

b)  21 CFR 820.50, Purchasing Controls 

Manufacturer A already has established procedures for controlling purchasing/supplier 
activities pursuant to 21 CFR 820.50.  Under this provision, Manufacturer A must ensure that 
appropriate purchasing controls for Manufacturer B are established and maintained.  In 
particular, based on risk associated with the drug and supplier, Manufacturer A must evaluate 
Manufacturer B as a potential supplier of the drug and establish the type and extent of control to 
be exercised over Manufacturer B as a selected supplier.132 

Purchasing controls (and acceptance activities under 21 CFR 211.84) with respect to the 

drug constituent part should focus on ensuring that Manufacturer B can supply the drug that 
meets the specifications that Manufacturer A has established during the design control process.  
Manufacturer A should establish purchasing agreements with Manufacturer B to ensure that 
Manufacturer A is notified of any changes that may affect the performance of the combination 
product prior to Manufacturer B’s implementation of the changes.  The notifications should 
address issues including changes in the drug specification, its components, composition of drug 
coating materials, or the drug manufacturing process or facility.  Such proposed changes may 
require that Manufacturer A complete additional design verification and/or validation.  For 
example, verification testing may be necessary to confirm that the purity and stability of the drug 
is maintained, pursuant to the requirements of 21 CFR 820.30(i).  

C. Drug Eluting Stent (DES)   

1.  Scenario Description 

In this scenario, Manufacturer A is the owner for a drug-eluting stent (DES) composed of 

a stent coated with a drug.  Manufacturer B manufactures the active pharmaceutical ingredient 

132 See 21 CFR 820.50(a)(2). 

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

(API or bulk drug substance), Manufacturer C manufactures a polymer with which the bulk drug 
substance will be combined for coating onto the stent, and Manufacturer D manufactures the 
materials used for the product’s primary packaging.  Manufacturer A purchases the bulk drug 
substance from Manufacturer B and the polymer from Manufacturer C, then formulates the drug 
coating solution and uses it to coat the stent in its own facility.  At the same facility, 
Manufacturer A packages the DES using the primary packaging materials it purchases from 
Manufacturer D.   

2.  Compliance with drug CGMP requirements 

The DES is a single-entity combination product as defined in 21 CFR 3.2(e)(1) and, 

therefore, is subject to both the drug CGMPs and device QS regulation.  As a device 
manufacturer, Manufacturer A already has a CGMP operating system designed to comply with 
the device QS regulation and has elected to establish a device QS regulation-based streamlined 
approach for the DES in accordance with 21 CFR 4.4(b)(2).  While Manufacturer A must ensure 
that this operating system complies with the device QS regulation, taking into account all of the 
issues raised by inclusion of the drug constituent part, this example focuses on considerations for 
complying with the drug CGMP provisions specified in 21 CFR 4.4(b)(2). 

a)  21 CFR 211.84, Testing and approval or rejection of drug components, product 

containers, and closures 

Manufacturer A has controls in place to evaluate suppliers, contractors, and consultants 
based on their ability to meet quality and other specified requirements and to control incoming 
materials in accordance with 21 CFR 820.50 and 21 CFR 820.80.  Under 21 CFR 4.4(b)(2), 
Manufacturer A must augment its existing CGMP operating system as needed to satisfy the 
requirements of 21 CFR 211.84 for the DES. 

Manufacturer A’s purchasing controls for the DES must include evaluation of 

Manufacturer B as the supplier of the bulk drug substance,  Manufacturer C as the supplier of the 
polymer for the coating, and Manufacturer D as the supplier of the primary packaging materials, 
in conformance with 21 CFR 820.50(a)(1).  In addition, under its CGMP operating system for 
the facility, Manufacturer A has controls to identify the acceptance status of manufactured 
products.  Manufacturer A’s responsibilities under 21 CFR 211.84 relate to these various 
obligations and controls arising from the device QS regulation.   

 In accordance with 21 CFR 211.84, the bulk drug substance, polymer, and primary 

packaging materials supplied by manufacturers B, C, and D must be sampled, tested, or 
examined, as appropriate, by Manufacturer A to determine whether they should be approved or 
rejected for use.  The primary packaging materials should be visually inspected to ensure that the 
correct, specified materials are received from Manufacturer D.  Each lot of bulk drug substance 
and polymer must be tested to verify conformity with written specifications for purity, quality, 
and strength.133  Due to the nature and intended use of sterile drug eluting stents, testing must 
include microbiological testing of the bulk drug substance and polymer.   

133 See 21 CFR 211.84(d)(2). 

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Under certain circumstances, Manufacturer A may rely on a report of analysis from a 

supplier in lieu of conducting some of its own testing.  If, for example, Manufacturer B performs 
conformity testing for the bulk drug substance (testing to ensure that the material meets 
appropriate purity, strength, and quality specifications) just prior to the shipment of material to 
Manufacturer A, then a report of analysis may be accepted by Manufacturer A in lieu of testing 
for these characteristics by Manufacturer A, if the following conditions are met.134 

Manufacturer A is still responsible for the performance of at least one specific identity 

test upon receipt of each lot of the bulk drug substance, even when a report of analysis 
accompanies the lot.135  Reliance on reports of analyses is also contingent on Manufacturer A 
establishing the reliability of the supplier’s analyses through appropriate validation of the test 
results at appropriate intervals.136  The supplier can be evaluated through initial purchasing 
controls and subsequently at suitable intervals.  A similar analysis would apply if Manufacturer 
C were to conduct conformity testing for the polymer it supplies to Manufacturer A.  Incoming 
examination or testing by Manufacturer A and receipt of any reports of analysis must occur prior 
to use of the material in the manufacture of the DES. 

b)  21 CFR 211.103, Calculation of yield 

Calculation of yield should be conducted during all appropriate steps in the 
manufacturing process prior to and after application of the coating to the stent, including the 
formulation of the coating.137  Manufacturer A is responsible for the calculation of yield at 
appropriate phases of manufacture at its facility, including application of the coating to the DES, 
and the packaging of the DES.  The formula used and the data generated for the calculation 
should be maintained in Manufacturer A’s batch production and control record.   

c)  21 CFR 211.132, Tamper-evident packaging requirements for over-the-counter 

(OTC) human drug products 

This regulatory requirement is not applicable to drug-eluting stents, as they are not OTC 

products. 

d)  21 CFR 211.137, Expiration dating 

As the manufacturer of the combination product, Manufacturer A is responsible for 

establishing the expiration date on the labeling of the finished combination product.  The 
expiration date must be established based on the data from the stability studies for the finished 
packaged DES and should also take into account other shelf-life considerations as required under 

134 See 21 CFR 211.84(d)(2). 
135 21 CFR 211.84(d)(2). 
136 See 21 CFR 211.84(d)(2). 
137 Drug-coated stents that are rejected due only to defects in the device constituent part (stent) will result in 
corresponding loss of drug constituent part from the batch/lot.  This loss should be captured as part of the yield 
calculations for the drug constituent part and investigation of the cause of that loss should identify the manufacturing 
problem that is leading to these device constituent part nonconformities. 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

design control.  These considerations include the functionality of the stent and polymer and the 
integrity of the coating and the packaging.138 

e)  21 CFR 211.165, Testing and release for distribution 

Manufacturer A must test each batch of the finished combination product to determine 

conformance with the final written specifications for the product.139  A detailed listing of all the 
tests performed on the DES and the acceptance criteria should be incorporated into the 
documentation for the manufacturing, production, and laboratory systems.  A description of each 
analytical test should be prepared and documented in standard operating procedures.  A general 
list of tests for drug-eluting stents is provided below:   

Identification 

Impurities and Degradation Products 

•  Appearance 
• 
•  Assay 
• 
•  Content Uniformity 
•  Drug Release Rate (immediate and/or extended release rates) 
•  Package Integrity and Sterility Assurance 
•  Endotoxins 
•  Particulate Matter 
•  Additional Testing, when applicable (including testing for polymer molecular weight, 

residual monomers, catalysts, and other additives) 

f)  21 CFR 211.166, Stability testing 

Stability testing for the final DES product should address the following considerations: 

appearance, assay/drug content, impurities/degradation products, rate of drug release, particulate 
matter, sterility, and package integrity.  Methods used for batch release under 21 CFR 211.165 
may also be suitable for stability testing.  Analytical procedures for stability testing should be 
fully validated as suitable to demonstrate stability.140  

g)  21 CFR 211.167, Special testing requirements 

Manufacturer A must conduct or contract to conduct testing of the DES in accordance 

with 21 CFR 211.167(a) because this class of product is purported to be sterile and non-
pyrogenic.  In addition, testing in accordance with 21 CFR 211.167(c) must be conducted 
because the DES constitutes a controlled-release dosage form. 

138 See 21 CFR 211.137(a) and (b). 
139 See 21 CFR 211.165(a). 
140 If Manufacturer A decides to develop a family of drug-eluting stents over time, differing from one another in the 
size of the stent, the Agency does not intend to object to the manufacturer’s leveraging previously generated stability 
data for the existing versions to establish expiration dating for later versions, or newer products being incorporated 
into the ongoing stability program for the existing marketed drug-eluting stents, so long as the manufacturer can 
provide adequate justification and such approaches have been reviewed by FDA, where applicable. 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

h)  21 CFR 211.170, Reserve samples   

Manufacturer A must maintain reserve samples representative of each lot of the active 
ingredient used in the combination product and of each lot or batch of the finished, packaged 
DES.141  Reserve samples must consist of at least twice the quantity necessary to perform all 
tests required for the active ingredient and the finished DES, excluding sterility and pyrogen 
testing.142  The reserve samples must be kept for the time periods required by 21 CFR 211.170.  
The samples of the active ingredient must be kept for 1 year past the expiration date of the last 
lot of finished drug-eluting stents to use that lot of the active ingredient.143 The samples for each 
lot or batch of the finished DES must be kept for 1 year after the expiration date for the 
combination product.144  If Manufacturer A maintains reserve samples in a third-party storage 
facility, Manufacturer A should ensure, via purchasing controls (21 CFR 820.50), that the facility 
can meet applicable CGMP requirements.145 

VI.  Contact Us 

If you have questions regarding compliance with CGMP requirements for combination 
products after reviewing this guidance and the materials cited in this document, we encourage 
you to contact us.  We recommend you contact the lead center for your product in the first 
instance.  However, you may also contact OCP for assistance.  Below are contact points for each 
center and OCP.  You may follow existing processes for your lead center when requesting 
feedback on combination product issues (e.g., meeting requests to CBER/CDER,146 pre-
submissions to CDRH147). 

1.  CBER   

Mail:   

Phone:  
Email:   

Office of Communication, Outreach and Development (OCOD) 
10903 New Hampshire Avenue 
Building 71, Room 3128 
Silver Spring, MD  20993 
1-800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010  
ocod@fda.hhs.gov 

141 See 21 CFR 211.170(a) and (b). 
142 See 21 CFR 211.170(a) and (b). 
143 See 21 CFR 211.170(a)(1). 
144 See 21 CFR 211.170(b)(1). 
145 Additional information on drug-eluting stents is provided in the draft Guidance for Industry on Coronary Drug-
Eluting Stents–Nonclinical and Clinical Studies –(March 2008). When finalized, this guidance will represent FDA’s 
current thinking on this topic.   
146 See Guidance for Industry: Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or Applicants (May 2009). 
147 See Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff: Requests for Feedback on Medical Device Submissions: 
The Pre-Submission Program and Meetings with Food and Drug Administration Staff  (February 2014). 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
                                                 
2.  CDER   

Mail: 

Phone: 
Email: 

3.  CDRH   

Mail:  

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Division of Drug Information (DDI) 
Hillandale Building 
10001 New Hampshire Avenue 
Silver Spring, MD  20993 
1-855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400 
druginfo@fda.hhs.gov 

Division of Industry and Consumer Education (DICE) 
10903 New Hampshire Avenue 
Building 66, Room 4621 
Silver Spring, MD  20993 

Phone:    1-800-638-2041 or 301-796-7100 
Email:    DICE@fda.hhs.gov 

4.  OCP 

Mail: 

  Office of Combination Products 
Food and Drug Administration  
10903 New Hampshire Avenue 
Building 32, Hub/Mail Room #5129 
Silver Spring, MD  20993 
301-796-8930 
301-847-8619 
combination@fda.gov 

Phone: 
Fax:      
Email:   

VII.  Glossary 

Note: this glossary is for use exclusively with this guidance document.  Definitions that have 
been taken from federal regulations include the relevant citation. 

Constituent part:  A drug, device, or biological product that is part of a combination product. 
(21 CFR 4.2) 

Co-packaged combination product:  Two or more separate products packaged together in a 
single package or as a unit and comprised of drug and device products, device and biological 
products, or biological and drug products.  (21 CFR 3.2(e)(2)) 

Cross-labeled combination product:  (i) A drug, device, or biological product packaged 
separately that according to its investigational plan or proposed labeling is intended for use only 
with an approved individually specified drug, device, or biological product where both are 
required to achieve the intended use, indication, or effect and where upon approval of the 
proposed product the labeling of the approved product would need to be changed, e.g., to reflect 

54 

 
 
 
 
       
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

a change in intended use, dosage form, strength, route of administration, or significant change in 
dose; or (ii) any investigational drug, device, or biological product packaged separately that 
according to its proposed labeling is for use only with another individually specified 
investigational drug, device, or biological product where both are required to achieve the 
intended use, indication, or effect. (21 CFR 3.2(e)(3) and 21 CFR 3.2(e)(4)) 

Device QS regulation-based streamlined approach:  A CGMP operating system that is 
intended to demonstrate compliance with all of the provisions of the device QS regulation and 
the following provisions from the drug CGMPs in accordance with 21 CFR 4.4(b)(2): 

(i) 21 CFR 211.84  

(ii) 21 CFR 211.103    
(iii) 21 CFR 211.132 

(iv) 21 CFR 211.137   
(v) 21 CFR 211.165 
(vi) 21 CFR 211.166   
(vii) 21 CFR 211.167   
(viii) 21 CFR 211.170  

Testing and approval or rejection of components, drug 
product containers, and closures 
Calculation of yield 
Tamper-evident packaging requirements for over-the-
counter (OTC) human drug products 
Expiration dating 
Testing and release for distribution 
Stability testing 
Special testing requirements  
Reserve samples 

Drug CGMPs:  The current good manufacturing practice regulations set forth in 21 CFR 210 
and 21 CFR part 211. (21 CFR 4.2) 

Drug CGMP-based streamlined approach:  A CGMP operating system that is intended to 
demonstrate compliance with all of the provisions from the drug CGMPs and the following 
provisions from the device QS regulation in accordance with 21 CFR 4.4(b)(1): 

(i) 21 CFR 820.20  
(ii) 21 CFR 820.30  
(iii) 21 CFR 820.50 
(iv) 21 CFR 820.100    
(v) 21 CFR 820.170    
(vi) 21 CFR 820.200   

Management responsibility  
Design controls 
Purchasing controls 
Corrective and preventive action 
Installation 
Servicing 

Lead center:  The FDA center (CBER, CDER, or CDRH) that has primary jurisdiction for 
premarket review and regulation of a combination product. 

Manufacture:  Includes, but is not limited to, designing, fabricating, assembling, filling, 
processing, testing, labeling, packaging, repackaging, holding, and storage. (21 CFR 4.2) 

CGMP operating system:  The operating system within an establishment that is designed and 
implemented to address and meet the current good manufacturing practice requirements for a 
combination product. (21 CFR 4.2) 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

Owner:  For purposes of this guidance, the entity that holds the marketing authorization for a 
combination product (regardless of whether that entity is directly engaged in the manufacture of 
the product).   

Device QS regulation:  The quality system regulation in 21 CFR part 820. (21 CFR 4.2) 

Single-entity combination product:  A product comprised of two or more regulated 
components, i.e., drug/device, biologic/device, drug/biologic, or drug/device/biologic, that are 
physically, chemically, or otherwise combined or mixed and produced as a single entity. (21 
CFR 3.2(e)(1)) 

Streamlined approach:  Either of the two approaches permitted under 21 CFR part 4, which 
allows combination product manufacturers to demonstrate compliance with both the drug 
CGMPs and device QS regulation by designing and implementing a CGMP operating system 
that demonstrates compliance with part 211 or part 820 in its entirety plus specified provisions of 
the other set of regulations. 

VIII. References 

Device 

1.  Applying Human Factors and Usability Engineering to Medical Devices 

(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/.../UCM259760.pdf) (February 2016) 

2.  Design Control Guidance for Medical Device Manufacturers, Guidance for Industry 

(March 1997) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/Guidanc
eDocuments/ucm070642.pdf)  

3.  Glass Syringes for Delivering Drug and Biological Products: Technical Information to 
Supplement International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Standard 11040-4 - 
Draft Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff (April 2013) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM346181.pdf) 

4.  Quality System Information for Certain Premarket Application Reviews, Guidance for 

Industry and FDA Staff (Feb. 3, 2003) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/Guidanc
eDocuments/ucm070899.pdf) 

5.  Requests for Feedback on Medical Device Submissions: The Pre-Submission Program 

and Meetings with Food and Drug Administration Staff, Guidance for Industry (February 
2014) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidanced
ocuments/ucm311176.pdf) 

6.  Sterilized Convenience Kits for Clinical and Surgical Use, Guidance for Industry (Jan. 

2002) 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/Guidanc
eDocuments/ucm071029.pdf) 

7.  Use of International Standard ISO- 1 10993, "Biological Evaluation of 2 Medical Devices 

Part 1: Evaluation 3 and Testing", DRAFT Guidance for Industry 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidanced
ocuments/ucm348890.pdf) 

Drugs 

8.  CGMP for Phase 1 Investigational Drugs, Guidance for Industry (July 2008) 

(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guid
ances/UCM070273.pdf) 

9.  Container Closure Systems for Packaging Human Drugs and Biologics:  Chemistry, 
Manufacturing, and Controls Documentation, Guidance for Industry, (May 1999) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guid
ances/UCM070551.pdf) 

10. Contract Manufacturing Arrangement for Drugs: Quality Agreements, Guidance for 

Industry (November 2016)  
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidan
ces/ucm353925.pdf) 

11. Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsor or Applicants, Guidance for Industry 

(March 2015) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidan
ces/ucm437431.pdf) 

12. Investigating Out-of-Specification (OOS) Test Results for Pharmaceutical Production, 

Guidance for Industry (Oct. 2006) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guid
ances/UCM070287.pdf) 

13. Process Validation:  General Principles and Practices, Guidance for Industry (Jan. 2011) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guid
ances/UCM070336.pdf) 

14. Q1A(R2) Stability Testing of New Drug Substances and Products, Guidance for Industry 

(Nov. 2003) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guid
ances/UCM073369.pdf) 

15. Q1B Photostability Testing of Drug Substances and Products, Guidance for Industry 

(November 1996) 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidan
ces/ucm073373.pdf) 

16. Q1C Stability Testing for New Dosage Forms, Guidance for Industry (November 1996) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidan
ces/ucm073374.pdf) 

17. Q1D Bracketing and Matrixing Designs for Stability Testing of New Drug Substances 

and Products, Guidance for Industry (January 2003) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/.../Guidances/ucm073379.pdf) 

18. Q1E Evaluation of Stability Data, Guidance for Industry (June 2004) 

(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidan
ces/ucm073380.pdf) 

19. Q7A Good Manufacturing Practice Guidance for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients, 

Guidance for Industry (Aug 2001) 
(http://www.fda.gov/ICECI/ComplianceManuals/CompliancePolicyGuidanceManual/uc
m200364.htm) 

20. Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical Development, Guidance for Industry (November 2009) 

(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/.../Guidances/ucm073507.pdf) 

21. Q9 Quality Risk Management, Guidance for Industry (June 2006) 

(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/.../Guidances/ucm073511.pdf) 

22. Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System, Guidance for Industry (April 2009) 

(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guid
ances/UCM073517.pdf) 

23. Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Processing — Current Good Manufacturing 

Practice, Guidance for Industry (Sept. 2004) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guid
ances/UCM070342.pdf)  

24. Submission of Documentation in Applications for Parametric Release of Human and 
Veterinary Drug Products Terminally Sterilized by Moist Heat Process, Guidance for 
Industry (February 2010) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidan
ces/ucm437431.pdf) 

Biological Products 

25. Cooperative Manufacturing Arrangements for Licensed Biologics, Guidance for Industry 

(Nov. 2008) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulator

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  

yInformation/Guidances/General/UCM069908.pdf) 

HCT/Ps 

26. Current Good Tissue Practice (CGTP) and Additional Requirements for Manufacturers of 
Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue-Based Products (HCT/Ps), Guidance for 
Industry (Dec 2011) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulator
yInformation/Guidances/Tissue/UCM285223.pdf) 

Combination Products 

27. Coronary Drug-Eluting Stents – Nonclinical and Clinical Studies, Draft Guidance for 

Industry (March 2008) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guid
ances/UCM228704.pdf) 

28. How to Write a Request for Designation (RFD), Guidance for Industry (April 2011) 

(http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm126053.htm) 

29. Human Factors Studies and Related Clinical Study Considerations in Combination 

Product Design and Development, Draft Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff  (February 
2016) (http://www.fda.gov/ucm/groups/fdagov-public/@fdagov-
afdagen/documents/document/ucm484345.pdf) 

30. Technical Considerations for Pen, Jet, and Related Injectors Intended for Use with Drugs 

and Biological Products, Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff (June 2013) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM147095.pdf) 

General 

31. Pyrogen and Endotoxins Testing:  Questions and Answers, Guidance for Industry (June 

2012) 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guid
ances/UCM310098.pdf) 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
