7.0	
Cleaning Validation Protocols
Cleaning validation protocols have many of the same elements as process validation protocols. For 
reasons of clarity, the format of a cleaning validation protocol usually follows the same approach (as 
appropriate) as used for process validation protocols for a given company. Common elements include 
purpose, scope, responsibilities, applicable product(s) and equipment, cleaning SOP, acceptance 
criteria and a requirement for a final report. Key elements for cleaning validation protocols include 
residue limits (see Section 4.0), sampling procedures (see Section 5.0) and analytical methods (see 
Section 6.0). The organization and rationale for cleaning validation protocols for biotechnology 
manufacturers is fundamentally the same as for other pharmaceutical manufacturers. 
7.1	 Cleaning Verification Protocols
Protocols for cleaning verification purposes are the same as for cleaning validation, except that the protocol 
is specific to one cleaning event. From a compliance perspective, the protocol applies only to the one 
cleaning event (although from a scientific perspective the data may suggest similar performance if the 
cleaning event were repeated). Another difference is that because a verification protocol is typically 
performed on a unique cleaning event, there may be limited cleaning development before execution 
of that protocol. Alternatively, companies might use a concept that defines explicit requirements for 
cleaning verification in an SOP and documents the specific activities, sample positions, etc., on a form, 
which will be approved.
7.2	 Key Issues Based on Regulatory Changes
It is assumed that the validation protocol is not written and approved until the cleaning process has 
been designed and developed (see Section 3.0). This is particularly important as it relates to a life cycle 
approach to validation. Two key issues for protocols, each of which is in a state of flux because of 
regulatory changes, are discussed below.
7.2.1	 Number of Runs in a Protocol
The traditional approach for cleaning validation protocols has been to require an evaluation of a 
minimum of three consecutive runs of the cleaning processes. By consecutive, it has meant that no 
cleaning events of that same process are skipped without appropriate rationale. 
This practice is in flux because of changes in approach by the U.S. FDA; the Agency no longer suggests 
a minimum of three runs. (17,18) Rather, the manufacturer must provide a rationale (based on its 
understanding of the process) for determining the number of runs. Providing such a rationale is not 
straightforward for cleaning processes, and some companies specify in their master plans that three 
runs will be required unless there is a written rationale for a different number. It should be noted 
that as of publication of this Technical Report, the question of the “number of runs” remains a 
significant issue in terms of applicability to cleaning validation and global harmonization for cleaning 
validation.
7.2.2	 Worst-Case Process Conditions
The traditional approach for cleaning validation protocols has been to include worst-case process 
conditions in the three protocol runs. Worst-case process conditions may include maximum dirty 
hold time, maximum batches in a campaign, use of different operators for manual cleaning, shortest 
allowed time for manual cleaning steps, lowest allowed temperature for manual cleaning processes, 
and worst-case circuits for CIP skid selection. Parameters such as temperature, cleaning agent 
40
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
concentration, and process step times for automated cleaning processes are generally controlled in a 
narrow range such that challenging the cleaning process at the lower or upper end of the specification 
is not appropriate. In this traditional approach, worst-case process conditions may be addressed in each 
of the three required validation runs, unless there is adequate data from the design and development 
of the cleaning process to support worst-case conditions in fewer runs.
41
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

8.0	
Maintenance of Validated State
A key part of the validation life cycle for any system is maintenance of the validated state. This 
section deals with activities after the cleaning process has been designed and developed and after the 
formal validation protocols have been successfully executed. This is critical for cleaning validation, 
because a lapse in the validated state has the potential to adversely impact the quality, safety and 
purity of subsequent batches of the same or different products. The main tools for ensuring the 
continued maintenance of the validated state are change control, risk-based periodic monitoring and 
data trending review. Additionally, training and retraining are important areas of control for manual 
cleaning processes, as they are the primary mechanisms for controlling the cleaning cycle. In each of 
these three areas, knowledge of the design space (see Section 3.8) should be applied.
8.1	 Critical Parameter Control
In controlling a validated cleaning process, it is of utmost importance to understand the critical 
parameters used to control the cleaning process. Typically these include cleaning agent concentration, 
temperature, flow rate and times for all processing steps. During the design phase, an appropriate level 
of understanding of the process and its variability should be obtained to design a cleaning process 
capable of addressing this inherent variability. Once the process is well defined, there are a variety of 
control strategies that may be used. 
One control strategy is to set minimum and/or maximum values for each of the key parameters 
during a cleaning cycle. In this model, each of the steps of the cycle has a defined range that must be 
monitored and maintained during each execution of the cleaning cycle, and each parameter does not 
vary outside that range. This approach has an advantage in that that it is straightforward to implement 
and control. 
8.2	 Control by Cycle Feedback
Another control strategy is to use analytical feedback to determine cycle step length. For example, 
the final rinse for a CIP cycle may be continued until the rinse conductivity indicates adequate 
completion of the rinsing step. This approach has elements of Process Analytical Technology (PAT) 
(see Section 11.8) to ensure the cleaning cycle is appropriately controlled. In the example given, 
other control parameters, such as temperature and cleaning agent concentration, are maintained 
in their appropriate ranges. Furthermore, it must be ensured in the design/development steps that 
conductivity is adequate to measure process step completion. Based on the initial validation, other 
analytical results (e.g., TOC) may be deemed more indicative of cycle step completion. However, 
since the cleaning of biotechnology products is accomplished by highly alkaline and/or acidic 
cleaning agents, conductivity is usually an appropriate indicator of completion of the rinsing step. 
If one ensures minimum and maximum values are set for other critical parameters and uses these 
values in concert with control of the rinse time based on analytical feedback, this approach will yield 
appropriate control of the cleaning cycle.
8.3	 Process Alarms
Another key component of applying design space to cleaning processes is alarming of critical 
parameters. In an automated CIP cycle, alarms may be based on a variety of parameters, such as 
temperature of the wash and rinse solutions, conductivity of the recirculating wash solution, pressure 
at the spray device, flow though various circuits, and conductivity of the final rinse. There are a variety 
of approaches to cleaning the equipment on which an alarm occurred. In all cases, the cause of the 
42
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
alarm should be investigated. One strategy is that on specified alarm conditions, the cleaning cycle 
may be restarted. For example, if inadequate cleaning agent concentration occurred (as indicated by 
an alarm on the wash cycle conductivity), the cleaning cycle can be restarted from the beginning after 
appropriate actions are taken to ensure the alarm does not reoccur. This is a conservative approach 
and ensures a complete cleaning cycle is performed, but care must be taken that alarms are noted 
and trended to ensure cycle performance is not trending towards being ineffective and to better 
correct repetitive problems. Alternately, the step in which the alarm occurs may be restarted. This 
approach strikes a balance between ensuring cycle performance and minimizing cleaning time, as 
the entire cycle does not have to be repeated. Automated alarming is generally not done in manual 
cleaning operations. However, if cleaning agent dilution is confirmed by conductivity, or cleaning 
agent temperature is confirmed by temperature measurement, measurements outside the specified 
range can serve as an “alarm.” In addition, for all cleaning processes, visual inspection after cleaning 
can serve as an “alarm.” In all cases, it must be ensured that cycles performed during validation are 
not “best case” due to alarm conditions. For example, if equipment is soiled, and during the initial 
validation of the cleaning cycle alarms occur that result in multiple rinse steps being completed, this 
cycle is no longer representative or worst case, but best case. 
8.4	 Change Control
A robust change control system is critical to ensuring maintenance of the validated state for cleaning 
processes. The change control system must cover all key parameters and components of the cleaning 
system to ensure that all changes with a potential to impact maintenance of the validated state are 
evaluated. This includes not only changes in the cleaning process, but also changes in equipment 
and changes in the manufacturing process (for example, a change in temperature in a manufacturing 
process) which might affect the performance of the validated cleaning process. Quality preapproval 
and robust tracking of changes are key requirements for this system. 
The change control system should provide for a review of each change by an interdisciplinary team. 
This must include a review of current validation for the equipment being changed, and depending on 
the nature of the change, may result in laboratory, pilot scale and/or commercial scale evaluations. 
Significantly major changes may result in the decision that the new cleaning process requires separate 
validation as a new process. There are some important considerations for designing the test plan to 
verify changes; review of the design space will assist in this evaluation. First, control parameters must 
stay within their validated ranges or must be revalidated. For example, if the pump on a CIP skid is 
validated to deliver water between 5 and 10 liters per minute, and the desired change is to increase the 
flow rate to 12 liters per minute, new validation testing is required to verify that the pump is capable 
of delivering the desired flow before validation of the cleaning cycle can occur. Second, the acceptance 
criteria for analytical methods should remain unchanged from the previous validation unless there is a 
justified reason for the difference. This is to ensure that changes result in maintenance of the validated 
state rather than creation of a new state, which may require significant testing to ensure it is still 
validated. Finally, reduced sample sites and/or fewer analytical methods may be appropriate in many 
cases to confirm validation based on a change. For example, if the effect of the change is only on 
bioburden, then it may be appropriate to evaluate only bioburden in studies that evaluate the effects 
of the change. These differences must be justified in the testing plan/protocol.
8.5	 Evaluation of Cumulative Changes
Equally important as a review of each individual change is the review of the cumulative impact of 
changes on a system. This review must provide evidence that the cleaning cycle meets prescribed 
43
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
requirements. It is possible that many minor changes (each deemed to have no impact on the validated 
state) could have an impact when considered in total. This review of cumulative changes should 
take two approaches. First, a documented analysis (i.e., review of the changes and the impact these 
changes will have on other parts of the process) of the changes should be undertaken on a regular 
basis. Second, process performance and alarms must be monitored (as discussed above) to ensure 
continued maintenance of the validated state and system performance.
8.6	 Periodic Monitoring
Another tool for ensuring maintenance of the validated state is a risk-based periodic monitoring 
program. A periodic monitoring program may provide analytical data to be trended. In most cases 
involving automated processes, the data are provided by the CIP equipment itself. For example, data 
may be generated by the CIP skid on wash solution conductivity, final rinse conductivity, temperatures, 
times and pressure. In other cases, separate sampling may be established for data collection, such as 
rinse bioburden or TOC. Visual examination after each cleaning process is another type of periodic 
monitoring. For routine use, however, visual inspection typically does not involve disassembly of 
equipment solely for the purpose of that inspection. 
A documented risk-based approach should be used to optimize compliance in an efficient manner. 
This could include leveraging family approaches, reduced sample sites and reduced analytical methods. 
When defining these approaches, the inherent risk associated with a given cleaning process and 
historical experience/data should be considered. For example, when performing the initial validation 
on a bioreactor, TOC may be measured via a variety of swab and rinse samples. However, with the 
proper data analysis, it may be appropriate to measure only rinse TOC during periodic monitoring. 
Historically it was considered acceptable to perform periodic revalidation on cleaning processes in 
lieu of periodic monitoring. However, this approach yields a much less robust picture of the state of 
control of the cleaning process.
8.7 	 Trending
Trending of cleaning cycle performance, analytical data from routine monitoring, and alarms are 
another recommendation to ensure continued cleaning cycle performance. When trending any of these 
data sets, procedures must be in place to initiate an investigation when adverse trends are observed, 
even if ineffective cleaning cycles have not occurred. Trending of cleaning cycle performance data 
is important for identifying potential cleaning cycle issues before they result in ineffective cleaning 
cycles. For example, a slowly increasing trend in the final rinse conductivity may not be indicative of 
an ineffective cleaning process. However, such a trend should require an investigation of the cause. 
In the example given, it may be that the spray device is becoming clogged, in which case it should 
be cleaned, and appropriate steps should be taken to prevent clogging in the future. On the other 
hand, it may be a result of a fouled conductivity sensor. Alarm monitoring and trending will indicate 
cycle failure, though it will not proactively identify potential issues, as is desired. The incidents of all 
alarms should still be trended to determine if additional process controls are required to reduce the 
frequency of alarming. 
44
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
