11.0	
Special Considerations
11.1	 Grouping/Family Approach
Grouping is a strategy whereby similar manufactured products and/or equipment are considered 
together, and a formal protocol is performed on a representative from the group. The representative 
from the group is usually the worst case among products or equipment in a group. Grouping is also 
called matrixing, family approach and bracketing. The rationale for grouping is to eliminate non-
essential or non-value-added work based on a risk approach. One requirement for grouping is that 
product and equipment be cleaned by the same cleaning process. 
11.1.1 Product Grouping
Products are assessed for their relative cleanability, typically in laboratory studies. Laboratory 
evaluations discussed in Section 3.0 may be utilized. Cleanability is assessed using representative 
surfaces, with stainless steel being the most common because of its predominance in biotechnology 
equipment. From the results, the relative cleanability of each product is defined, typically by 
determining under proposed cleaning parameters which product requires the longest time to clean. 
A Performance Qualification (PQ) protocol, usually involving a minimum of three validation runs 
because this protocol represents other products, is performed. The acceptance criterion for that worst-
case product is generally the most stringent acceptance criterion of all products in the group. Since 
it is common in biotechnology to have the same acceptance criteria and same analytical methods for 
similar products (bulk actives, finished drug products, intermediates, etc.), selection of the acceptance 
criteria is usually straightforward. Successful cleaning validation of the representative (worst- case) 
product means the cleaning of the other products in the group is also validated.
11.1.2 Equipment Grouping
Grouping of equipment is an effective method for encompassing equipment from a limited population 
of systems undergoing cleaning validation without redundant testing. The grouping strategy is based 
on designating equipment as “identical” or “similar,” based on design and cleanability. Once equipment 
has been placed within a designation, the designation defines the cleaning validation requirements. 
If it involves identical equipment, a protocol with a minimum of three validation runs involving any 
combination of three equipment items in the group is performed. Provided an adequate rationale 
is given for determining the equipment items are identical, there is no need to perform validation 
runs on every item in the group. For similar equipment, the representative equipment is the worst 
case or may involve bracketing of equipment. For example, for storage tanks of the same size but 
of different complexity, such as the number of baffles, the more complex equipment is chosen as 
the worst case. For similar equipment of different sizes, the largest and smallest (representing the 
extremes) may be chosen for the formal validation runs (unless one size can be determined as the 
worst case). Confirmatory validation runs (perhaps only one run) are an option for other equipment 
(not a worst case) within the group. 
11.1.3 Introduction of a New Product or New Equipment Into a Group
The introduction of a new product into an already validated group is then assessed using the same 
evaluation process to initially determine the worst-case product. It is recommended that when 
each new product is tested, a suitable control, such as the previous worst-case product, is included. 
Relative product cleanability is then used to determine validation requirements for that product on 
equipment used for other products in that group. The relative cleanability of the product in relation to 
the preceding worst-case product will dictate the validation requirements. Based on a risk assessment, 
50
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
introduction of an easier-to-clean product may just require laboratory and/or scale-up studies to 
confirm ease of cleaning or may require a confirmatory validation protocol. Introduction of a more 
difficult-to-clean product will require validation of that new worst-case product. 
Based on risk considerations, introduction of new identical equipment may just involve determination 
that it is equivalent or may require an additional confirmatory validation protocol. Introduction of 
new similar equipment requires an evaluation if that new equipment represents a new worst case or 
a new extreme. If not a new worst case or new extreme, a confirmatory validation protocol using 
only a visually clean criterion can be used. If the new equipment is a new worst case or extreme, the 
validation requirements for the previous worst case or extreme should be repeated for the new worst 
case or extreme equipment.
11.1.4 Conclusion
The use of product and equipment grouping may be used to streamline cleaning validation programs 
while ensuring sufficient data to support the validation of procedures, processes and equipment 
associated with cleaning. The grouping program for a given facility or company should be in a well-
defined validation program/validation master plan. 
11.2	 Cleaning Agent Issues
Equipment cleaning processes in the biopharmaceutical industry often involve a pre-rinse with water, 
an alkaline wash, an acid wash and a series of water rinses. 
11.2.1 Sodium Hydroxide Wash
A commodity alkali such as sodium hydroxide is often used for the alkaline wash step. The high pH 
and alkalinity of sodium hydroxide solutions enhance solubility of most organic process residues, and 
in some cases facilitate hydrolysis. Sodium hydroxide is also widely available, relatively inexpensive 
and, being a single component, relatively easy to analyze and validate for cleaning agent removal. 
Commodity cleaners such as sodium hydroxide, however, may have limited effectiveness for 
tenaciously adhered or baked-on proteinaceous residues, cell debris and antifoams. They also have 
limited wetting characteristics and soil suspending ability. The higher pH of sodium hydroxide also 
facilitates the precipitation of salts or oxides of such ions as calcium, magnesium and iron, if those 
ions are present during the cleaning process. 
11.2.2 Acid Wash
The addition of an acid wash step after the caustic wash may overcome precipitation and buildup 
of inorganic compounds and help broaden the spectrum of soils cleaned although at the expense of 
adding another cycle. In addition, maintaining a clean surface and limiting the deposition and buildup 
of iron or other anodic contaminants may help minimize the potential for stainless steel corrosion 
and rouge formation.
11.2.3 Formulated Detergents
Formulated detergents are multi-component cleaning agents that take advantage of several different 
cleaning mechanisms, thus providing broader spectrum effectiveness. In addition to the mechanisms 
of alkalinity and hydrolysis offered by a commodity caustic, a formulated alkaline detergent might 
51
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
provide improved wetting and soil penetration, emulsification, chelation of calcium, iron or other 
inorganic ions, and might facilitate dispersion of particulates in one wash step. Despite the use of 
chelating agents and the broad spectrum effectiveness of formulated detergents, rouge buildup may 
still be observed over a period of time, and a periodic derouging process may be necessary, particularly 
in applications that involve aggressive process conditions such as SIP. 
11.2.4 Issues in Selection
A number of factors besides broad spectrum cleaning effectiveness need to be considered when 
selecting detergents. These include rinsability, quality, consistency, substrate compatibility, stability, 
safety, toxicity, assay suitability, environmental compliance and assured long-term availability. 
11.3	 Special Equipment Issues
11.3.1 Chromatography Columns
Chromatography columns are typically used in protein purification processes. In contrast to 
equipment like fermenter vessels or tanks used in purification that are cleaned empty, for batch-to-
batch cleaning within a campaign of the same product, the columns are clean packed with resin after 
the batch is processed. The cleaning processes for the chromatography resin packed into the column 
are process specific and depend on the type of resin used. Resin cleaning and reuse is out of scope 
of this document and is described in detail in PDA Technical Report No. 14, Validation of  Column-Based 
Chromatography Processes for the Purification of  Proteins. (19)
Since chromatography columns are cleaned with resin packed into a column, the resin cleaning 
process also cleans the column housing. Therefore, after unpacking a column, product- and process-
related impurities on the column surfaces are already removed to a certain extent. However, it is 
common practice to clean an empty column after a column is unpacked. Column frits or sieves are 
normally product dedicated due to their porosity and the difficulties to validate removal of product- 
and process-related impurities. In moving from a campaign of one product to a new campaign of a 
different product, they are removed prior to column cleaning and stored for further use. Typically, 
a manual cleaning process using the same or similar cleaning agents as for tank cleaning is used for 
the cleaning of the column housing. After cleaning, the same cleaning validation principles (such as 
limits) applied to tanks can be utilized.
11.3.2 Tangential Flow Filtration (TFF) Filter Systems
Similar to chromatography columns, tangential flow filtration filter housings (also called filter holders) 
are cleaned together with the membranes after a batch has been processed. The cleaning processes for 
the filter membranes packed into the filter housing are process specific and depend on the type of mem-
brane used. TFF membrane cleaning is out of scope of this document and is described in detail in PDA 
Technical Report No. 15, Validation of  Tangential Flow Filtration in Biopharmaceutical Applications. (20)
 Since TFF membranes are cleaned in a filter housing, the membrane cleaning process also cleans the 
filter housing. Therefore, after removing TFF membranes, product and process related impurities on 
the housing surface are already removed to a certain extent. However, it is common practice to clean 
an empty filter housing after the membrane cartridge or cassette is removed. Typically, a manual 
cleaning process using the same or similar cleaning agents as for tank cleaning is applied for the 
cleaning of the TFF housing. After cleaning, the same cleaning validation principles (such as limits) 
52
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
applied to tanks can be utilized.
11.3.3 Centrifuges
In many biotechnology processes, centrifuges are used at the end of fermentation to remove cells 
from cell cultures or to separate bacteria from the fermentation broth prior to further processing. 
Many centrifuges can be cleaned in place; others have to be manually cleaned. 
Cleaning complex pieces of equipment like centrifuges can be challenging. For instance, not all 
surfaces which have been in contact with the fermentation broth can be easily reached. Special 
attention has to be given to hard-to-access areas of the equipment, both in the cleaning process and in 
the evaluation of that cleaning. After cleaning, the same cleaning validation principles (such as limits) 
applied to tanks can be utilized.
11.4	 Multi-Host Facilities
Cleaning validation is performed to demonstrate that residual material or cleaning agents remaining 
on shared equipment surfaces following the manufacture of one product are controlled to below 
acceptable levels so that the shared equipment may be utilized for the manufacture of a subsequent 
product without impacting the safety, identity, strength, quality or purity characteristics of the 
subsequent product. In order to maintain a successful cleaning validation program for a multi-host 
facility involving both cell culture and bacterial fermentation processes, the validation strategy must 
consider not only cleaning agent and process residues, but also specific requirements for each process 
step necessary to maintain drug quality throughout the manufacturing process.
Robust cleaning validation programs for multi-host facilities should ensure that cleaning procedures 
are appropriate for all processes/systems used in the facilities. The successful cleaning validation 
program for a multi-host facility will ensure the cleaning/sanitization/changeover procedures control 
residual process residues to below acceptable levels for all products made in the facility.
11.5	 Non-product Contact Surfaces
Non-product contact surfaces may be defined in different ways by manufacturers. One way is to 
regard any equipment surface that does not directly contact the drug substance (the active) or drug 
product as non-product contact. Examples under this definition might be lyophilizers, equipment 
used solely to manufacture and transfer buffers and media, and equipment to process drug product 
after completion of primary packaging. Other companies may choose to define some of these 
surfaces as “indirect product contact,” since in the case of buffers and media, any residues left on 
equipment surfaces after cleaning will contact the next buffer/media and will eventually contact the 
drug substance manufactured with that next buffer/media. Because of the limited impact of these 
indirect or non-product contact surfaces, requirements for cleaning validation can be reduced or 
cleaning validation can be eliminated in certain situations. 
11.5.1	Equipment for Buffers
For buffers, which generally have components that are readily water soluble, cleaning is generally 
relatively easy and may be done with either water alone or a dilute caustic solution. Concerns 
about cross-contamination of buffers are not necessarily based solely on the carryover of the buffer 
components, but on any effects residues might have on production efficiency or production quality. 
53
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Based on a risk analysis, cleaning validation of buffers may only involve acceptance criteria of visually 
clean and conductivity. Although some companies may also choose to include a measurement of 
TOC, conductivity is the better method because of the fact that the buffers are readily water soluble 
and highly conductive. Measurement of bioburden may also be utilized, depending on a risk analysis 
based on the growth promotion properties of the buffer. Measurement of specific residues may be 
appropriately done by rinse sampling because of the water solubility of the buffer components. 
Grouping of buffers and selecting the worst case for cleaning validation is also a valid (and common) 
approach for cleaning validation of buffers.
11.5.2 Equipment for Media
The situation with media is similar to that of buffers, except that media are generally much more difficult 
to clean, such that cleaning solutions containing alkali are used. Concerns about media carryover are 
also not necessarily based on safety concerns related to carryover of the media components, but 
on any effects that media residues might have on production efficiency or production quality of 
drug substance made utilizing the next media batch. Cleaning validation may include the criteria of 
visually clean, with measurements of TOC, conductivity and/or bioburden after cleaning. TOC is 
used because of the organic nature of the media components. Conductivity confirms removal of the 
alkaline cleaning solution. Bioburden is measured because the media typically enhances microbial 
growth. For concerns about endotoxin from gram-negative bacteria, endotoxin may also be evaluated. 
Because of the design of equipment for media manufacture, rinse sampling alone may be adequate. 
However, the solubility or degradation of media components should be considered as part of the 
risk analysis for performing rinse sampling only. Grouping of media and selecting the worst case for 
cleaning validation is also a valid (and common) approach for the cleaning validation of media.
11.5.3 Lyophilizers
Acceptable (meaning saleable and meeting all product specifications) drug product never touches 
lyophilizer surfaces; contact of drug product with lyophilizer surfaces generally only occurs because 
of broken vials or vials that tip over and spill during loading. However, because of the close proximity 
of lyophilizer shelves to open product, and because of a perceived airborne transfer of residues on the 
shelves to open vials, cleaning validation is typically performed on lyophilizers used in formulation/
fill operations. Typically, only WFI is used for cleaning lyophilizers because of the concern of leaving 
cleaning solution residues inside the lyophilizer. Cleaning procedures for lyophilizers may also include 
a precleaning step to remove broken glass or spilled product before the validated cleaning procedure 
is performed. Carryover calculations for setting limits are typically not applicable to lyophilizers 
because the indirect contact with the next product precludes any scientifically based calculation as 
conventionally performed for direct product contact surfaces. The most common acceptance criteria 
for cleaning validation of lyophilizers are a visually clean requirement and/or a measure of TOC. 
Since direct carryover calculations are not applicable, TOC limits are typically based on one of the 
following criteria: a 10 ppm TOC criterion in any desorbed swab sample, or a TOC limit the same as 
the TOC limit for any direct product contact equipment immediately before or after the lyophilizer. 
The logic of the latter approach is that indirect contact equipment is less of a risk than direct product 
contact equipment; therefore, if the indirect is held to the same requirement as the direct, then the 
product should be acceptably protected. Bioburden may also be measured during cleaning validation 
of lyophilizers; however, lyophilizers generally undergo an SIP process after cleaning. 
54
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
11.5.4 Packaging Equipment
Once the drug substance is in its primary packaging, the risk of cross-contamination is relatively low. 
Cleaning processes should be used on the packaging lines after primary packaging but do not require 
cleaning validation. The main concern with cross-contamination is broken vials, which release product. 
Cleaning processes for such situations should be considered; however, because contamination of the 
next product may only involve contamination of the outside of the primary packaging, cleaning 
validation becomes a major concern only if that spilled product has some unusual toxicity concerns. 
In those cases, a dedicated line or a cleaning step known to deactivate or degrade that drug active 
should be considered. Such a degradation process may appropriately be confirmed in a laboratory 
study demonstrating degradation or deactivation of the active.
11.6	 Viruses, Mycoplasma and Prions
The biological nature of materials and processes used in biotechnology production presents unique 
challenges for equipment cleaning and cleaning verification. Besides product and product-related 
residues and those residues that may remain from the cleaning process itself, viruses, mycoplasma and 
prions are another concern for product contamination. However, viruses are not routinely addressed 
in cleaning validation protocols or programs, but in viral clearance studies and/or as part of process 
validation.
11.6.1 Control Steps
While the primary control measures are viral clearance process steps, testing for viruses and 
mycoplasma in the unprocessed bulk, and exclusion of raw materials that might contain viruses, 
mycoplasma and prions, specially designed cleaning processes might also be needed in some cases. 
Control of raw materials is essential, especially for plasma and plasma-derived products and those 
derived from animal materials – through vendor certification, incoming QA inspection and QC testing. 
Recombinant and “non-animal origin” materials should be used wherever practicable throughout all 
processing steps; however, viruses have been found to contaminate non-animal raw materials due 
to exposure during raw material storage, either at the raw material vendor or at the manufacturing 
site due to adventitious viral contamination. Also, mycoplasma that can replicate in mammalian cell 
culture often have a plant source and may be a contaminant in plant peptones. Since mycoplasma 
contamination can also be due to humans, proper gowning and personal hygiene are critical to 
control contamination. Additionally, sterilization of equipment used in cell culture, fermentation and 
finished product manufacturing may provide additional assurance of product that is free of viruses 
and mycoplasma. 
11.6.2 Control by Cleaning
Equipment cleaning using caustics and/or acids at appropriate ranges for the cleaning parameters of 
time, temperature, concentration and action is also essential to successful biocontamination control. 
The use of cleaning solutions containing sodium or potassium hydroxide is widely practiced in the 
industry. NaOH has been shown to be effective for inactivating most viruses. A U.S. FDA/CBER 
guidance provides a regulatory perspective on prion inactivation methods:
“TSE agents are quite resistant to most disinfecting regimens. There is no current consensus on specific 
details of decontamination requirements for blood products. However, methods of destruction of 
TSE-implicated material include steam autoclaving at 132°C for 1-4 hours, incineration, or treatment 
55
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
with 1 N NaOH or concentrated sodium hypochlorite for at least 1 hour. These treatments are known 
to diminish (but may not completely eliminate) infectivity.” (21)
11.6.3 Conclusion
Although cleaning processes are generally not designed to remove viral, mycoplasma or prion 
contaminants, a well-designed, robust cleaning procedure can be an effective process partner in a 
facility’s overall biocontamination control strategy.
11.7	 Single-Use Equipment
Single-use equipment or components may be considered in place of reusable equipment that 
requires cleaning. Single-use technology has significantly evolved over the last decade and is being 
rapidly implemented in biopharmaceutical manufacturing since the introduction of the single-use 
bioreactor. Single-use equipment may include anything from carboys, storage bags, bioprocess 
containers, filter systems, tubing and connection devices to bioreactors. Many of these components 
are available presterilized (e.g., by gamma irradiation). Such single-use items offer possibilities to 
simplify the handling of critical process steps and significantly reduce contamination risks, especially 
for multiproduct facilities and for contract manufacturers. The economic and operational advantages 
of single-use equipment stem largely from eliminating cleaning and sterilization, reducing the utilities 
that support these operations, and enabling rapid equipment setup and turnaround.
Along with the benefits of single-use equipments, there are risks and limitations to consider. Most 
single-use items are polymeric materials. All polymeric product-contact materials and components 
used in cGMP manufacturing must be assessed to determine if the polymer is safe, and if it is compatible 
with the solution it is in contact with. Thorough evaluation of potential extractables and leachables 
is necessary to ensure the safety and quality of the drug product and to maintain compliance with 
appropriate regulatory requirements for extractables/leachables. Most companies address this as part 
of process validation and/or qualification of the single-use item. 
11.8	 Process Analytical Technology 
PAT is defined by the U.S. FDA to be “a system for designing, analyzing, and controlling manufacturing 
through timely measurements (i.e., during processing) of critical quality and performance attributes 
of raw and in-process materials and processes, with the goal of ensuring final product quality.” (22) 
The U.S. FDA further notes that “the term ‘analytical’ in PAT is viewed broadly to include chemical, 
physical, microbiological, mathematical, and risk analysis conducted in an integrated manner.” 
Much has been published about PAT in general and about PAT in many processes; the reader should 
consult those references for general background on PAT. However, there are limited publications 
about PAT in cleaning processes and cleaning validation (23-26) as compared to PAT for other 
manufacturing operations. The emphasis for PAT here is for the use of a feedback loop from the 
analytical measurement to control a cleaning process or cleaning process step. It should be noted that 
consistent with PAT principles, the timely measurement could be in-line, on-line or at-line.
“Timely measurements” have long been used in cleaning processes to assist in the design of rinse 
cycle times in automated CIP systems, including those in the biotechnology industry. For example, 
a common practice in the design of the rinsing process has been to measure conductivity of the 
final rinse as a function of rinse time. Conductivity is a useful parameter for this determination, 
since cleaning in biotechnology manufacturing usually involves highly alkaline and/or acidic cleaning 
56
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
agents, which possess significant conductivity (in addition to the conductivity of the manufactured 
product and/or its degradants). If evaluated over several cleaning process runs in the design phase, a 
minimum time to consistently complete the rinsing process can be effectively determined. A safety 
factor (additional time) may be included as part of this determination. While such a study in the 
design phase would be appropriate for a PAT application, unless it combines the timely measurement 
with a feedback mechanism to control the cleaning process during commercial cleaning processes, it 
would not be considered PAT. As described in this paragraph, the purpose of the timely measurement 
is not to control the rinsing process, but to assist in selecting a fixed rinse time. 
11.8.1 PAT for Cleaning Process Control
The more relevant use of PAT for cleaning processes is the use of a timely measurement to define 
the completion of a cleaning process step. In this case, the achievement of a certain analytical 
measurement is a controlling mechanism for completion of that step. In the situation referred to 
previously about measuring conductivity online, if it is possible to determine that the achievement of 
a certain conductivity correlates with the end of the rinsing process, conductivity could be employed 
in a PAT approach. That is, the rinse time is not fixed, but could be variable depending on the time 
needed to achieve that predetermined conductivity value. In addition, consistent with PAT principles, 
it would be expected that the achievement of that conductivity value would be within a defined time 
window. The U.S. FDA PAT guidance states “Within the PAT framework, a process end point is not 
a fixed time; rather it is the achievement of the desired material attributes. This, however, does not 
mean that process time is not considered. A range of acceptable process times (process window) is 
likely to be achieved during the manufacturing phase and should be evaluated, and considerations 
for addressing significant deviations from acceptable process times should be developed.” (22) For 
example, achievement of a desired conductivity in a very short time could be due to insufficient 
cleaning solution in the cleaning process. Achievement of the desired conductivity in a very long time 
may be the result of a clogged spray device. In both cases, a final conductivity is recorded and a final 
rinse time is recorded. However, in the traditional approach time is the step-controlling parameter, 
and conductivity is the monitoring parameter. In a PAT approach, conductivity could be the step-
controlling parameter, and time would be the monitoring parameter.
Sometimes there is an inappropriate objection to the use of PAT in this way, because it seems to violate 
the cleaning validation principle of not cleaning until clean (or testing until it’s clean). However, one 
of the features of PAT is that traditional rules of what is done for validation may not apply. As noted 
in the U.S. FDA’s PAT guidance, “Systems that promote greater product and process understanding 
can provide a high assurance of quality on every batch and provide alternative, effective mechanisms 
to demonstrate validation (per 21 CFR 211.100(a), i.e., production and process controls are designed 
to ensure quality). In a PAT framework, validation can be demonstrated through continuous quality 
control whereby the process is continually monitored, evaluated, and adjusted using validated in-
process measurements, tests, controls, and process end points.” (22) 
While this example of conductivity as a timely measurement to control the rinse process has been 
used, there are at least theoretically other opportunities for timely measurement to assist in the cleaning 
process design. For example, timely TOC measurements during the washing step may be indicative 
of the minimum time needed to complete the washing step (before rinsing is initiated). By this, it 
is meant that as proteinaceous soils are removed from the equipment surfaces in the washing step, 
it would be expected that the TOC in the wash solution would increase and then level off at a time 
when no more soil is removed (that is, the wash step is complete). 
57
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
11.8.2 PAT Measurement Tools for Biotechnology Cleaning Processes
Currently, the most common tools with potential PAT application in biotechnology cleaning processes 
are conductivity and TOC, because these can be measured online in the cleaning or rinse solution. 
Surfaces techniques, such as NIR for surfaces, may not be practical for timely control, because such 
techniques involve measuring for residues after the cleaning process is completed, not during the 
cleaning process. 
Conductivity sensors are readily available for in-line measurements and have been widely used for 
in-line monitoring (but not necessarily for control). Online TOC does not involve an in-line sensor, 
but rather a “sipper tube” which diverts a stream from the process piping to the online instrument 
(U.S. FDA calls this “on-line in a diverted stream”). One concern about the use of TOC in this way is 
the delay between taking the sample and the output of the actual measurement. Another concern is 
that if the instrument is continually taking and measuring samples during a cleaning process, earlier 
samples with high TOC values may carry over to the following sample and cause a false high reading. 
Of course, if the process is performed until the desired TOC value is achieved, there is an assurance 
that the process is adequate, because that possible carryover situation reflects a worst case.
11.8.3 Additional Considerations for PAT
It should be noted that in the conductivity example described in Section 11.8.1, all aspects of traditional 
cleaning validation are not avoided. If conductivity were the measure of a residual cleaning agent, 
and if only sampling rinse water were acceptable for determining residues of a cleaning agent, a PAT 
approach of measuring conductivity as a rinse step control parameter would also provide assurance 
that the cleaning agent was adequately removed for each and every cleaning process. However, it 
would not address issues of residues of the active and/or bioburden. Those residues would have 
to be measured in the traditional manner, unless a timely measurement of those residues could be 
utilized.
It should be clarified that rapid and/or online methods by themselves do not necessarily constitute 
PAT. As discussed previously, online conductivity can be a routine monitoring tool in a cleaning process 
step without controlling a process step. Online TOC (other than during the design phase) is not the 
use of PAT, unless the achievement of a certain analytical measurement of TOC determines and/or 
controls the completion of a cleaning process step. The same is the case with rapid microbiological 
methods. Rapid methods may enable one to obtain lab data faster, but unless those measurements 
determine and/or control the end of a process step, they are just rapid monitoring tools, not PAT 
tools (although they have the potential to be PAT tools).
The examples given illustrate the use of PAT for process design and for process step completion. 
In an ideal world, PAT would be used for real-time release of cleaned equipment and would be 
used instead of cleaning validation. However, at this time the tools to utilize PAT to confirm that 
equipment surfaces are appropriately clean (measuring removal of active, cleaning agent, bioburden 
and endotoxin in the case of biotechnology manufacturing) have not been adequately developed to 
enable real-time release for cleaning biotechnology equipment. 
11.9	 Product Changeover
Much biotechnology manufacturing involves campaigning. In a campaign, the same product is 
made again and again. However, typically between each batch in a campaign, validated cleaning is 
performed. At the end of a campaign, some additional steps may be taken to prepare the equipment 
58
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
for the subsequent campaign of a different product. This extra precaution typically involves performing 
an additional cycle of the same validated cleaning process used for cleaning between batches in a 
campaign. Because of concern about possible migration of residues (particularly product active) into 
gasket materials, or more accurately, into the interstices between gaskets and stainless steel surfaces, 
changeover of soft parts such as gaskets may also be done after the initial cleaning. During changing 
of soft parts, a more comprehensive visual examination of the equipment surfaces is made. Following 
reassembly of the equipment, the validated cleaning process is repeated. Routine monitoring of both 
the initial cleaning and the final cleaning is performed as is normally done. Some companies also 
might perform a specific analytical test (such as an ELISA procedure) as an extra check for the previous 
active protein in the final rinse water of the second cleaning . It should be recognized, however, that 
the likelihood of any native protein surviving one cleaning process, much less two cleaning processes, 
is very remote. 
An alternative is not to change out those soft parts based on data showing no migration of residues 
into interstices between gaskets and stainless steel surfaces or analysis based on potential carryover. 
Such data can be based on studies on commercial equipment, on scale-up equipment, and/or in a 
laboratory simulation. In such cases, one validated cleaning cycle is used both between batches of one 
campaign and for a campaign changeover.
Certain equipment is generally dedicated to a given product. This includes chromatography resins 
and ultrafilters. Cleaning may be done on these items within a campaign; however, at the end of the 
campaign the resins and ultrafilters are cleaned, but typically are not used for campaigns involving 
different products.
11.10 Clean Hold Considerations
Following cleaning, equipment that is to be reused should be stored in a manner to protect it from 
contamination during storage. Criteria used to determine acceptability of storage conditions may 
include lack of bioburden proliferation, endotoxin level and visual examination. A major regulatory 
concern is the control of bioburden proliferation during the storage of equipment. Even if equipment 
is sterilized prior to use, it is prudent to measure bioburden after the clean hold time to ensure that 
the subsequent sterilization is not excessively challenged. This is also important from the standpoint 
of the control of pyrogens from gram-negative bacteria, which may not be removed or inactivated by 
sterilization processes. (8) Storage instructions should be specified in a control document, such as the 
cleaning procedure or approved storage procedure. 
The best procedures are to store cleaned equipment in a dry state or in a solution that inhibits the 
proliferation of bioburden. If equipment is to be stored in a dry state, manufacturing controls should 
be in place to ensure that equipment is sufficiently drained and dried upon completion of the cleaning 
process, as well as to minimize the amount of condensed water accumulation in the equipment after 
cleaning due to equipment cooling. In addition, it is preferred that equipment be stored in a manner 
to prevent external recontamination. If stored in a dry state (that can be unequivocally established as 
dry), and if protected from external contamination, formal studies to demonstrate lack of bioburden 
proliferation may not be necessary. Based on sound scientific principles, bioburden will not proliferate 
on clean, dry surfaces. If stored in an inhibiting solution, the solution should be known to inhibit 
bioburden growth (such as dilute caustic) or data should be developed to demonstrate inhibition.
If the equipment is stored with a possibility of water in all or parts of the equipment, there are two 
common strategies to control microbial proliferation during the storage of equipment. One strategy 
is to establish an acceptable time between the end of cleaning and the beginning of the next use 
59
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
(which may be sterilization, sanitization, or a manufacturing process step) by performing a clean 
hold validation. After a predetermined storage time, sampling by a suitable method is performed 
and the post-hold data is compared to the data at the beginning of storage. If rinse sampling is used, 
it should be ambient temperature water so that what is measured is the bioburden remaining on 
surfaces (the use of a hot water rinse may reduce the bioburden in the rinse solution). Bioburden (and 
possibly endotoxin) levels in the equipment are measured to ensure that levels would not challenge 
the sterilization or sanitization procedures or exceed in-process manufacturing specifications.
If clean hold validation is not performed, or if the validated clean hold time is exceeded, a validated 
water (usually hot water) flush may be used before sterilization, sanitization, or use of the equipment 
to reduce any microbial proliferation that might have occurred during storage to an acceptable level 
before further manufacturing or processing on the equipment. After the water flush, sampling (by 
rinse, swab or plating) is performed. Bioburden (and optionally endotoxin) levels in the equipment 
are measured to ensure that levels would not challenge the sterilization or sanitization procedures or 
exceed in-process manufacturing specifications.
For clean hold time studies using rinse water being fed from process lines, a few common approaches 
to establishing the acceptable amount of rinse water to use are based on the minimum working 
volume of the system or the minimum CIP rinse based on the design. Bioburden values in any rinse 
sample should be compared to the measured bioburden values based on the equivalent rinse sampling 
at the beginning of storage. It is preferable to collect the entire volume of rinse solution and agitate it 
for a specified period of time to ensure homogeneity before collecting the sub-sample for testing. 
For buffer and media vessels, when operational controls are in place to minimize bioburden, and 
when a risk assessment demonstrates that there is minimal risk to product quality as a result of the 
control procedures, a clean hold validation may not be necessary. 
Validation of clean hold studies on a given piece of equipment should be able to be applicable to all 
products using that equipment and to all cleaning processes for that equipment, provided the final 
state of the cleaned equipment and the storage conditions are consistent. If a validated clean hold 
time is exceeded, an assessment should be made as to the need for corrective action. Appropriate 
corrective actions before use or further processing may include cleaning the equipment again using a 
validated cleaning process or using a validated hot water rinse (as described above) to bring bioburden 
to an acceptable level. If any changes to the equipment, manufacturing processes and/or cleaning 
procedures are made, the impact of these changes on the clean hold studies should be evaluated.
60
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
