5.0	
Sampling Methods
It is essential to a cleaning validation program that the appropriate sampling techniques are utilized. 
Sampling must be conducted with techniques appropriate for the equipment surfaces and for the 
nature of the study, including the analytical methods used. This section discusses types of sampling 
methods, sampling recovery validation studies, and the training and qualification of samplers.
5.1	 Sampling Method Selection
Selection of a sampling method depends on the nature of the equipment and the nature of the 
residue being measured. Sampling methods discussed here are direct surface sampling, swabbing, 
rinse water sampling and placebo sampling. It should be noted that while regulatory documents refer 
to swabbing as “direct” sampling and to rinse water sampling as “indirect” sampling, it is preferable 
and more descriptive to refer to those sampling methods as “swab sampling” and “rinse sampling,” 
and reserve the term “direct sampling” for techniques such as the use of visual inspection.
5.1.1	 Direct Sampling Methods
Direct sampling methods (as used in this document) include visual inspection. 
It is a well-accepted practice that a cleaning process should remove visible residues from the production 
process off of equipment surfaces. The visual inspection of equipment has limitations in that some 
equipment surfaces (e.g., piping) are usually not accessible for viewing. The use of optical equipment 
like mirrors or endoscopes, as well as the use of additional lighting, can help to facilitate visual 
inspection. 
Remote inspection techniques (with fiber-optic probes and a LCD viewing screen) are utilized when 
visual inspection by a trained inspector is difficult to perform because of access to equipment surfaces, 
or when one prefers to supplement an “unaided” visual inspection procedure. 
Borescopes, fiberscopes, and videoscopes allow visual inspection of hard-to-reach areas. Borescopes 
have been used to view the interior of piping and tank welds. Typical benefits of these scopes are that 
they: can fit into confined spaces not accessible to operators; are very maneuverable; have additional 
lighting attached; and may come with optional magnification and/or zooming capabilities. The 
major drawback of these scopes is the complexity of use, controlling lighting/brightness, and that 
the operator still has to make the determination if the area viewed is visually clean. 
A remote visual camera allows operators to view remote areas on a screen. The camera has most of 
the same strengths and weaknesses as the scopes, with the added benefit that operators can typically 
also record video or take pictures. Multiple operators can, at the same time, view what is on the 
screen. The potential to record video and allow multiple operators to view the screen may help 
support a site’s visual inspection training program. Pictures printed from the camera may distort the 
actual amount of residue present, since operators will typically zoom in on a particular area when 
taking a picture. 
All these techniques, like visual inspection, require an adequate training program. 
5.1.2	 Rinse Sampling
Rinse sampling involves sampling the equipment by flowing water over all relevant equipment surfaces 
to remove residues, which are then measured in the rinse water. The most common rinse sampling 
technique is to take a grab sample from the final rinse water during the final rinse of the cleaning 
24
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
process. Another option is to fill the entire equipment with water after the cleaning procedure is 
completed. Then, a bulk sample is taken and analyzed. A third option is to utilize a separate CIP 
sampling rinse of defined volume following the completion of the final process rinse. 
Advantages and disadvantages of both methods for CIP rinsing are shown in Table 5.1.2.
Table 5.1.2	 Comparison of CIP Grab Sampling versus Separate CIP Sampling Rinse
Grab Sampling from CIP Final Rinse
Separate CIP Sampling Rinse
Advantages
Represents the normal cleaning process
• 
Allows on-line testing
• 
Requires no additional amounts of rinse 
• 
water
Equipment can be used for further 
• 
processing without additional steps
Results can easily be used for carryover 
• 
calculations
Represents what is left on surfaces after 
• 
the completion of the cleaning process
More likely to result in an acceptable 
• 
result if done correctly
Disadvantages
Sample represents a worst-case 
• 
carryover to the next batch (but can 
demonstrate robustness of the cleaning 
process)
Assumptions need to be made about 
• 
sampling for carryover calculations
Utilizes an additional step
• 
Requires additional amounts of rinse 
• 
water 
Contamination is possible due to the 
• 
method of water addition
Online testing not practical
• 
A special case of rinse sampling is the sampling of small parts. Those parts may be sampled by 
swabbing, but there are two options for rinse sampling. One type of rinse sampling is extraction of 
the small parts. In an extraction procedure, the extraction solution (typically water for biotechnology 
residues) is placed in a clean vessel. The small part is then placed in the extraction solution and agitated 
or sonicated for a fixed time. The sampling solution is then analyzed for potential residues. A second 
type of rinse sampling for small parts is typically used for items with an orifice, such as filling needles. 
In this procedure, a fixed volume of sampling solution (again, typically water) is passed through the 
lumen and collected in a clean collection vessel. The sampling solution is agitated for uniformity, and 
then analyzed for the potential residues. Because the surface area and sampling volume are precisely 
known, limits can be accurately calculated for such situations.
5.1.3	 Swab Sampling
Swab sampling involves wiping a surface with a fibrous material (most commonly). During the wiping 
procedure, the residue on the surface may be transferred to the fibrous material. The fibrous material 
is then placed in a solvent to transfer the residue to the solvent. The solvent is then analyzed for the 
residue by an acceptable analytical technique. The most common fibrous material is some kind of 
textile (knitted, woven or nonwoven) attached to a plastic handle. 
In most cases the swabs are wetted with a solvent prior to sampling the surface. For TOC and 
conductivity, the solvent is almost always water. For sampling the same site, companies may choose 
to sample the same surface area with multiple swabs in order to provide a higher percent recovery of 
residue from the surface. In such cases, the additional swab(s) utilized may be either dry swab(s) or 
swab(s) wetted with the same solvent.
25
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.1.4	 Comparison of Swab and Rinse Sampling
Both swab sampling and rinse sampling are listed as acceptable sampling techniques in most regulatory 
documents. (8,9,11) Both methods have their advantages and disadvantages, as shown in Table 5.1.4.
Table 5.1.4	 Comparison of Swab Sampling and Rinse Sampling
Swab Sampling
Rinse Sampling
Advantages
Enables the analysis of residues found 
• 
on the specific surfaces. Includes the 
recovery of proteins that are denatured 
and/or adhered to the surface.
Allows for sampling of areas that are 
• 
more difficult to clean (i.e., worst 
cases).
During rinsing, the entire product-
• 
contacting surface is wetted. One 
analysis result represents the sum of all 
removed residues for the flow path.
The sampling procedure does not 
• 
contaminate the equipment. Re-cleaning 
is not required after sampling.
This method allows for conclusions on 
• 
the cleanliness of areas that are not 
accessible for swabbing.
Disadvantages
Only discrete sampling areas can be 
• 
analyzed, and these must represent the 
entire equipment; sampling must include 
worst-case locations.
The sampling itself can potentially 
• 
contaminate the equipment. Re-cleaning 
may be required after sampling.
Some areas are not accessible for 
• 
swabbing (e.g., piping systems).
Only water soluble residues can be 
• 
detected.
Those areas that are hard to clean 
• 
cannot be identified.
Does not deal with residues that 
• 
preferentially transfer from one part of 
the equipment to the next product.
May dilute out the residue to be 
• 
undetectable by the analytical method.
In cases where the equipment surface is difficult to access for swabbing (e.g., piping), swabbing is 
not an option. It should be appropriately justified that the cleaning procedure is considered effective 
if swab testing will not be performed. The following situations will justify a decision to not swab a 
surface: 
Equipment not accessible for swabbing is constructed of the same materials as equipment that 
• 
allows swabbing.
Difficult to access equipment surfaces are exposed to the same residues and conditions as 
• 
equipment surfaces that allow swabbing.
Difficult to access equipment surfaces are cleaned with the same cleaning procedure (i.e., the 
• 
same cleaning agents and the same temperature) as equipment that allows swabbing.
The mechanical forces during cleaning in piping systems (e.g., turbulent flow) are higher compared 
• 
to tank cleaning using spray balls.
In contrast to tanks, the piping system is completely filled with flowing liquid during cleaning.
• 
Rinse sampling appropriately addresses the issue of cross-contamination from those surfaces.
• 
26
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
5.2	 Placebo Sampling
In biotechnology, placebo sampling generally does not include actual product placebo; instead, it 
includes only WFI or the aqueous processing buffer without any product. In this sampling process, 
the equipment is cleaned. Following cleaning, a manufacturing process is performed (to the extent 
feasible) using only WFI or buffer. Following processing, the WFI or buffer is evaluated as any 
other cleaning validation sample, typically for TOC (or Total Protein), conductivity, bioburden and 
endotoxin, as measures of possible contamination of a manufactured product with those residues. 
Placebo runs can be done for both bulk and formulation/fill manufacturing to demonstrate actual 
carryover to the processed material. 
5.3	 Sampling for Microbial and Endotoxin Analysis
Sampling for bioburden involves rinse water sampling, swabbing or contact plates. Rinse water 
sampling for bioburden must involve the use of sterile sample containers. A careful sampling technique 
is required for any microbial method to avoid external contamination of the sample. 
Sampling for endotoxin is almost always a rinse water sample.
There is nothing unique to biotechnology about the use of these sampling techniques for microbial 
evaluation.
5.4	 Sampling Recovery Studies
Sampling recovery studies are generally required to adequately demonstrate that a residue, if 
present on equipment surfaces, can be adequately measured or quantified by the combination of the 
analytical method and the sampling procedure. These studies provide a scientific basis for utilizing 
those sampling and analytical methods to measure residues. Three types of sampling recoveries are 
discussed below: swab sampling recovery, rinse sampling recovery, and “visual examination” recovery. 
For swab and rinse sampling, recovery studies may be performed as part of the analytical method 
validation, or they may be performed as separate studies, once it is determined that the analytical 
method can appropriately measure residues in solutions. Sampling recovery studies are laboratory 
studies involving coupons of sampled equipment of different materials of construction (such as 
stainless steel, glass, PTFE and silicone) spiked with residues to be measured.
5.4.1	 General Considerations
Recovery studies may not be required for certain residues which are known to be readily water soluble 
and are used well below the solubility limit, such as sodium hydroxide or phosphoric acid used as 
cleaning agents. 
In performing recovery studies for swabbing and rinse sampling, the amount of material spiked onto 
coupons should represent an amount equal to what could be present at the residue limit, as this 
represents a worst case. 
The residue spiked should be the same residue present at the end of the cleaning process. For 
biotechnology protein actives, this is actually degraded protein fragment. However, it is common 
practice to spike the native protein active, as this is simpler and represents a worst case. For bulk 
biotechnology manufacturing, some manufacturers only perform recovery with the bulk active, 
whereas others will also utilize an early stage harvest product to represent early stage residues. 
27
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Recovery values should be established for all surfaces sampled. For swab and rinse sampling, this may 
be accomplished by performing recovery studies on all surfaces. An alternative is to perform one 
residue study on a surface, which through documented evidence, is equivalent (in terms of percent 
recovery) to other surfaces for which a formal recovery study is not performed. This is essentially a 
grouping or family approach for recovery studies. Equivalence for establishing the group or family 
may be established based on published studies or in-house data. Another approach used by some 
companies is to exclude formal recovery studies for sampled surfaces constituting less than a small 
percentage (such as 1% or 2%) of the total equipment surface area; in such cases, the recovery value 
used for that excluded surface is the lowest recovery of any other surface type for which a formal 
sampling recovery study was performed, or the minimum acceptable recovery percentage required 
by the company’s procedures.
Swab recovery studies are typically performed on a nominal coupon square surface area of either 
25 cm2 or 100 cm2. In sampling manufacturing equipment for a protocol, it is not always possible to 
swab a 10 cm X 10 cm area (it might be necessary to swab a 5 cm X 20 cm area). Furthermore, it might 
not be practical to swab exactly 100 cm2 (an area of 60 cm2 or 128 cm2 may be required because of 
the specific equipment geometry). In such cases, the recovery percentage based on sampling 10 cm 
X 10 cm may be applied to each of those cases. If such an approach is used, a range of acceptable 
surface area (such as 25% to 150% of the nominal sampled area) should be established. However, if 
the sampled area for equipment surfaces in a protocol varies from the nominal value, the residue limit 
for that sample should be adjusted based on the actual surface area swabbed.
5.4.2	 Swab Recovery
For swab recovery studies, coupons are spiked with solutions of the target residue, allowed to dry, 
and sampled with the swabbing procedure to be utilized in the cleaning validation protocol. The 
swab is desorbed in a suitable solvent, and the amount of residue is measured in that solvent sample. 
The amount recovered is compared to the amount spiked on the coupon, and the result is expressed 
as percent recovery. Because swabbing is a manual procedure, typically each person performing 
a recovery study performs three replicates. It is preferable to have at least two persons perform 
swabbing recovery studies for each combination of residue and surface type. The recovery percentage 
established by the study may be defined in different ways, but typically is defined as the lowest average 
recovery of any one analyst. An acceptable swab recovery depends on how that swab recovery is being 
used. If the recovery is performed to qualify the sampling method without correction of either a limit 
or an analytical result, a recovery of 70% or more is typically required. If the recovery percentage is 
used to correct a residue limit or an analytical result, a recovery of 50% or more is typically required. 
An upper limit for percent recovery should be established.
At a minimum, recovery values are generally performed at the residue limit on the surface (in μg/cm2, 
for example). While it is possible to perform recoveries at different spiked levels, in general, there is little 
value to such additional spiked levels because of the variability of the sampling procedure. It is prefer-
able to perform additional replicates at the one-residue limit rather than studies at additional levels. Ac-
ceptable variation for recovery results at one spiked level is typically on the order of 15-30% RSD.
5.4.3	 Rinse Recovery 
Rinse recovery studies address the validity of rinse sampling for that residue. They demonstrate that 
if the residue were on a surface, that residue would be effectively removed and could be analyzed in 
the rinse solution. Rinse recovery studies address the U.S. FDA’s “dirty pot” and “baby/bath water” 
28
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
analogies. (8) Rinse recovery studies, like swab recovery studies, are performed on coupons that have 
been spiked with solutions of the target residue and then allowed to dry. For swab recoveries, it is 
necessary to perform the exact swabbing procedure to be used in the cleaning validation protocol. For 
rinse sampling, in contrast, the exact rinsing procedure cannot be duplicated in the laboratory. However, 
it is possible to simulate the rinsing procedure in the laboratory. Where possible, the conditions of the 
simulated rinse should be the same as the equipment rinsing situation. This includes the selection of 
rinsing solvent (typically water), as well as the temperature of the rinsing solvent. In other cases, the 
rinsing conditions should be selected as the same or worst case as compared to the equipment rinsing 
situation. For example, the ratio of solvent to sampled surface area should be the same or lower in the 
recovery study compared to the equipment-rinsing situation. 
One method of simulating the rinse process is to suspend a spiked coupon above a clean collection 
vessel and cascade the rinse solution across the surface into the collection vessel. Another method is 
to spike the bottom of a beaker of the appropriate material of construction, allow the residue to dry, 
add rinse solution to the beaker and apply gentle agitation for a time which approximates the time of 
the final rinse. The rinse solution is either pipetted or decanted from the beaker and analyzed. A third 
option, used in cases where a beaker of suitable material of construction is not available, is to place a 
spiked coupon in the bottom of a beaker and perform a simulated rinse, as in the second situation.
Since rinse sampling is not significantly operator dependent, three replicates by one operator are 
adequate to determine percent recovery. Acceptable percent recoveries are typically established at the 
same levels and conditions as for swab recovery studies. 
5.4.4	 “Recovery” in Visual Inspection
This process is actually the determination of a quantitative “visual detection limit” where visual 
examination is the sole sampling/analytical method and “visually clean” is used as the sole acceptance 
criterion for the given residue in the absence of swab or rinse sampling for that residue. (12,13) If visual 
examination is used to supplement swab or rinse sampling, such determination of a visual detection 
limit is not required. A visual detection limit under specified viewing conditions can be determined 
by spiking coupons of the equipment surface materials with solutions of the residue at different levels 
(in μg/cm2) and by having a panel of trained observers determine the lowest level at which residues 
are clearly visible across the spiked surface. The significance of such a visual detection limit is that if 
equipment surfaces are determined to be visually clean under the same (or more stringent) viewing 
conditions in a cleaning validation protocol, the level of the residue is below the visual detection limit. 
Appropriate viewing conditions include distance, lighting and angle. The visual limit depends on the 
nature of the residue as well as the nature of the surface (for example, stainless steel vs. PTFE) and 
the visual acuity of the inspector. Typical values reported in the literature for a visual detection limit 
are 1-4 μg/cm2. (14)
5.4.5	 Recovery for Bioburden and Endotoxin Sampling
Recovery studies to determine percentage recovery from surfaces are not appropriate and are not 
required for microbiological sampling or for endotoxin sampling for the following reasons:
The question of enumeration in microbiological tests—“colony forming units” are typically 
1.	
counted, as opposed to individual organisms. 
Vegetative organisms will die or lose viability when dried on a coupon in a standard sampling 
2.	
recovery procedure. 
It is unclear which species should be used for a recovery study. 
3.	
29
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The limits set for bioburden typically are significantly below what could possibly cause either 
4.	
product quality issues or process performance (e.g., SIP) issues; therefore, even though recovery 
may be low (<50%), product quality and/or process performance are not impacted by excluding a 
recovery factor.
5.5	 Training and Qualification of Samplers
Training involves the steps taken to assist the prospective sampler in learning the technique of 
sampling/inspection. For purposes of this section, “sampling” and “sampler” also include “inspection” 
and “inspector” for visual evaluation. Qualification involves the process of “certifying” that the 
prospective sampler can appropriately sample. 
Training always precedes qualification. At a minimum, the trainee should read the sampling 
procedure, and a trained sampler should demonstrate the correct procedure. During the reading and 
demonstration, the trained sampler provides commentary on the rationale for certain practices or 
aspects of the sampling procedure. Demonstration of technique may also utilize a visual indicator on 
the swabbed surface, which assists the trainee in seeing consequences of poor technique. The last step 
in training is demonstration of the correct procedure by the prospective sampler.
Qualification processes used for sampling will depend on the type of sampling performed. Qualification 
may involve merely demonstration of the correct technique (that is, the last step of the training 
process), or it may involve a “test” which challenges the trainee’s ability to perform the activity 
correctly (e.g., perform a visual inspection using an array of coupons, including some that are soiled 
and others that are not, or perform a swab sampling for a known soil residue level on coupons). Either 
type of qualification may be repeated on a regular basis, or upon any retraining of a sampler.
5.5.1	 Key Issues for Training for Swab Sampling
It is preferred to have a separate swab sampling SOP for training prospective samplers. This helps 
prevent “procedure creep” which might occur if the swabbing procedure text is just repeated in 
every protocol. It also helps ensure that the same sampling procedure is used in recovery studies as in 
protocol execution, and thus simplifies training.
Four keys to consistency in swab sampling training are: 
1.	 Consistency of wetting the swab head 
2.	 Consistency of the swabbing motion (including overlapping strokes) 
3.	 Consistency in applying pressure
4.	 Consistency in swabbing of the correct surface area
It is assumed, of course, that the correct swab, the correct number of swabs, and the correct wetting 
solution (if any) for the swab are utilized. A fifth key factor for swab sampling involving TOC is emphasis 
on preventing external contamination of the swab due to the ubiquitous presence of organic carbon. It 
can be beneficial to emphasize “aseptic technique” used in microbiological sampling in training swab 
samplers, particularly when the sampling involves TOC analysis. In contrast to aseptic techniques used 
in microbiological sampling, however, the negative consequences (that is, artificially high TOC values) 
of using isopropanol on gloves or on adjacent surfaces prior to sampling should be emphasized.
Since swab sampling is not unlike manual cleaning processes, in that it is highly dependant on a person 
for consistency, consideration should be given to retraining and/or requalifying swab samplers on an 
established basis. Retraining may involve the same process as for initial training, or may involve only 
portions of that initial training. Requalification generally involves a repeat of the initial qualification 
30
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
process. The need for retraining and/or requalification should also be addressed as part of change 
control for the swabbing procedure and as remedial action when swab sampling “operator error” is 
suspected in the investigation of a non-conforming result.
5.5.2	 Key Issues for Training for Rinse Sampling
It is preferred to have a separate rinse sampling SOP for training prospective samplers. For CIP systems, 
the rinse sampling procedure may be the same procedure that is used for sampling water systems, 
appropriately modified to cover sampling of process equipment. 
The major concern for accuracy in rinse samples is to prevent contamination of the rinse sample due 
to the sampling port and the environment around the sampling port. This includes adequately flushing 
or cleaning the port prior to taking a sample, as well as avoiding sample contamination due to the use 
of isopropanol on gloves or the use of isopropanol to clean the port (prior to sampling). As in swab 
sampling training, it can be beneficial to emphasize the “aseptic technique” used in microbiological 
sampling in training rinse samplers, particularly when the sampling involves TOC analysis. In training 
rinse samplers to take a sample for the final rinse of a CIP cycle, timing of the sampling process is 
critical. Typically the very last portion of the rinse is sampled; but, it may be acceptable to sample 
before that time if such sampling represents a worst case. However, once process rinsing is complete, 
there is no way to go back and collect a rinse sample (unless a separate sampling rinse is performed). 
Since the consistency of rinse sampling is less operator dependent, the need for retraining and requali-
fication should also be addressed as part of change control for the rinse sampling procedure, as well as 
when rinse sampling “operator error” is suspected in the investigation of a non-conforming result.
5.5.3	 Training for Visual Inspection
Training for visual inspection depends on whether the visual inspection is part of a protocol execution 
or whether the visual inspection is the laboratory “limit of detection” determination. In either case, it 
is preferred to have a visual inspection SOP, so that training can be for that SOP. Visual inspectors for 
either type of visual examination should have appropriate vision tests
For training of visual inspectors in a protocol execution, key issues are: 
Access to sites for viewing
• 
Appropriate lighting 
• 
Ability to discern the difference between residues on the surface and surface imperfections
• 
An important element of visual inspection training is knowing when to call for further analysis 
to determine the nature of the residue. For example, if what appears to be rouge is seen on the 
equipment, the presence of that residue should be noted. Determining whether that residue causes a 
failure in the cleaning process is a separate decision.
The procedure for visual inspection for laboratory “limit of detection” determination is generally 
different from that of visual inspection during protocol execution, because the objective is different. 
The objective is to determine at what level a certain residue can be consistently seen across a spiked 
surface in order to correlate a visual detectability limit with a level of known residue(s) below that 
spiked level. This procedure may be in a separate SOP, or may be incorporated in an overall SOP for 
visual inspection. In addition to the same elements that are included in training for protocol execution, 
a key for training in this procedure, which involves viewing spiked coupons, is a careful distinction 
between a visually clean surface, a partially soiled surface (in which residue is apparent only over a 
portion of the spiked area), and a “fully” soiled surface.
31
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
