12.0	
Regulatory Issues
Most regulatory documents dealing with cleaning validation do not make any explicit comments 
about biotechnology manufacturing or about how cleaning validation might be different for 
biotechnology as compared to other pharmaceutical manufacturing. The general principles laid out 
in regulatory documents, i.e., limits should be “practical, achievable, and verifiable,” (8) apply equally 
to biotechnology manufacturing and small molecule pharmaceutical manufacturing. 
Below are specific regulatory comments relevant to biotechnology cleaning validation:
The WHO Working document QS/03.055/Rev.1 includes a statement about the use of ELISA as an 
1.	
analytical technique for biopharmaceuticals. (27) However, that statement is not of much help, since 
most biopharmaeutcials degrade in the cleaning process. 
The U.S. FDA’s “Q&A on CGMP” (updated 2005) provides a rationale for allowing the use of TOC 
2.	
for cleaning validation purposes. (28) While it does not specifically mention use for biotechnology, 
the biotechnology industry is among the biggest users of TOC for cleaning validation.
The U.S. FDA inspection guide for biotechnology has the following statements about “cleaning 
3.	
procedures:”
“Validation of the cleaning procedures for the processing of equipment, including columns, should 
be carried out. This is especially critical for a multi-product facility. The manufacturer should have 
determined the degree of effectiveness of the cleaning procedure for each BDP [Biotech-derived 
product] or intermediate used in that particular piece of equipment. 
“Validation data should verify that the cleaning process will reduce the specific residues to an 
acceptable level. However, it may not be possible to remove absolutely every trace of material, even 
with a reasonable number of cleaning cycles. The permissible residue level, generally expressed in 
parts per million (ppm), should be justified by the manufacturer. Cleaning should remove endotoxins, 
bacteria, toxic elements, and contaminating proteins, while not adversely affecting the performance 
of the column.” (29)
Following these two paragraphs are additional comments on cleaning procedure, limit and analytical/
sampling issues. However, other than the explicit comment about including residues of bacteria and 
endotoxin, there is little that is specific to biotechnology manufacturing.
The U.S. FDA guidance for lyophilization of parenterals states the following:
4.	
“One could conclude that if contamination is found on a chamber surface after lyophilization, then 
dosage units in the chamber could also be contaminated. It is a good practice as part of the validation 
of cleaning of the lyophilization chamber to sample the surfaces both before and after cleaning.” (30)
This probably means that if contamination of shelves from external sources (such as hydraulic fluid) 
is found after lyophilization (and before cleaning), it is likely that the same contaminant is in vials. 
However, if that is of concern, that is a maintenance issue and probably belongs as part of preventive 
maintenance rather than cleaning validation. Note that this statement has an implicit assumption that 
cleaning validation is performed for vial lyophilization. 
The Health Canada, Health Products and Food Branch Inspectorate Guidance, 
5.	
Cleaning Validation 
Guidelines (11) states the following about biotechnology manufacturing:
“Relevant process equipment cleaning validation methods are required for biological drugs because of 
their inherent characteristics (proteins are sticky by nature), parenteral product purity requirements, 
the complexity of equipment and the broad spectrum of materials which need to be cleaned.”
61
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
It furthermore states the following about bracketing (grouping) for biotechnology manufacturing: 
“For biological drugs, including vaccines, bracketing may be considered acceptable for similar products 
and/or equipment provided appropriate justification, based on sound, scientific rationale is given. 
Some examples are cleaning of fermentors of the same design but with different vessel capacity used 
for the same type of recombinant proteins expressed in the same rodent cell line and cultivated in 
closely related growth media; a multi-antigen vaccine used to represent the individual antigen or 
other combinations of them when validating the same or similar equipment that is used at stages of 
formulation (adsorption) and/or holding. Validation of cleaning of fermentors should be done upon 
individual pathogen basis.” 
ICH Q7 
6.	
Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (10) contains in Section 
18.0, “Specific guidance for APIs manufactured by cell culture/fermentation.” It provides GMP 
guidance on the cell culture/fermentation manufacturing process for biotechnological product and 
some small molecules. 
At the beginning of the section, it states that, “in general, the degree of control for biotechnological 
processes used to produce proteins and polypeptides is greater than that for classical fermentation 
processes.” It further explains that, “APIs produced by classical fermentation are normally low 
molecular weight products such as antibiotics, amino acids, vitamins, and carbohydrates.”
Q7 states the following regarding equipment cleaning for cell culture/fermentation:
“Cell culture equipment should be cleaned and sterilized after use. As appropriate, fermentation 
equipment should be cleaned, sanitized, or sterilized.”
“Shared (multi-product) equipment may warrant additional testing after cleaning between product 
campaigns, as appropriate, to minimize the risk of cross-contamination.”
Q7 states the following regarding equipment cleaning for harvesting, isolation and purification:
“All equipment should be properly cleaned and, as appropriate, sanitized after use. Multiple successive 
batching without cleaning can be used if intermediate or API quality is not compromised.”
Q7 states the following regarding equipment cleaning for viral removal/inactivation steps:
“The same equipment is not normally used for different purification steps. However, if the same 
equipment is to be used, the equipment should be appropriately cleaned and sanitized before reuse. 
Appropriate precautions should be taken to prevent potential virus carryover (e.g., through equipment 
or environment) from previous steps.”
ICH Q5A, 
7.	
Viral Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology Products Derived from Cell Lines of Human or Animal 
Origin states the following regarding validation of column cleaning and regenerating from viral 
inactivation perspective:
“Assurance should be provided that any virus potentially retained by the production system would 
be adequately destroyed or removed prior to reuse of the system. For example, such evidence may 
be provided by demonstrating that the cleaning and regeneration procedures do inactivate or remove 
virus.” (31)
While these are specific comments from guidance documents, it should be recognized that regulatory 
inspectors may (and should) have additional expectations for cleaning validation in biotechnology 
based on current industry practices and on their past experience with similar companies.
62
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
1.	 Technical Report No. 29: Points to Consider 
for Cleaning Validation; Parenteral Drug 
Association: Bethesda, MD, 1998.
2.	 Technical Monograph: Cleaning and Cleaning 
Validation: A Biotechnology Perspective; Paren-
teral Drug Association: Bethesda, MD, 1996.
3.	 Pharmaceutical CGMPs For The 21st Century 
– A Risk-Based Approach: Final Report; U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration: [Online] 
2004. www.fda.gov/Drugs/Development 
ApprovalProcess/Manufacturing/Questions 
andAnswersonCurrentGoodManufacturing 
PracticescGMPforDrugs/ucm137175.htm 
(accessed Jun 28, 2010).
4.	 Quality Guideline Q8(R2), Pharmaceutical 
Development Q8; Conference on 
Harmonisation: [Online] 2009. www.
ich.org/cache/compo/276-254-1.html 
(accessed June 28, 2010).
5.	 Quality Guideline Q9, Quality Risk 
Management. International Conference 
on Harmonisation: [Online] 2005. www.
ich.org/cache/compo/276-254-1.html 
(accessed June 28, 2010).
6.	 Quality Guideline Q10, Pharmaceutical 
Quality System. International Conference 
on Harmonisation: [Online] 2008. www.
ich.org/cache/compo/276-254-1.html 
(accessed June 28, 2010).
7.	 Rathore, N., et al. Bench-Scale Characteriza-
tion of Cleaning Process Design Space for 
Biopharmaceuticals. BioPharm Intl., 2009, 
22(3), 32-45. 
8.	 Guide to Inspections of  Validation of  
Cleaning Practices; U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration: [Online] 1993. www.fda.
gov/ICECI/Inspections/InspectionGuides/
ucm074922.htm (accessed June 28, 2010).
9.	 Document PI 006-3, Recommendations 
on Validation Master Plan, Installation and 
Operational Qualification, Non-Sterile Process 
Validation Cleaning Validation; Pharmaceuti-
cal Inspection Convention Pharmaceutical 
Inspection Co-Operation Scheme: [Online] 
2007. www.picscheme.org/publication.
php?id=8 (accessed June 28, 2010).
