3.0	
Cleaning Process Design and Development
3.1	 Introduction 
The cleaning process requires design and development prior to implementation in a manufacturing 
plant to ensure the cleaning process and equipment are acceptable for use. Additionally, the concept of 
“Design Space,” recently introduced as an approach to the development of pharmaceutical processes, 
is discussed and applied to the development of cleaning processes.
The operational parameters that describe the cleaning process (such as cleaning agent, concentration, 
contact time, temperature, soil characteristics and soil condition), as well as specifics about the cleaning 
equipment, automated cleaning pathways, the sequence of cleaning steps, and flow rates during each 
step, should be determined prior to implementation.
Generally, the establishment of acceptable conditions (or confirmation of acceptable conditions for 
new soils being introduced to the manufacturing plant) follows a standard progression of activities – 
beginning with identification of control variables, cleaning measurements, and performance criteria. 
Laboratory (scale-down) experimentation, analogous to process characterization, and specific 
equipment requirements provide the necessary data to establish cleaning parameter control ranges.
This section describes the application of operational parameters and measurements, the design of 
laboratory scale experiments, the selection of appropriate test soils, and the scale-up for cleaning the 
manufacturing equipment. 
3.2	
Cleaning Process Controls (Inputs) and Measurements (Outputs)
3.2.1	 Cleaning Cycle Design 
Cleaning processes are comprised of multiple steps. Each step in the process has a function and a 
set of parameters that are controlled within defined ranges to ensure effective soil (and cleaning 
agent) removal. Steps in a typical cleaning cycle for a biotechnology product are outlined in Table 
3.2.1. Details of the cleaning processes may vary from site to site and for different types of process 
equipment. Differences may include the use and type of detergents, the presence of an acid cleaning 
step the concentration of cleaning agents, contact time of cleaning agents on equipment, feed pressure 
or flow rate, cleaning temperature, and required length or volume of rinse steps.
7
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 3.2.1	 Cleaning Process Steps (Examples)
Step
Function
Comments
Pre-Rinse
Removal of soluble and non-adhering 
residues
Reduction of soil load prior to primary 
cleaning step. Often performed 
at ambient temperature to avoid 
denaturation of residual proteins.
Alkaline
Cleaning
Solution
Removal of soluble and dried residues, 
solubilization of soils by degradation, 
heat, and/or wetting with detergents
Primary step for soil and bioburden 
removal. Generally performed at 
elevated temperatures.
May include alkaline detergents or 
alkali hydroxides.
May not be required depending on soil 
composition.
Water Rinse
Removal of alkaline detergent and 
suspended or solubilized soils
May not be as thorough as final rinse 
if prior to acid rinse.
Acid Rinse
Neutralization of residual alkali, 
additional cleaning of acid-soluble soils
May not be required depending on soil 
composition.
Final Water Rinse
Removal of all cleaning agent and 
product residues
Generally performed at elevated 
temperatures.
3.2.2	 Physical-Chemical Aspects 
There are four principal cleaning input parameters that can be varied for each step in the cleaning 
process. These four parameters are typically referred to as TACT (Time, Action, Concentration and 
Temperature). These four variables are interrelated and have a direct relationship on the success of each 
phase in the cleaning cycle. For example, cleaning agents may be heated to increase their effectiveness. 
The effect of each of these variables on soil removal should be determined, and acceptable ranges 
should be established as part of the cleaning development effort (soil type and condition are additional 
inputs that are discussed in Section 3.5).
Time is defined as the length of time for the cycle step. There are two typical methods for defining 
and measuring time during a cycle step, direct and indirect. Using the direct method, a cycle step 
counter that is part of the control system is used to measure the cycle step time. Time also may 
be measured indirectly. For example, for a rinse step, volume is sometimes tracked instead of time 
because the volume and flow rate define a time. For final water rinse, it is also common to add 
additional requirements, such as a specified conductivity level.
Action is the mechanism used to deliver the cleaning agent. This mechanism may be characterized 
as soak, scrubbing, impingement or turbulent flow. Agitation enhances the chemical actions of the 
cleaning agents and helps to increase the effectiveness of the cleaning process. Manual cleaning 
typically includes soaking or scrubbing as the action to achieve cleaning. Automated cycles typically 
employ impingement and/or turbulence as a cleaning action. The type of cleaning action should be 
identified for each cleaning process. The velocity (flow rate) of the cleaning and rinse fluids traveling 
through the equipment is an operational parameter that should be specified and verified at each step 
8
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
in the cleaning process. Spray devices have minimum and maximum flow rate requirements, and 
piping should be flushed at a speed sufficient to assure adequate flooding and turbulence. 
Cleaning agent concentrations directly affect the success of the cleaning process. Cleaning chemicals 
are available in concentrate forms that are diluted and used in cleaning cycles. Effectiveness of the 
cleaners may be related to their concentration. Too little cleaning agent might result in failure to 
remove the soil from equipment, and too much detergent can result in difficulty in removing cleaning 
agent residues, requiring excessive rinsing. In general, the greatest effectiveness of alkaline cleaners 
is achieved at elevated temperatures with agitation or turbulence over extended periods of time. 
Although there is some risk of denaturing residual protein onto the surfaces of the equipment at high 
temperatures, thereby making it more difficult to clean, it is typically minimized by performing an 
appropriate pre-rinse at ambient temperature prior to the caustic chemical wash. Chemicals are also 
costly, both in their purchase and disposal, thus determining the correct concentration of cleaning 
agent required to ensure cleanability is important. The addition of a cleaning agent to an automated 
system must be designed for reproducibility. Regardless of the method of addition, confirmation 
of the cleaning agent concentration helps verify consistency. For automated cleaning processes, the 
easiest means to verify cleaning agent concentration for highly alkaline or acidic cleaning agents is by 
conductivity. 
A process should be in place to detect anomalies in detergent concentration based on the mechanism 
by which chemical makeup is performed. For example, some systems control chemical addition by 
volume and use conductivity as a confirmation. An alarm would be triggered if the conductivity is 
outside a preset range. The allowable range should be supported by cleaning development data.
Selection of the cleaning agent should consider various aspects, including soil type, ease of removal, 
and need for chelating agents.
The optimal temperature ranges will vary for the different steps of the cleaning process. Initial water 
rinses are typically performed at ambient temperatures to minimize denaturing effects on proteins 
and maximize the dilution effects. Cleaning agents are typically heated to increase their effectiveness. 
Final rinse water steps may be performed at high temperatures to increase both the drying rate and 
the solubility of any process or cleaning agent residues. 
3.3	 Measurements Used to Determine Cleaning Effectiveness
Cleaning effectiveness may be determined by the inspection and analytical methods described 
in Section 6.0. They include visual inspection, analytical techniques for measuring removal of 
manufactured product, cleaning agent, bioburden and endotoxin. Depending on the purpose and the 
design/development phase, these may be on-line measurements and/or may be off-line measurements 
of rinse or swab samples.
3.4	 Equipment and Plant Design Considerations
3.4.1	 Piping 
Piping of the equipment being cleaned and of the CIP skid should be sloped continuously to ensure 
maximum drainability of the lines. If supply and/or return loop headers are used, the loop must be 
designed such that liquid flows in both parts of the loop at adequate speeds. If this is not achieved, one 
part of the loop may become a functional deadleg.
9
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The pressure drop in the piping also needs to be considered. The CIP skids are often located remotely 
from the process area, and the length of the distribution piping results in a total pressure drop that 
can be significant. The greatest challenge is sizing the distribution piping when the supply flow rate 
set points in the system vary by more than twofold. 
3.4.2	 Automated vs. Manual Systems
Use of automation provides consistent and robust control and monitoring of CIP cycles and parameters 
(such as time, flow rate or pressure, cleaning agent concentration, and temperature). Manual systems 
require more detailed operating instructions and increased operator attention during use.
3.4.3	 Centralized CIP vs. Discrete Cleaning of Isolated Equipment
Centralized CIP systems can provide a single location for handling cleaning agents and can reducing 
the plant requirements for cleaning-related equipment (pumps and tanks) and instrumentation. 
However, centralized systems often require more complex piping designs and may complicate desires 
to segregate parts of the process (e.g., upstream and downstream operations or pre- and post-virus 
removal steps in mammalian cell processes). Some process equipment (e.g., reusable membrane 
systems and chromatography columns) may require special cleaning agents that are different than 
those used for the rest of the process equipment. For these systems, discrete CIP or CIP systems 
(including portable CIP systems) that are integrated into the process skids may be desirable.
The design of centralized CIP systems should consider the potential for carryover of product 
residues between process steps, between products being manufactured concurrently in multi-product 
facilities, and between different products after a product changeover. To address the potential for 
product carryover, central CIP systems are often dedicated to one part of the manufacturing plant 
(e.g., upstream through product clarification steps or one process train in a multi-train plant). 
3.4.4	 Clean Out of Place (COP)
Small parts, containers, and other portable process equipment that are difficult to clean in place are 
often disassembled and cleaned in COP stations, washers or baths. Where COP is used, care must be 
taken in handling the parts after cleaning and in identifying parts for correct reassembly. COP may be 
performed in automated washers or baths or by manual cleaning. 
3.5	 Soil Evaluation and Categorization
3.5.1	 Soil Categories
There are a large variety of substances that contact process equipment surfaces during the manufacture 
of biopharmaceutical products. They include: fermentation and cell culture media; cells and cellular 
products, such as proteins and nucleic acids; organic and inorganic acids, bases and salts; process 
additives, such as antibiotics, surfactants, glycols, polyamines, sugars, plant or animal hydrolysates; 
and cleaning agents such as detergents, acids and bases.
Cleaning processes and cleaning validation must be designed and tested to address this wide variety 
of potential process soils. These tasks may be simplified by creating categories of soils and selecting 
representative soils for testing and tracking during the development and validation of cleaning 
processes. An example of process soil categories is shown in Table 3.5.1. 
10
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
Table 3.5.1	 Process Soil Categorization (Example)
Category
Representative Soil
Applicable Process Equipment 
Fermentation / Cell 
Culture Soils
Unconditioned (unused) 
fermentation/culture media
Media preparation equipment
Media storage and feed tanks
Conditioned (post-fermentation, cell-
containing) culture media
Inoculum preparation equipment
Seed reactors (fermentors)
Production reactors (fermentors)
Cell processes and clarification 
equipment
Conditioned (post-fermentation, cell-
free) culture media
Post-clarification product processing 
and storage equipment
Product capture equipment
Downstream and 
Formulation/Fill Soils
Aqueous salt solution containing 
product
Purification equipment
Concentration and buffer exchange 
equipment
Solution containing product and 
formulation components (e.g., 
excipients and surfactants)
Formulation equipment
Final sterile filtration equipment; 
product filling equipment
Buffer Preparation 
Soils
Aqueous salt solution without 
product
Buffer preparation equipment
Buffer filtration equipment and hold 
tanks
Cleaning Agent Soils
Cleaning agent, including surfactant 
and alkali/acid
Process equipment
The final selection of a representative soil within a process stream should be based on the similarity of 
the physiochemical properties of the soils. In many circumstances, categories may be combined, and 
the number of representative soils used for development activities may be further reduced. 
3.5.2	 Soil Removal
Soils may be removed by physical and/or chemical means. Physical removal may be accomplished by 
the diffusion of soils away from the surface (static soaking) or by convection, whereby energy from 
cleaning solution flow is used to transport soils into the fluid stream. Physical removal is dependent 
on soil size and its degree of adhesion to the equipment surface.
Chemical cleaning mechanisms include solubility, emulsification, wetting, chelation, dispersion, 
hydrolysis and oxidation. Cleaning agents are generally chosen for their ability to remove process soils 
by one or more of these mechanisms. In some cases, multiple cleaning steps may be used in order 
to take advantage of different chemical cleaning mechanisms. For instance, alkaline detergent for 
solubilization and emulsification may be followed by a sodium hypochlorite solution for the oxidation 
of protein soils. It should always be kept in mind that the more aggressive the cleaning solvents are 
(e.g., sodium hypochlorite solution), the more corrosion might occur. The right choice of materials 
for cleaning purposes is part of the engineering phase.	
Factors affecting “cleanability” also include the surface type, the surface finish, the surface geometry, 
11
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
the soil type and the soil level. Process surfaces typically encountered in biopharmaceutical manufac-
turing equipment are listed in Table 3.5.2.
Table 3.5.2	 Surface Materials for Biopharmaceutical Production Processes
Material
Description
Stainless steel, Hastelloy®†, other alloys
Reactors, tanks, piping, other large-scale 
equipment
Glass, ceramic
Flasks, beakers, cylinders
Polyethylene
Carboys
Polypropylene
Carboys
Fluorocarbons (PTFE; FEP)
Gaskets, hoses, piping, small containers
PETG Plastic
Culture vessels
Polycarbonate
Small containers
Silicone
Tubing, gaskets, O-rings
Fluoroelastomer
Gaskets, O-rings
EPDM
Gaskets, O-rings
Surface finish also affects the removal of soils. Rough surfaces provide more area for soil contact and 
may contain cracks and crevices that are difficult for the cleaning agent to penetrate. Therefore, the 
interior surfaces of stainless steel process equipment are typically treated (e.g., electropolishing) to 
smooth and polish rough surfaces.
The ease with which a soil is released from the equipment surface by one of the mechanisms 
described above determines its cleanability. Soil response to a particular cleaning mechanism may 
influence the choice of cleaning agent and cleaning conditions. Attachment to surfaces can be by 
a combination of van der Waals forces, electrostatic effects and other forces. The time that the soil 
resides on the equipment can also influence the difficulty of soil removal. Fresh soils are generally 
easier to remove than soils that have been allowed to dry on the surface. The planned time between 
soiling and cleaning must be considered when designing the cleaning studies to simulate the dirty 
hold time with coupons.
High soil levels can complicate removal by saturating the cleaning solvent or by depleting surfactants or 
other components of the cleaner (e.g., oxidizers or emulsifiers). This may limit the minimum cleaning 
volumes and should be considered in cleaning cycle design when high soil levels are anticipated.
3.5.3	 Cleaning Comparability Based on Soil and Surface 
Laboratory testing often includes screening a matrix of soils and relevant process surfaces. Screening 
experiments are designed to test soil removal capability using representative soils (Table 3.5.1) and 
coupons of relevant surface materials (Table 3.5.2). Cleaning conditions can be selected based on the 
results for the soil-surface combination encountered in the production equipment.
† Hastelloy is a registered trademark of Haynes International, Inc.
12
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
3.5.4	 Soil Selection for Laboratory Evaluations
Care should be taken in the choice of soils and soil conditions used for the selection of cleaning agents 
during laboratory evaluation. The soils should be representative of the soils on equipment in the 
manufacturing plant, including the chemical and physical (dried, baked) nature of the soils. 
Solutions or suspensions of soils selected for experimentation are generally coated on coupons 
representing the process contact surfaces and are dried to simulate the soil condition on the process 
equipment prior to testing for removal with cleaning agents. The representative soils generally should 
include conditioned culture media and the product solution. Other relevant soils may also be included, 
as mentioned above and outlined in Table 3.5.1. The number of representative soils will vary with 
an organization’s experience and history as well knowledge about the content and cleanability of the 
various process steps.
3.6	 Performing Cleaning Development Experiments 
Biotechnology processes generally involve product contact with a variety of materials (Table 3.5.2). 
Laboratory evaluation of the interaction between product and surfaces can be performed using test 
coupons made of the surface of interest under simulated cleaning conditions. Based on the process 
details, appropriate materials of construction with the appropriate surface finish characteristics should 
be selected for use in lab-scale cleaning experiments. To minimize the number of experiments, it may 
be sufficient to include only those surfaces that are expected to be the most difficult to clean (based 
on prior knowledge and risk assessment tools). Stainless steel coupons are the most common choice, 
as they represent a majority of equipment surfaces in a production facility. Non-electropolished 
stainless steel coupons with a representative or worse surface finish compared to vessel surfaces may 
be preferred for lab evaluations. 
Preparation of coupons typically involves the use of a cleaning regimen in order to ensure that all 
coupons are uniformly cleaned at the start of the experiment. This also helps to ensure that any foreign 
material deposited on the coupon surface during the fabrication process is removed to minimize any 
interference with the process soils or cleaning agent. The coupons are then completely dried before 
spotting them with soils, which may be the cell culture/fermentation fluid, harvested cell culture 
fluid, bulk drug active, and/or the final drug product formulation. It is important that the spotting 
of liquid onto each coupon be kept consistent to minimize experimental variability. The coupons are 
then dried for a fixed time to simulate the soiled equipment surfaces at the time of cleaning before 
they are subjected to the lab-scale cleaning process. That fixed time is generally the desired dirty hold 
time or a longer time.
The purpose of the experiment could be to make one or more determinations related to cleanability: 
comparison of the various materials of construction for a given soil, comparison of different process 
streams for a given surface, comparison of different cleaning conditions (such as concentration of 
cleaning agent and temperature), comparison of different products for the same process step and 
surface, or a combination of these. The outcome of these studies can be analyzed to create the “design 
space” for cleaning. In any case, it is important that the performance of the cleaning process in the lab 
represents the performance in the pilot plant or larger scale process. Key operational parameters, such 
as temperature, time, mode of action and concentration, are controlled to mimic what is used in the 
manufacturing plant. If it is difficult to simulate the actual process conditions in the lab, conditions 
representing a worst-case scenario should be employed. The laboratory studies can also be used to 
challenge the cleaning process by modifying different variables of the cleaning process to further 
outline the design space.
13
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Evaluation of performance for cleaning design space studies can utilize the various analytical methods 
listed in Section 6.0.
3.6.1	 Parameter Selection
A variety of parameters can impact the performance of a cleaning regimen. These include the nature 
and strength of the interactions between the product and the surface; the nature of the interaction 
between the cleaning agent and the soil; time (dirty hold time, time for each cleaning cycle); cleaning 
agent and concentration; temperature; cleaning action (flow properties, e.g., stagnant, laminar or 
turbulent, and pressure; and properties of the liquid (ionic strength, pH, components, viscosity, density, 
etc.). All of these except the cleaning action are independent of the equipment. The selection of 
parameters to be examined in an experimental study should be done on a case-by-case basis. The larger 
the number of parameters that need to be evaluated, the more the number of experiments that are 
required to understand the impact of the parameters and their interactions. On the other hand, if too 
few parameters are picked, the resulting conclusions in terms of identifying the important operational 
parameters and their ranges are likely to be erroneous, since important effects might be ignored.
 Use of a risk analysis tool, such as Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), may assist in prioritizing 
the various operational parameters for further examination (See Section 10.0 on Risk Management). 
Single parameter studies that vary one parameter at a time can be designed to identify the parameters 
that have significant impact on the performance. One such study, conducted at bench scale, reported 
the concentration and temperature of the cleaning solution to be the parameters with predominant 
effects. (7) As discussed in the following section, single parameter studies can then be followed by 
Design of Experiments (DOE) to investigate the interactions between these parameters. Alternatively, 
if only a few parameters need to be examined, just performing a DOE to measure both the main 
effects and the interactions may be more resource and time efficient. 
3.6.2	 Parameter Interactions 
The use of DOE-style experiments helps to determine the effect of varying individual parameters on 
cleanability, as well as provides an indication of their interaction. Statistical tools including regression 
analysis, leverage plots, response surface analysis and interaction profiles can be used to study 
both main and interaction effects. Relationships and interactions between such parameters as the 
temperature of the cleaning solution and the concentration of the cleaning agent may be determined. 
Such DOE analyses can be used to construct a multi-parameter design space for the cleaning process 
and to establish the ranges of operational parameters that provide acceptable cleaning process 
performance.
Using existing knowledge and a risk-based approach, cleaning experiments can be reduced or 
eliminated, for example, for transfer of a manufacturing process from one facility to another.
3.7	 Cleaning Process Scale-Up
Following the selection of cleaning agents and cleaning conditions (such as temperature, contact 
time, cleaning agent concentration and flow stream hydrodynamics) from historical plant data (if 
available) and laboratory development work, the cleaning process can be implemented for use on 
larger scale manufacturing equipment. Determination of soil and cleaning agent residue removal is 
generally performed prior to formal cleaning validation. Adjustments to cleaning conditions may be 
made during the scale-up process based on plant experience and laboratory development studies. 
14
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
3.7.1	 Setting Process Controls
It is both prudent and consistent with current CGMP to establish control ranges for the cleaning 
process operational and performance parameters. Operational parameters for CIP include:
Dirty hold time for equipment (time between use and initiation of cleaning)
• 
Flow rate and/or delivery pressure of the cleaning stream (proof of flow for any parallel flow paths)
• 
Cleaning agent concentration
• 
Duration of each step in the cleaning process (by time or volume)
• 
Temperature of cleaning agents and rinses
• 
Air flow verification during any water removal or drying steps
• 
Instrumentation for each of these parameters should be included in the system design. Alert and 
action levels can be set for each parameter in order to maintain proper operation. Alert levels may 
be set based on expected variability of the equipment and instrumentation in the CIP system. Action 
levels should be set at values that permit adjustment to the equipment to avoid jeopardizing acceptable 
operation. Both alert and action levels should be within the acceptable ranges for each parameter. It 
is also reasonable to establish check times, such that an alarm notification will occur if parameters do 
not reach their set points (e.g., volume flow, conductivity) within the specified time.
Performance parameters should also be evaluated during scale-up. Performance parameters may 
include:
Final rinse water conductivity
• 
Final rinse water TOC
• 
Final rinse water bioburden
• 
Final rinse water endotoxin
• 
3.7.2	 Introduction of New Soils to a Validated Cleaning System
Once cleaning processes are successfully operating in the manufacturing plant, they are monitored 
to ensure soil removal remains effective. When new products or significantly different raw materials 
are introduced to the plant, a system must be in place to ensure that the cleaning process will remain 
effective.
Generally, the cleaning effectiveness of the existing system for new soils can be tested by performing 
laboratory experiments using coupons of relevant materials (see Section 3.6 on Lab Development). 
These experiments can be designed to test both the effectiveness of the proposed cleaning regimen 
and the relative difficulty of cleaning the new soils compared to soils that have already been introduced 
to the plant. If the new soils are easier to clean than the most difficult soil already being cleaned, 
introduction of the new material using existing cleaning procedures can be made with confidence. If 
the material is more difficult to clean than any of the present soils, some modifications to the current 
cleaning process may be required, and cleaning validation is an expectation. However, if the new soil 
is easier to clean, then the number of confirmatory runs needed (if any) is determined based on a risk 
assessment. 
Each organization should have its own system for maintaining effective cleaning after the introduction 
of new products or raw materials. 
15
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.8	 Applying the “Design Space” Concept to Cleaning 
Processes 
“Design Space” is the multi-dimensional combination and interaction of input variables and process 
parameters that have been demonstrated to provide assurance of quality. The design space concept 
has been introduced by the ICH (4) to describe an approach to the development and control of 
pharmaceutical manufacturing processes. An analogous approach can be applied to cleaning 
processes.
The cleaning design space for a manufacturing facility is defined through a risk- and science-based 
approach relying on cleaning process knowledge, product/equipment knowledge, regulations 
and quality practices (requirements). Similar to manufacturing process development, control and 
validation, cleaning process operational parameters (inputs) can be controlled to ensure predictable 
and acceptable performance as evidenced by appropriate measurements (outputs). The cleaning design 
space is represented by the range of each of the operational parameters that results in acceptable 
performance of the cleaning process.
Steps in defining the design space for a cleaning process may be slightly different from steps taken to 
define design space for a manufacturing process, in that the design space for a manufacturing process 
is unique to that process (a fermentation, for example). However, many biotechnology manufacturers 
may want to design one cleaning process for a specific equipment train that is used, regardless of the 
manufactured product. This may be accomplished by identifying the “worst-case” soils and defining 
the design space around cleaning process performance using these soils.
Specifications are developed to support the design, installation and operation of the cleaning system. 
Risks are identified and assessed for impacts to safety and cleaning effectiveness (e.g., severity, 
probability of occurrence and detectability). Parameters may be categorized based on their level of 
criticality, with the most critical parameters monitored closely so that the cleaning operation can be 
repeated if parameters are not kept within their predetermined ranges. The criticality of cleaning 
process operational parameters is based on laboratory studies that document the influence of each 
parameter on cleaning effectiveness.
Cleaning effectiveness is influenced by the following factors:
soil type or family
• 
dirty hold time
• 
equipment and contact surface type and finish
• 
cleaning technology and functional specifications for the cleaning process
• 
This information is used to drive the design requirements for the cleaning method. Cleaning 
validation supports the worst case range of testing. Field conditions such as the lowest flow rate, least 
concentration of cleaning agent, minimal contact time, minimal process temperature, and longest 
dirty hold time are conditions that are considered when developing an effective cleaning process. The 
assumption is that any cleaning process that is performed within the space defined by these conditions 
will be effective, reliable and consistent.
A soil evaluation (characterization) study is performed prior to the introduction of any new process 
into manufacturing. These studies support the design space for the range of soils that will be 
cleaned from the process equipment. The characterization study is conducted with material that is 
representative of the process or a soil that represents the worst-case condition. For example, it is 
typical to use harvest material for this purpose, as it is the most complex and concentrated form of 
16
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
bioprocess soil. The soil type selected for a characterization study is dependent upon the impact to 
the manufacturing process. If a soil does not react as expected following exposure to a cleaning agent, 
alternate cleaning solutions should be evaluated. 
Cleaning operational parameters (inputs) should be monitored to assure compliance with the 
established design space. Operational parameters may be set within the design space. Setting 
operational parameters with tighter ranges than allowed by the design space provides some flexibility 
in addressing deviations of operational parameters outside the control ranges.
17
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
