7.0	
Cleaning Validation Protocols
Cleaning validation protocols have many of the same elements as process validation protocols. For 
reasons of clarity, the format of a cleaning validation protocol usually follows the same approach (as 
appropriate) as used for process validation protocols for a given company. Common elements include 
purpose, scope, responsibilities, applicable product(s) and equipment, cleaning SOP, acceptance 
criteria and a requirement for a final report. Key elements for cleaning validation protocols include 
residue limits (see Section 4.0), sampling procedures (see Section 5.0) and analytical methods (see 
Section 6.0). The organization and rationale for cleaning validation protocols for biotechnology 
manufacturers is fundamentally the same as for other pharmaceutical manufacturers. 
7.1	 Cleaning Verification Protocols
Protocols for cleaning verification purposes are the same as for cleaning validation, except that the protocol 
is specific to one cleaning event. From a compliance perspective, the protocol applies only to the one 
cleaning event (although from a scientific perspective the data may suggest similar performance if the 
cleaning event were repeated). Another difference is that because a verification protocol is typically 
performed on a unique cleaning event, there may be limited cleaning development before execution 
of that protocol. Alternatively, companies might use a concept that defines explicit requirements for 
cleaning verification in an SOP and documents the specific activities, sample positions, etc., on a form, 
which will be approved.
7.2	 Key Issues Based on Regulatory Changes
It is assumed that the validation protocol is not written and approved until the cleaning process has 
been designed and developed (see Section 3.0). This is particularly important as it relates to a life cycle 
approach to validation. Two key issues for protocols, each of which is in a state of flux because of 
regulatory changes, are discussed below.
7.2.1	 Number of Runs in a Protocol
The traditional approach for cleaning validation protocols has been to require an evaluation of a 
minimum of three consecutive runs of the cleaning processes. By consecutive, it has meant that no 
cleaning events of that same process are skipped without appropriate rationale. 
This practice is in flux because of changes in approach by the U.S. FDA; the Agency no longer suggests 
a minimum of three runs. (17,18) Rather, the manufacturer must provide a rationale (based on its 
understanding of the process) for determining the number of runs. Providing such a rationale is not 
straightforward for cleaning processes, and some companies specify in their master plans that three 
runs will be required unless there is a written rationale for a different number. It should be noted 
that as of publication of this Technical Report, the question of the “number of runs” remains a 
significant issue in terms of applicability to cleaning validation and global harmonization for cleaning 
validation.
7.2.2	 Worst-Case Process Conditions
The traditional approach for cleaning validation protocols has been to include worst-case process 
conditions in the three protocol runs. Worst-case process conditions may include maximum dirty 
hold time, maximum batches in a campaign, use of different operators for manual cleaning, shortest 
allowed time for manual cleaning steps, lowest allowed temperature for manual cleaning processes, 
and worst-case circuits for CIP skid selection. Parameters such as temperature, cleaning agent 
40
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
concentration, and process step times for automated cleaning processes are generally controlled in a 
narrow range such that challenging the cleaning process at the lower or upper end of the specification 
is not appropriate. In this traditional approach, worst-case process conditions may be addressed in each 
of the three required validation runs, unless there is adequate data from the design and development 
of the cleaning process to support worst-case conditions in fewer runs.
41
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
