16.0	
List of Acronyms
69
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Notes
70
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
Notes
71
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Terms of Usage
An Authorized User of the electronic PDA Technical Report is a PDA Member in good standing or the purchaser of the Technical 
Report. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
Search and view the content of the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Download the PDA Technical Report for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• 
Print the PDA Technical Report for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• 
Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Technical Report for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Technical Report available to anyone other than an Authorized User 
• 
Post articles from the PDA Technical Report on Web sites, either available on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of 
• 
online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Technical Report or its content 
• 
Use or copy the PDA Technical Report for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or distribution of materi-
• 
als in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose 
Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Technical Report including any text or graphics 
• 
Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information or notice con-
• 
tained in the PDA Technical Report 
Combine any portion of the PDA Technical Report with any other material 
• 
To License or purchase Reprints or Hardcopies
Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Technical Reports can be obtained for a fee. To learn more about licensing 
options and rates, please contact: Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133. Written correspondence can be 
sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
Reprints: Reprints of PDA Technical Reports can be purchased for a fee. To order reprints, please contact: Janny Chua, Publica-
tions Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133. Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West 
Highway, Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
Hardcopies: Hardcopies of PDA Technical Reports are available on demand for a fee. The PDA membership benefits include dis-
counted pricing for printed copies of PDA Technical Reports. Go to www.pda.org/bookstore to order a hardcopy. PDA members 
will need their PDA identification number and password to receive the discount.
Technical Report No. 49
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside front cover) 
comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/biopharmaceutical industry, 
regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are subjected to a global review of PDA 
members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. Comments from the global review are then 
considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task 
Force and those participating in the global review ensure a broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently 
available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s Advisory 
Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Biotechnology Advisory Board, Regulatory Affairs and Quality Committee, and Audit 
Guidance Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and determines 
whether to publish or not publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report.
PDA Officers and Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Maik Jornitz, Sartorius Stedim Biotech 
Chair-Elect: Anders Vinther, Ph.D., Genentech, Inc.
Secretary: Rebecca Devine, Ph.D., Regulatory Consultant
Treasurer: Harold Baseman, ValSource LLC  
Imd. Past Chair: John Shabushnig, Ph.D., Pfizer 
President: Richard Johnson
Directors  
Véronique Davoust, Ph.D., 
Pfizer Inc. 
Lothar Hartmann, Ph.D., 
F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Inc.  
Steven Mendivil, 
Amgen, Inc.
Junko Sasaki, 
Dainippon Sumitomo
Amy Scott-Billman, 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. 
Christopher Smalley, 
Wyeth
Martin VanTrieste
Amgen, Inc.
Gabriele Gori,
Novartis Vaccines & Diagnostics
Zena G. Kaufman,
Abbott Laboratories
Michael Sadowski
Baxter Healthcare
Amy Scott-Billman, 
GlaxoSmithKline plc. 
Lisa Skeens, PhD
Baxter Healthcare
Laura Thoma PharmD,
U. of  Tennessee
PDA Publication Production and Editing:
Richard V. Levy, Ph.D., VP, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Director of Publishing
Iris Rice, Manager of Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Evelyn Heitman, Copyeditor
Sanctioning Advisory Board: Biotechnology Advisory Board
Jeffrey C. Baker, Ph.D., MedImmune (Co-Chair)
Norbert Hentschel, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma (Co-Chair) 
Michael Vanderwerf, GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals (Co-Chair)
S. Robert Adamson, Wyeth Biopharma
Kurt A. Brorson, Ph.D., U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Christopher M. Bussineau, Ph.D., BioVascular, Inc. 
Anita Derks, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.
Rebecca A. Devine, Ph.D., Regulatory Consultant
John Geigert, Ph.D., BioPharmaceutical Quality Solutions
Brian D. Kelley, Genentech, Inc.
James D. Kenimer, Ph.D., Biologics Consulting Group
Peter F. Levy, PL Consulting
Rohin Mhatre, Ph.D., Biogen Idec
Annemarie MÖritz, Ph.D., Novartis Pharma AG
Jill A. Myers, Ph.D., BioPro Consulting, Inc.
Gail Sofer, SofeWare Associates
SØren Thuesen Pedersen, Novo Nordisk A/S
Barbara J. Potts, Ph.D., Genentech, Inc.
Anurag S. Rathore, Ph.D., Amgen, Inc.
Amy M. Scott-Billman, GlaxoSmithKline
Karin Sewerin, Pharm.D., NDA Regulatory Service AB
Robert Sitrin, Ph.D., Merck Research Labs
Hannelore Willkommen, Ph.D., RBS Consulting
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 200
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel:
1 (301) 656-5900
Fax:
1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
