6.0	 Analytical Methods
It is essential to a cleaning validation program that the appropriate analytical methods are utilized. 
Analytical methods must be appropriate in that they can adequately detect the residue(s) of concern. 
It is also important to understand what can be concluded from the analytical result (e.g., was the 
product not removed or was the cleaning agent not removed?). The results of testing will determine 
if the cleaning validation cycle is acceptable or if it needs to be redeveloped. Thus, it is important to 
have confidence in the results. This section discusses how to select the appropriate assay methods, 
detailed information on the applicability and use of nonspecific assays and microbial test methods, 
and assay method validation.
6.1	 Specific Analytical Methods
Specific analytical methods are those which measure a certain residue in the presence of expected 
interferences. In a cleaning process for biotechnology products where the specific analyte is the active 
protein, such interferences may include degradation products and related substances, excipients, 
cleaning agents and cleaning agent by-products. Examples of specific methods include HPLC, ELISA, 
SDS PAGE, and PCR. Each of these methods requires the use of an appropriate reference standard. 
In contrast, nonspecific analytical methods measure a general property, such as conductivity or TOC, 
which could be due to a variety of analytes or sources.
Selection of an analytical method will depend on the nature of the residue as it exists after the cleaning 
process. Only if a protein (or other organic active) is not degraded during the cleaning process (surviving 
high temperatures and pH extremes in an aqueous environment, for example) does it make sense to 
use a specific analytical method for that active. The advantage of using a specific analytical method in 
this situation is that it gives a precise measure of the major residue of concern – the active itself.
If a specific analytical method for an active protein were utilized following a cleaning process which 
has been demonstrated to denature (degrade) that active protein, it is likely that residues of the active 
protein would be non-detectable (i.e., not measurable) by that specific analytical method. Residues of 
that protein would be various degraded fragments. If the native protein were actually detected using 
a specific method for that protein, it is likely that there had been a serious problem with the cleaning 
process, such as a clogged spray device causing a lack of coverage of that portion of the equipment 
surface. In such a case, failure would also most likely be detected by a nonspecific method and/or by 
visual examination. Consequently, if a specific assay method is used, a nonspecific assay method is 
also required, unless studies prove that the product is not degraded by the cleaning process.
In biotechnology cleaning validation, specific analytical techniques such as HPLC are more likely to 
be used for detergents, because the surfactants or other functional materials in the detergents are not 
likely to degrade in the cleaning process. However, it should be noted that nonspecific methods can 
also be used for detergents and other cleaning agents.
6.2	 Impact of Inactivation/Degradation of the Active
Product inactivation means that the active protein is modified in some way such that it is no longer 
active and may no longer be measurable by specific analytical methods for that native protein. This 
modification usually involves degradation of the active protein into smaller fragments, but may also 
involve a process in which larger molecules are formed. A key issue for process equipment cleaning 
in biotechnology manufacturing is the degradation or deactivation of the active protein during 
the cleaning process. This is a result of cleaning processes in biotechnology utilizing hot, aqueous, 
alkaline and acidic cleaning solutions. Under such conditions, it is well recognized that protein actives 
32
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
will degrade. This degradation affects several issues in the cleaning and cleaning validation process. 
Because of the degradation, the residues of the active protein (which are actually now residues of 
the degraded active protein) are more readily rinsed away during the rinsing step of the cleaning 
process. This is because the degraded fragments typically have a lower molecular weight and are 
potentially more polar, both conditions leading to greater water solubility. A second consequence 
of the degradation is that it no longer is scientifically justified to have an analytical method which is 
specific for the native protein. For this reason, a nonspecific method such as TOC or Total Protein is 
typically used to measure residues of the degraded active (as well as other organic molecules) in a 
cleaning validation protocol. A third consequence is that limits in bulk biotechnology manufacturing 
are typically not appropriately established based on a “fraction of a dose” calculation of the native 
protein, since the residues are degraded fragments. Since residues being sampled are residues of the 
degraded protein, it may also make more scientific sense to perform sampling recovery studies based 
on recovery of the degraded fragments. However, assuming an increase in solubility for degraded 
proteins, sampling recovery studies on the native protein will typically be a worst case as compared to 
recovery of degraded fragments. 
While it is assumed in almost all cases that the active proteins or other large organic molecules 
produced in biotechnology manufacturing are readily degraded in hot, aqueous alkaline conditions, it 
is desirable to demonstrate this with a laboratory study. In such a simple “beaker” study, the bulk active 
protein is exposed to the conditions of the cleaning process, including cleaning agent concentration, 
temperature and time. At the end of that exposure time, the pH is neutralized, and the temperature 
is reduced. The resultant solution is then analyzed for the active protein by the specific analytical 
procedure (such as ELISA, HPLC or a bioactivity assay). In such a procedure, the ratio of protein to 
cleaning solution should represent the same ratio present during cleaning, or a worst-case ratio (a 
worst-case is a higher ratio of protein to cleaning solution). 
The assay methodology for such studies must be appropriate and valid. Care needs to be exercised 
in performing such a study to ensure that the chemicals in the cleaning solution do not interfere 
with the analytical procedure. This can be addressed by having adequate controls, such as adding 
the active to a solution of the neutralized cleaning solution at ambient temperature. If chemicals 
in the cleaning solution interfere with the specific analytical procedure, another option is to remove 
them by diafiltration. If it is just the surfactants in the cleaning agent that interfere, another option 
is to perform the degradation study with just the equivalent amount of alkali present in the cleaning 
solution. Note that in many cases, cleaning in a biotechnology facility utilizes alkaline cleaning agents 
followed by an acidic cleaning solution. Current evidence suggests that it is the alkaline portion that 
is most effective in degrading active proteins. (15) Companies may choose to perform a degradation 
study only with the alkaline agent and not pursue degradation studies with the acidic solution unless 
the alkaline cleaning agent alone is inadequate for degradation. 
6.3	 Nonspecific Analytical Methods
6.3.1	 Total Organic Carbon (TOC)
Most of the compounds used in biotechnology processes are of organic nature. TOC can detect 
organic carbon with a good sensitivity in the sub-ppm range; however this sensitivity may still not 
be adequate for highly active substances. The method can be semi-automated with an autosampler 
and has a short analyzing time. In contrast to specific analytical methods, TOC analyzers can detect 
all organic residues, including complex mixtures of compounds like cell culture media or product 
degraded by the cleaning process. 
33
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
With TOC, it is not possible to distinguish between a biotechnology product and other organic 
compounds present in the same sample. As a consequence, all organic carbon is assumed to be product, 
representing a worst-case approach. Another aspect is the potential for sample contamination with 
organic substances during sampling and testing, requiring well- trained personnel and clear sampling 
instructions. Special care should be taken to ensure that the sampling container does not introduce 
unacceptably high amounts of carbon to the sample.
Different TOC analyzers are commercially available. All instruments oxidize organic carbon and 
measure the resulting carbon dioxide. When selecting a TOC instrument, care should be taken to 
select an instrument and instrument parameters that are able to completely oxidize the organic 
carbon present.
The TOC method can be used for rinse and swab measurements. If used for final rinse water testing, 
samples can be analyzed directly. If used for swab testing, the organic carbon has to be extracted from 
the swab after sampling. It is important to consider some additional topics during TOC swab method 
development, such as swab material and technique. Swabs should not significantly contribute carbon 
to the sample and should not adsorb significant amounts of the residue such that it is not released 
for analysis. The sampling technique (e.g., swab size and shape, swabbing pattern, swab container 
and extraction method) is much more complex in comparison to rinse water testing. The swabbing 
technique can have a high influence on residue recovery.
6.3.2	 Total Protein
Several total protein assays of different sensitivity are commercially available. Assays often used are 
Bradford, Lowry or BCA. Total protein assays are not product specific, but specific towards a class of 
molecules. Total protein assays can be used if the majority of the residues are proteins. If proteins are 
just one of many residues present (e.g., cell culture fermentation), the use of an assay with a broader 
spectrum (e.g., TOC) should be considered.
One advantage of total protein assays is potential commercial availability. Different companies offer 
test kits and support during test implementation. Lead times for implementing commercial test kits 
are typically shorter compared to in-house developed methods. In-house methods may be developed 
to provide enhanced sensitivity. 
Proteins often degrade (e.g., by hydrolysis during a cleaning cycle if high pH and temperatures are 
used). During assay implementation, it should be investigated if the assay still can detect protein after 
exposure to cleaning agents.
6.3.3	 Conductivity
Conductivity measurement is a very sensitive method to detect dissociated ionic substances in 
water samples. WFI has a conductivity of ≤ 2.4 µS/cm at 65°C. For cleaning validation purposes, 
conductivity readings are expressed in milli-Siemens/cm (mS/cm) for higher concentrations (such 
as cleaning solutions) and micro-Siemens/cm (µS/cm) for lower concentrations (such as final rinse 
waters). It is often used to measure cleaning agent residues (e.g., caustic agents) and to control 
automated cleaning processes (e.g., CIP). Conductivity instruments can be used for a wide range of 
concentrations by exchange of conductivity probes. Conductivity readings are highly influenced by 
the sample temperature. Either temperature adjustment of the sample or automated temperature 
compensation can be used to standardize the measurements.
34
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
Conductivity is a nonspecific method that correlates linearly (within a defined range) to the ion 
concentration in an aqueous sample. Analytical instruments are robust and can be used on the 
manufacturing floor by trained personnel. The high influence of the sample temperature on the 
instrument reading should be considered to avoid incorrect results. The method cannot differentiate 
between different ions. Therefore, as for TOC, all conductivity results above the water baseline should 
be attributed to the contaminant in question (e.g., the cleaning agent). For biotechnology cleaning 
validation applications, conductivity is normally not used to detect product residues.
To allow correlation of conductivity readings with concentrations of cleaning agents, a dilution curve 
(conductivity vs. concentration) should be established (at a relevant temperature) by conductivity 
measurements of different dilutions in the relevant range near the acceptance value.
6.3.4	 Visual Inspection
Visual inspection is a qualitative method to determine cleanliness on specific equipment surfaces. 
Visual inspection has been demonstrated to be a simple and effective direct sampling method in the 
evaluation of equipment cleanliness.
Visual inspection does have multiple weaknesses that are inherent. Extensive training and a detailed 
documented procedure are required to ensure that “visually clean” from one operator to the next is 
consistent. What one can visually see will vary with distance, angle, lighting, the nature of the surface 
and inspector’s visual acuity. Some equipment surfaces (e.g., piping) are usually not accessible for 
visual inspection. The use of optical equipment (e.g., mirrors, remote visual cameras or endoscopes) 
can help to facilitate visual inspection. In order to view some equipment areas, wear and tear on 
the equipment may occur (e.g., the disk stacks in a centrifuge are not designed to be removed and 
inspected for visual cleanliness after cleaning). In other cases, an operator may be required to enter a 
confined space for viewing equipment surfaces.
The visual inspection procedure should specify how operators are to deal with visual observations. 
Visual inspection could find four different types of visual observations: residue, surface anomalies, 
foreign object and water pooling. Residue is the main concern, which would constitute a visual failure 
when one is looking at the acceptability of a cleaning cycle. A sample of the residue should be collected 
for further testing, if possible, to assist in the investigation of the cause. Typically, surface anomalies 
and foreign objects are not considered visual inspection failures for cleaning validation purposes, but 
must be further investigated and corrected, as applicable. Surface anomalies should be noted and 
a “suitability for use” assessment should be performed to remediate any issue(s) found. Rouge is 
the most common type of surface anomaly discovered during visual inspection; rouge is generally 
considered a preventive maintenance problem, not a cleaning process problem. Foreign objects and 
their removal should be noted. How the foreign object came to be in the equipment should also be 
investigated. Water pooling should be documented, and the cause should be investigated. 
All equipment surfaces that can be readily inspected visually should be visually inspected. Visual 
inspection may not be performed on the interior of lines and tubing (although outlets may be inspected) 
on equipment where disassembly of the equipment is not practical or possible, or where inspection of 
the equipment could potentially be dangerous to the inspector (e.g., entry into a confined space).
A visual inspection training program should be developed for visual inspection. Inspectors typically 
should be trained and/or requalified on an established basis. If visual inspection is not possible on an 
area of concern, it is important to ensure that other sampling methods (such as rinse sampling) can 
adequately detect potential residues of concern.
35
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The use of “visually clean” alone (in the absence of other analytical methods such as TOC or 
conductivity) is not generally used in the biotechnology industry, because all critical surfaces are not 
readily available for visual examination.
6.4	 Microbial Test Methods
The U.S. FDA’s cleaning validation guidance states that “Control of the bioburden through adequate 
cleaning and storage of equipment is important to ensure that subsequent sterilization or sanitization 
procedures achieve the necessary assurance of sterility.” (8) Endotoxin is a concern in that steam 
sterilization does not destroy or remove endotoxin. Thus, both bioburden and endotoxin are typically 
monitored and controlled during the manufacturing and cleaning processes. Typically microbiology 
sampling is performed during all cleaning validation studies throughout the manufacturing process.
6.4.1	 Endotoxin
Typically, endotoxin testing is performed for cleaning validation runs. Endotoxin testing may not 
need to be tested in upstream cell culture and initial purification processes where it is proven during 
process validation that one or more purification steps is able to effectively remove endotoxin that 
is present. Typically, a three logs or greater reduction of endotoxin in endotoxin removal steps is 
required to justify decisions not to test for endotoxin upstream. Endotoxin methods are typically 
compendia methods.
6.4.2	 Bioburden
Testing of bioburden is typically done through rinse water sampling, although other methods may be 
used. The benefit of rinse water sampling for bioburden is that it is convenient. Typically, rinse water 
sampling is being performed to verify removal of protein and cleaning agent(s), so one additional rinse 
water sample does not require significantly more work. Also, bioburden testing of rinse water is typi-
cally already a qualified method for testing water systems for bioburden. The biggest weakness of rinse 
water sampling is that the full range of the acceptance criteria is not able to be utilized, for example, 
if 100 ml of rinse water is used for testing with an acceptance criterion of 10 CFU/mL. The typical 
number of colonies that can be counted is 300 before TNTC (Too Numerous To Count) is achieved; 
this only allows an acceptance criterion of 3 CFU/mL before failing to meet the acceptance criteria. In 
most situations this is not an issue; it may result in the need to test smaller sample volumes. If this situ-
ation occurs, it is important to test an adequate amount of rinse to ensure that bioburden is detected. 
Two methods for measuring directly on surfaces are swab and contact plate method. For swab 
samples, the swab can be desorbed, and a count can be made by a pour plate method. Contact 
plates are directly incubated and enumerated. The biggest concern with contact plates and swab 
procedures is potentially exposing product contact surfaces to an unknown media or buffer solution 
from swabs; thus, acceptable removal of this media or buffer solution should be demonstrated before 
manufacturing can occur. Another concern is that contact plates require flat surfaces.
6.5	 Analytical Method Validation
This section focuses on analytical method validation for “chemical” residues. Typically, endotoxin 
methods are compendia methods and do not require formal validation but require a confirmation 
for their application of use or suitability. Microbiological methods that are approved microbiology 
laboratory methods do not require additional method validation.
36
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
6.5.1	 General Principles
Since one key part of cleaning validation is setting residue limits and then measuring (using an analyti-
cal method) the actual residues left on surfaces after cleaning, it is critical that the analytical method be 
appropriately validated. Method validation is typically accomplished using the criteria in ICH Q2(R1), 
Validation of  Analytical Procedures: Text and Methodology. (16) However, the types of assays listed in ICH 
Q2 do not explicitly cover cleaning validation methods. Some companies will essentially validate ana-
lytical methods much like an “assay” in ICH Q2, establishing accuracy, precision specificity, linearity 
and range, with the added determination of LOD/LOQ. LOD/LOQ must be below the acceptance 
limit for the sample and ideally is significantly below the acceptance limit so that the robustness of 
the cleaning process can be established. In addition to the ICH Q2 parameters, sample stability as a 
function of storage conditions (time, temperature, vial, etc.) may be evaluated if there is a significant 
interval between sampling and analysis. 
In cases where a nonspecific method (such as TOC) is utilized, it is not necessary to compensate for the 
lack of specificity by “other supporting analytical procedures” (as suggested in ICH Q2). The reason for 
this is that for cleaning validation purposes, the limit value is not a target (as it is for a potency assay); 
rather the limit is a value not to be exceeded. As long as other organic substances contribute positively 
to the TOC value, and as long as all measured carbon is attributed to the target residue, such comple-
mentary methods suggested by ICH Q2 are not required. Furthermore, it is not required to correlate 
TOC results with a specific analytical method, except to the extent that accuracy in method validation 
is established using a known standard that establishes the concentration or activity by a specific analyti-
cal method. While Detection Limit and Quantitation Limit are not part of the “Assay” requirement in 
ICH Q2, it is critical that these values be at or below the preestablished limit for the residue (otherwise 
it would not be possible to claim that residues were below the predetermined limit values). However, 
it is not necessary to drive detection or quantitation limits as low as possible; having detection or quan-
titation limits around 10% of the residue limit in the analytical sample is ideal (but not always possible) 
to establish the robustness of the cleaning process. Assay capability should take into account both the 
target/limit and the process capability and provide relevant measurements for both.
When performing carryover calculations (as is typically done for the formulation/fill side of 
biotechnology manufacturing) it should be ensured that the analytical methods that will be used for 
cleaning validation are sensitive enough to meet the acceptance criteria. To provide reliable results for 
carryover calculations, the results should be equal to or above the LOQ. Results between the LOQ and 
the LOD typically show a higher-than-acceptable variation of the results obtained and are typically 
reported as less than LOQ.
For companies that use a pass/fail analytical method for meeting cleaning validation limits, analytical 
method validation is less extensive. In such a procedure, the only conclusion of the analytical procedure 
is whether the experimental sample is less than or equal to the pass/fail value, or above that pass/fail 
value. Accuracy and precision are typically performed only at the residue limit, but linearity and range 
are not performed. Note that in this case, the pass/fail value selected should take into consideration 
any applicable correction factor due to the sampling method, recovering less than 100% from the 
surface. Pass/fail analytical procedures are more likely to be part of a cleaning verification mode, used 
in the manufacture of early clinical trial materials.
Analytical method validation protocols may only include validation of the residue in solutions. 
They may also include sampling recovery studies, although those sampling recovery studies may be 
performed as separate studies apart from the analytical method validation.
Acceptability of the variability of results for parameters such as accuracy and precision for methods 
37
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
at typical residue levels are generally much broader than in a typical potency assay. RSD requirements 
of 15-20% are typical.
6.5.2	 Compendia Methods
Compendia methods do not require separate analytical method validation, provided those methods 
are used within the parameters in the compendia. For example, a compendia method for endotoxin is 
generally appropriate for measuring endotoxin in final rinse water samples. 
When using TOC in rinse water samples (a compendia method), additional work should be done 
to support the applicability of that method to test samples that could have TOC values above 500 
ppb, or where a linear range is to be established. Just performing system suitability as specified in the 
various pharmacopeias may not be adequate to demonstrate that the analytical procedure could ac-
curately analyze samples at 1 ppm or 5 ppm. For that reason, analytical method validation as for any 
other method should be considered. An additional reason for formal method validation for TOC in 
rinse water samples is that the compendia methods are essentially set up as a pass/fail test, not as a 
quantitative assay.
Measurement of TOC in swab samples does not follow a compendia method and must be validated 
prior to use in cleaning validation or verification studies. Particular attention should be given to the 
choice of swab, swabbing technique, and recovery of residue from the swab (see Section 6.3.1).
6.5.3	 Visual Inspection
Method validation in this case is actually the determination of a quantitative “visual detection limit” 
in cases when visual examination is the sole sampling/analytical method and “visually clean” is used 
as the sole acceptance criterion for the given residue in the absence of swab or rinse sampling for that 
residue. If visual examination is used to supplement swab or rinse sampling, such determination 
of a visual detection limit is not required. A visual detection limit under specified viewing conditions 
can be determined by spiking coupons of the equipment surface materials with solutions of the 
residue at different levels (in μg/cm2) and by having a panel of trained observers determine the lowest 
level at which residues are clearly visible across the spiked surface. The significance of such a visual 
detection limit is that if equipment surfaces are determined to be visually clean under the same (or 
more stringent) viewing conditions in a cleaning validation protocol, the level of the residue is below 
the visual detection limit. Appropriate viewing conditions include distance, lighting and angle. The 
visual limit depends on the nature of the residue as well as the nature of the surface (for example, 
stainless steel vs. PTFE).
6.5.4	 Bioburden Methods
Approved and qualified microbiological lab procedures do not require additional method validation 
for use in cleaning validation programs. 
6.5.5	 Use of a Contract Laboratory
Contract laboratories can be used to develop and validate an analytical method for use in cleaning 
validation. The same considerations given to method validation discussed in Section 6.5.1 apply in 
this situation. However, if the method is to then be performed by the biotechnology company, it is 
mandatory to have a method transfer protocol established and executed so the method can be used 
38
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
“in house,” If the method is developed by a contract laboratory and protocol samples are analyzed 
by that contract laboratory, no transfer protocol is required. It is preferable that analytical method 
validation protocol be reviewed and approved by the biotechnology company prior to execution of 
that protocol. If an analytical method has been developed and validated previously by the contract 
laboratory, the biotechnology company must review that protocol and the final report to determine 
the acceptability of the method for its (new) intended use. If an analytical method has been developed 
and validated by a biotechnology company and cleaning validation samples are to be analyzed by a 
contract laboratory, a method transfer protocol must be established to determine that the contract 
laboratory can suitably analyze samples using that method.
39
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
