4. 0	 Acceptance Limits
Cleaning validation is performed to demonstrate the effectiveness and consistency of a cleaning pro-
cedure. The rationale for selecting limits for product residues, cleaning agents and microbial con-
tamination, as well as any other process components, should be logically based on the materials that 
impact the manufacturing process and the safety and purity of the product. The acceptable limits for 
cleaning manufacturing systems and components should be “practical, achievable and verifiable.” (8)
Limits for cleaning validation generally contain some measure related to the active protein (or other 
major component of interest), some measure related to the cleaning agent, some measure related to 
bioburden levels, some measure related to endotoxin levels, and a requirement that the equipment 
be visually clean. In addition, if there are any specific toxicity concerns related to the active protein 
or other process components (for example, cytotoxicity, allergenicity, or reproductive hazards), the 
manufacturer’s toxicology or pharmacology groups may determine if a modification of limits is 
required, or whether the use of dedicated equipment is needed. 
In the discussion that follows, issues for limits are considered based on the nature of the residue and 
on the stage of manufacturing (e.g., bulk active vs. formulation/fill). Manufacturing stages include 
bulk active manufacturing (all steps resulting in the bulk active drug substance) and formulation/
fill (formulation of the bulk active into a finished drug product and primary packaging of that drug 
product). Bulk manufacturing is further divided into upstream process steps (all process steps through 
harvesting) and downstream process steps (purification and following steps).
4.1	 Key Issues in Limits for Actives
Biotechnology cleaning processes often involve a change of the active molecule itself, which 
is commonly a protein. Proteins typically are degraded to some extent by the cleaning processes 
commonly used in biotechnology manufacturing. The most important mechanism for degradation 
is summarized below.
In alkaline solutions, such as hot, aqueous solutions containing sodium or potassium hydroxide, 
proteins may hydrolyze to soluble oligomers or free amino acids. Ester groups on actives may be 
hydrolyzed to an alcohol and a fatty acid. A common example of this is saponification of fats and oils 
to glycerol and fatty acid anions. 
Sodium hypochlorite is sometimes used in biotechnology cleaning. As a cleaning agent, it is particularly 
effective in removing denatured protein residues from surfaces. It is a reactive oxidizer which will 
degrade proteins in a more random manner to smaller fragments. A general concern with sodium 
hypochlorite use is its possible deleterious effect on stainless steel components. Therefore, it is critical 
that the rinse cycle following the use of sodium hypochlorite is adequate enough to remove any 
residual chloride ion before adding the subsequent acid wash.
Proteins will hydrolyze at a high pH. The parameters of time and temperature have a significant 
influence on protein hydrolysis. Therefore, the higher the temperature and pH, the more extensive 
protein hydrolysis will occur. Because the protein is typically degraded into smaller fragments and 
those fragments tend to be more polar, they are likely to be more water soluble and more readily 
removed from equipment surfaces during the washing and rinsing processes. A second effect after 
protein exposure to high pH solutions is a possible irreversible, significant decrease of biological 
activity due to hydrolysis.
Degradation of the active can be demonstrated in a laboratory study by exposing the active to the 
cleaning solution under simulated cleaning conditions (or less stringent conditions) and performing 
18
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
analytical and/or biochemical tests on the resultant mixture. 
For these reasons, in most cases biotechnology manufacturers do not directly set limits for and directly 
measure the active in cleaning validation. Because of the degradation of the active, no active protein 
should remain after completion of the cleaning process. It is for that reason that analytical methods 
like TOC (see Section 6.0) are used for the detection of protein residues (or their fragments). If a 
nonspecific method like TOC is used for the correlation to residues of the active, it should be noted 
that the “real” value of protein residues after cleaning may be significantly lower, as TOC measures 
all sources of organic carbon (and not just residues from the active protein).
4.1.1	 Establishing Limits for Actives in Formulation and Final Fill
In biotechnology formulation/fill manufacturing, limits for protein actives are typically set using 
a carryover calculation (often called MAC, or Maximum Allowable Carryover) in the same way as 
for small molecule cleaning validation. Though the product is degraded (as discussed above), the 
calculations are based on active product. This is assumed to represent a worst-case approach if the 
cleaning method used in formulation/fill results in degradation of the protein active to fragments. 
Such calculations may be revised based on degradation considerations.
This method only applies when the therapeutic daily dose is known. For products dosed chronically, 
a typical calculation allows no more than 1/1000 of the minimum daily therapeutic dose of an active 
in the maximum daily dose of the subsequent manufactured product; the factor of 1/1000 may be 
modified depending on the specifics of the situation. In addition, if that calculation allows more than 
10 ppm of the active protein in the subsequent drug product, a limit of 10 ppm active protein in the 
next drug product may be utilized. Similar criteria are included as examples in the both the U.S. FDA 
(8) and PIC/S guidance documents. (9) 
Limits per surface area can then be calculated based on the minimum batch size of the next drug 
product and the shared surface area. Limits in swab and/or rinse samples can then be calculated using 
the sampling parameters. 
When this method is used for setting limits, the limit for the active is calculated. It can then be 
converted to appropriate units for the analytical procedure to be utilized. For example, if the analytical 
procedure is TOC, the limit calculated for the active is converted to TOC based on the TOC content 
(percentage) of the active. 
An example carryover calculation for formulation/fill is given as Example 1 in Section 15.0 of the 
Appendix.
It should be noted that limits based on carryover calculations are one example of a “science-based” 
method of setting limits. Some companies choose to set limits based on more stringent criteria, such 
as the WFI TOC specification of 500 ppb TOC. Such an approach is acceptable, but should only be 
used if it can be demonstrated that the WFI TOC specification is more stringent than the TOC result, 
as determined by a carryover calculation.
4.1.2	 Establishing Limits for Actives in Bulk Manufacture
Carryover calculations used for formulation/fill are typically not applicable for bulk manufacture. The 
primary reason is that if the carryover calculation is based on the entire equipment manufacturing 
train surface area, limits are extremely low and are not measurable by available analytical techniques, 
unless the active is not degraded during the cleaning process. As previously discussed, the active 
19
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
protein is, in almost all cases, degraded by the cleaning process. Therefore, even though typical specific 
assays for the active can measure the active at very low levels, those assays are not useable when the 
active is degraded. As noted above, the residues of the active are generally measured “indirectly” by 
measuring a property like TOC (for purposes of this report, TOC will be used as an example of such 
analytical methods, although assays like Total Protein could also be used). Typical quantitation limits 
for TOC for cleaning validation purposes are on the order of 100-500 ppb carbon, which is equivalent 
to about 200-1,000 ppb protein for proteins containing about 50% carbon. Therefore TOC cannot be 
used as an analytical method if limits are based on a carryover calculation using the surface area of 
the entire equipment train.
Some companies choose to use a carryover calculation for a limited surface area, such as for the last 
manufacturing vessel or for all of the manufacturing equipment after the last purification process. 
Such a modification may result in a carryover limit, which possibly could be measured by TOC. One 
rationale for such an approach can be found in ICH Q7, Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for Active 
Pharmaceutical Ingredients; Section 12.7 of the guide says that early processing steps do not require 
validation if subsequent processing steps remove those residues. (10) The various processing steps 
after fermentation and processing, including chromatographic purification and ultrafiltration, can 
be expected to remove those residues of the active from earlier cleaning steps, since those residues 
are typically smaller fragments. This generally has not been demonstrated for a specific active but 
is a reasonable supposition based on an understanding of degradation and the various purification 
processes utilized in a given manufacturing process. Inactivation of active protein can be considered 
in carryover calculations with rationales. This results in a conservative limit, because it is assumed that 
the degraded fragments have significantly less pharmacologic effect and/or safety concern compared 
to the native protein. 
Because of these measurement issues, and because of the degradation issues, a more common 
technique for setting limits for residues of the active is based on process capability. This is not a true 
process capability study, but is based on what has been and can be achieved by conventional cleaning 
procedures in biotechnology manufacturing. These limits are typically based on the TOC values of 
any sample, whether rinse or swab. As a general rule, the limits may be more stringent following the 
purification process. TOC limits upstream are typically less stringent, because the product cleaned 
from the equipment surfaces has more extraneous materials (such as cellular materials). Typical values 
established as acceptance criteria by manufacturers are 1-2 ppm TOC for downstream processes and 
5-10 ppm TOC for upstream processes. As in other cleaning validation protocols, it should be noted 
that typical values achieved are significantly below established limits. 
Exceptions to this practice are for product-dedicated materials like ultrafilter membranes and 
chromatography resins. These are part of the downstream processing, but limits may be set higher. 
This higher level is acceptable when these items are dedicated to the manufacture of only one product. 
An example carryover calculation for bulk active manufacture (assumes the entire manufacturing 
train is the shared surface area) is given as Example 2 in Section 15.0 of the Appendix. The purpose 
of that illustration is to demonstrate the low (and unmeasurable) TOC values that are achieved in 
such calculations.
4.1.3	 Limits Based on Toxicity Data
An alternative to establishing limits for the active for either formulation/fill (Section 4.1.1) or bulk 
manufacture (4.1.2) is to establish limits based on toxicity calculations. These toxicity calculations 
for the active are similar to toxicity calculations for cleaning agents covered in Section 4.2.1. Toxicity 
20
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
calculations typically involve the use of the short-term toxicity data for the active, ultimately to arrive 
at an ADI (Acceptable Daily Intake). Calculations should preferably be based on toxicity data by the 
same route of administration (such as intravenous studies if the drug product is given by injection). 
If the data are based on oral toxicity, additional safety factors may be required for the cleaning of 
injectables. As a general observation, such calculations for actives based on safety considerations 
generally result in higher limits as compared to calculations based on dosing. Furthermore, if the 
active protein is degraded, the more relevant toxicity data is not the toxicity of the native protein, but 
the toxicity of the degraded fragments, which is often assumed to be less of a safety concern (although 
toxicity studies on degraded fragments are typically not performed). 
4.2	 Limits for Cleaning Agents 
Limits for cleaning agents will also depend on the stage of manufacturing (formulation/fill vs. bulk 
active manufacture). Typical cleaning processes for biotechnology involve either a caustic wash 
followed by a phosphoric acid step, or an alkaline detergent followed by an acidic detergent. Each of 
these situations will be handled separately. 
4.2.1	 Limits for Commodity Chemicals
If only commodity chemicals such as sodium hydroxide and phosphoric acid are used for cleaning, it 
is common practice to set limits for these indirectly as a conductivity value. Preferably, an acceptable 
level of sodium hydroxide or phosphoric acid is established based on toxicity carryover calculations or 
based on the effects on process parameters. The conductivity limit is then set at a level equivalent to that 
concentration at a specified temperature. It is typically the case that the conductivity limit established 
in this way is well above the conductivity limit for WFI at the same temperature. Therefore, limits 
are based on either WFI specifications or on a slightly higher value (such as 5 μS/cm). The rationale 
for this is that it is more stringent than the “scientific” calculation allows. Furthermore, in many 
cases, phosphate ions and/or sodium ions may be part of any subsequently manufactured product. 
Therefore, carryover of small amounts is not significant. It should also be noted that calculations 
based on toxicity of the commodity chemicals are extreme, since sodium hydroxide is not carried over 
into a final product as sodium hydroxide, and phosphoric acid is not carried over into final product 
as phosphoric acid. If such chemicals were carried over intact at high concentrations, process checks 
(such as a significant change in pH) would also cause a non-conformance. Thus, the purpose is not 
to confirm compliance with WFI specifications, but rather to confirm low amounts of a cleaning 
agent. The rationale for allowing a conductivity limit slightly higher than the WFI limit is that the 
WFI limit applies to water in the recirculating WFI loop. As soon as the water is taken out of that loop 
and passed through clean equipment (particularly through spray devices where it can pick up carbon 
dioxide from the air), there is no expectation that it will necessarily meet the WFI conductivity limit. 
4.2.2	 Limits for Formulated Cleaning Agents
For formulation/fill manufacturing, limits for residues of formulated cleaning agents (which may 
contain a variety of organic components in addition to inorganic hydroxide) are typically set based 
on a carryover calculation using the short-term toxicity (LD50) data for that formulated cleaner. Such 
toxicity information may be supplied by the cleaning agent manufacturer or may be calculated using 
worst-case assumptions based on an analysis of the formulation components. A typical calculation is 
given in Example 3 of Section 15.0 of the Appendix. For the determination of the limit in the next 
drug product, a default value for the formulated cleaning agent may also be used if it is more stringent 
21
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
than the carryover calculation. That default value is typically 10 ppm formulated cleaning agent. Note 
that the only difference between a carryover calculation for the active and a carryover calculation for 
the formulated cleaning agent is how the limit in the subsequent product is calculated – one uses a 
fraction of a dose and one uses a fraction of the LD50. Once that calculation is performed, subsequent 
calculations for cleaning agents use the same formulas as for actives to determine the limit per swab 
or the limit per analytical sample.
For manufacturing of bulk actives, some of the same issues discussed for limits of actives also apply 
to cleaning agents. That is, a carryover calculation considering the total shared surface area results in 
extremely low limits, typically not measurable. However, the formulated detergents typically used 
may be removed by various purification processes (such as ultrafiltration or size exclusion chromatog-
raphy) based on molecular weight. As with limits for actives, toxicity calculations may be applicable 
for downstream processes following the purification steps or for the last downstream process vessel. 
4.3	 Bioburden Limits
In considering bioburden limits following cleaning, it is not expected that the cleaning process itself 
results in sterile equipment. However, even if the process equipment is steamed in place or autoclaved 
prior to manufacture of the next product, it is typically the practice to evaluate bioburden to establish 
that the subsequent process is not overly challenged. Achievement of typical bioburden limits for 
non-sterile manufacturing (1-2 CFU/cm2 for surface sampling methods) is considered more than 
adequate. For rinse sampling, some companies will utilize typical WFI values (10 CFU/100 mL), 
while others will utilize a value of either 100 CFU/100 mL or 1,000 CFU/100 mL. The rationale for 
the higher limit is that the equipment will be subsequently sterilized. Furthermore, the WFI value is 
the value for the WFI in the recirculating loop; once it is removed from that loop and placed in clean 
equipment, there is not necessarily an expectation that it will still meet the WFI value.
4.4	 Endotoxin Limits
Endotoxin carryover to the final product is more of a concern after the various endotoxin removal 
steps. In those cases, endotoxin is typically measured only in the final rinse water, and limits are set at 
the typical WFI limit of 0.25 EU/mL. Prior to the endotoxin removal steps for cell culture processes, 
it can be expected that rinse samples should meet the WFI limit. For bacterial fermentation with 
E. coli (a gram-negative bacterium which will produce large amounts of endotoxin in the washing 
step), meeting the WFI limits following cleaning at the fermentation and harvesting steps may not 
be achievable. For that reason, some companies may not set endotoxin limits for cleaning for those 
steps, while others will set endotoxin limits but at a higher value, such as 5-25 EU/mL. Achieving 
such values indicates a measure of control in the cleaning process, and any possible carryover at those 
levels should be addressed by subsequent endotoxin removal process steps.
4.5	 Visual Clean Criterion 
The visual appearance of production surfaces is a direct measurement that verifies removal of 
residuals. Visual appearance is not a quantitative method but is very useful to directly verify that 
production surfaces are clean. Visual appearance is easy to perform provided there is ready access 
to the critical surfaces. It verifies the cleanliness of a significant area of production equipment. 
Literature indicates that low levels of residues (if present) are visible and can be detected. As used in 
biotechnology manufacturing, a visual clean criterion is typically used with swab and/or rinse testing 
22
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 49
for residues for cleaning validation protocols. 
4.6	 Modifying Limits
Manufacturers may establish action and/or alert levels on validated processes as part of routine 
monitoring. Those values are typically more stringent than the pass/fail limits in the validation 
protocol. Based on process capability showing consistently low values and the ability to maintain 
those values, manufacturers may perform a risk assessment and consider the use of more stringent 
limits for future validation protocols.
23
Technical Report No. 49
© 2010 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
