74
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
The incoming testing strategy should identify the quality attributes to measure, the sampling plan 
and the acceptance criteria. A statistical analysis should provide the basis for these, including AQL or 
process capability. The testing methods should be appropriately validated and harmonized with sup-
plier test methods. Upon initial implementation, the control strategy should be closely monitored and 
improved as needed to ensure its continued suitability. 
12.3.3 Semifinished Syringes
A semifinished syringe is one lacking a plunger rod. This term refers to the primary packaging in 
which the product is filled and sealed. CCI requirements are directly associated with the life cycle of 
a sterile product. During the development phase, which includes the process parameters, the product 
design and its specifications, the initial assessment of CCI should encompass worst-case conditions 
that may explore the limits of the final product and process. This can include the use of components 
that have undergone preparation process steps (e.g., washing and sterilization) with parameters ex-
ceeding the ones that have been defined. For example, a higher irradiation dose for sterilization can 
be used to demonstrate the absence of impact on the mechanical properties of the elastomeric com-
pounds, and therefore, on the CCI of the product. The use of components from different batches 
and of different ages is also recommended to ensure that batch-to-batch variability and component 
degradation over time are adequately addressed. During this development phase, these attributes are 
commonly assessed via a formal risk assessment of how CCI may be affected and/or whether further 
evaluations are required. As per regulatory guidance, a robust rationale should be built when the ac-
tual product is not used to justify the use of these alternatives (98, 99).
The assessment of CCI should follow the evolution of the product/process development. It should 
encompass any change in the critical parameters of the process or in the primary packaging compo-
nents. Any change in the process or product should be assessed using a risk-based approach to identify 
any potential impact on the CCI of the final product and to conduct the appropriate studies.
When the product reaches the routine production stage, CCI should be monitored on a predefined 
basis. Depending on the validation strategy used and the risks identified in the process, this can in-
clude in-process checks of the integrity or release testing for integrity of the product. Additionally, it 
may be necessary to consider the aging of the packaging components until the end of the primary 
packaging shelf life to determine the potential impact on CCI, depending on applicable regulatory 
requirements. CCI assessment may also replace sterility testing on stability studies, which is in line 
with the recommendation from the FDA on CCI testing for sterile products (5).
Finally, distribution aspects should receive consideration at any stage of product development. A risk 
evaluation associated with the different distribution channels of the product should provide the ba-
sis for the evaluation (100). Temperatures, vibrations, pressure differences, and the sizes of the air 
bubbles within finished syringes should also be considered. These variables can have an impact on 
excessive plunger movement that could lead to a loss of sterility of the product, and should therefore 
receive a careful assessment, especially for semifinished syringes in which it can be more difficult to 
prevent plunger movement. 
12.3.4	Syringe Assembly and Secondary Packaging
The CCI of the assembled PFS (including finger-flange and plunger rod components) is predicated 
on the sterility assurance and CCI of the semifinished syringe introduced into the assembly process. 
The design/development of the assembly and secondary packaging processes should include risk 
assessment of the failure modes related to potential loss of drug product sterility and/or CCI of 
the semifinished syringe, including evaluation of the potential for plunger stopper and needle-shield 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
75
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
movement, and damage to the semifinished syringe. The processes should be validated to ensure that 
the resulting product meets established criteria and is suitable for its intended use.
12.3.5	 Shipping and Distribution of Semifinished Syringes and PFSs
The semifinished syringe and PFS may be exposed to transportation conditions that can include me-
chanical forces, pressure changes, and vibrations during shipping and distribution throughout the life 
cycle of the product. Shipping studies should provide an understanding of the capability of the product 
to maintain CCI following exposure to representative and/or worst-case transportation conditions.
12.4	CCI Test Method Toolbox: Method Selection, Development, 
and Validation
CCI testing ensures that the sterility of the syringe contents is maintained. Physicochemical CCI test-
ing methods are typically designed to challenge the PFS. Key technology options include microbial 
ingress, dye immersion, pressure/vacuum decay, mass extraction, high-voltage leak detection, and 
helium-leak detection. Table 12.4-1 compares and contrasts the major characteristics of the methods 
of CCI testing.
The CCI test method selected must be suitable for its intended use. The use of visual inspection 
and probabilistic methods (e.g., dye ingress) may aid in gross defect detection, whereas deterministic 
methods are more appropriate for definitive CCI testing, if applicable.
Nondestructive methods are generally preferred, which conserves the sample for further analyses. 
The use of quantitative methods should indicate if leak size information is required. Testing speed 
and throughput are key considerations for in-process and in-line CCI testing. In addition, consider-
ation of package content attributes should aid in ensuring that the selected methods are applicable. 
For example, contents with low electrical conductivity may preclude use of high-voltage leak detec-
tion methods. Another scenario may be one in which a proteinaceous drug product may clog leak 
defects and prevent reliable detection by vacuum-based methods (e.g., vacuum decay).
Critical method parameters must be optimized for the specific drug product package and fully dem-
onstrate the method’s applicability. Testing a number of intact samples bracketing typical drug prod-
uct variations (e.g., multiple batches of C/C components, drug products of different concentrations, 
and packages at different sites/lines) should ensure a low false-positive probability. The use of positive 
control samples of known defect sizes (prepared using micropipettes, wires, capillary columns, laser 
drilled defects, and/or microelectromechanical systems) can optimize and demonstrate method reli-
ability and sensitivity. Evaluation of additional types of actual and simulated real-world defects may 
further verify method effectiveness.
CCI test method validation should be specific to the drug product or product type and appropriate for 
various drug product development phases. After selection of the C/C system, packaging process, and 
drug product formulation, the CCI test methods selected should support various development stud-
ies, such as engineering and stability studies. Prior to licensure application, validation of the method 
must follow applicable ICH guidelines and regulatory requirements. Complete method robustness 
studies should enable future long-term routine use in commercial QC laboratories.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
76
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 72
Table 12.4-1	Comparison of CCI testing methods (101)
Considerations
Vacuum/Pressure Decay  
and Mass Extraction
High-Voltage Leak Detection
Helium-Leak Detection
Dye Ingress
Microbial Ingress
Best-Case Practical 
Detection Limit 
2-5 µm
2-5 µm
0.1-2 µm
20-50 µm
20-50 µm
Detection 
Deterministic
Deterministic
Deterministic
Probabilistic
Probabilistic
Destructiveness
Nondestructive
Nondestructive
Nondestructive
Destructive
Destructive
Quantitative
Qualitative and quantitative 
Qualitative only
Qualitative and quantitative
Qualitative only
Qualitative only
Typical Applications
Container/closure (C/C) 
development and qualification
Routine QC testing
100% in-line testing potentially 
feasible
Sealing process validation
C/C development and 
qualification
Routine QC testing
100% in-line testing potentially 
feasible
Sealing process validation
C/C development and 
qualification
Routine QC testing
100% in-line testing potentially 
feasible
Sealing process validation
C/C development and 
qualification
Routine QC testing
Sealing process validation
C/C development and 
qualification
Sealing process validation
Major Advantages 
Potentially applicable to 
injection devices
Testing under normal 
atmospheric pressure
Applicable to high-
concentration proteinaceous 
products
Highly sensitive
Widely used for decades
Industry and regulatory 
familiarity
“Last resort” used when all 
else fails
Widely used for decades
Industry and regulatory 
familiarity
“Last resort” used when all 
else fails
Major Limitations 
Possible interference 
with defect detection by 
proteinaceous products 
Requirement for electrically 
conductive fills
Not applicable to most 
injection devices
Possibility of causing drug 
product degradation
Requirement for helium-
containing headspace for drug 
product-filled syringes
Less sensitive
Probabilistic detection
Destructive
Less sensitive
Probabilistic detection
Destructive
Not applicable to drug-
product-filled syringes
Key Considerations
Assurance of proper fixture 
design to prevent plunger 
stopper movement and 
deformation
Sample surface and vacuum 
chamber preparation 
Possibility that syringe barrel 
area covered by needle shield 
is not assessable
Need to ensure that sample 
surfaces are free of adsorbed 
helium prior to testing to avoid 
false detection 
Need to ensure that a true 
failure can be detected (e.g., 
dye in syringe, liquid in ribs)
Inability to ensure the absence 
of pathogens
Reference or  
Standard method
ASTM F2338 (102)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
