87
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
14.0  Drug Product Compatibility
This section focuses on the compatibility of a drug product with the various syringe components 
discussed in the previous sections, and the possible impact of surface interactions and stresses on drug 
product stability due to drug product manufacturing, shipping, storage, and handling.
14.1	Risk Assessment
Risk assessments are recommended to determine the sensitivity of the protein to various stress con-
ditions and interfaces. It is important during the risk assessment to understand the molecular char-
acteristics, including any known degradation pathways, to leverage this information during the risk 
assessment.
A risk assessment typically uses a risk-based approach involving FMEA to determine the criticality of 
process parameters and their effects on critical quality attributes, quality attributes, or manufacturing 
attributes. In the area of compatibility, an assessment of all interfaces of the product during manufac-
turing, and ultimately filling in the PFS, must be performed to determine their impact on the product. 
Any risk-mitigation activities applied must minimize the risk to the product. The risks are identified, 
scored, and characterized as being high, medium, or low to determine the mitigation strategy. The 
risk assessment makes it possible to obtain a complete understanding of the processes that the prod-
uct will be subjected to, and helps to determine any incompatibilities that may result from the drug 
product manufacturing process.
The risk assessment should involve members of the research and development unit, and the manu-
facturing unit to ensure the characteristics of the product and manufacturing process are understood. 
Once actions that are associated with risk-mitigation activities are complete, the FMEA is reevaluated, 
rescored, and relevant documents are updated accordingly. Table 14.1-1 presents only an illustrative 
example of the output of a risk assessment exercise, including process steps, parameters, risk ratio-
nale, criticality based on scoring, and recommended actions. For further information on conducting 
formal risk assessments, refer to PDA Technical Report No. 54: Implementation of  Quality Risk Manage-
ment for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations (36).
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
88
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Table 14.1-1	 Example of Risk Assessment Output
Process 
Step
Process Parameter
Rationale
Criticality
Action
Filter into 
Filling 
System
Filter specification
Noncompatibility of filter 
with formulation that could 
affect the product
High
Use adequate filter and 
conduct bacterial retention 
study over a designated 
time and range integrity 
Filling/ 
Stoppering
Residual vapor 
hydrogen peroxide 
(VHP) concentration
Possibility that residual VHP 
in stopper bowl, chutes, 
etc., will affect product; 
Demonstrated effect on 
product at specified levels
High
Monitor residual levels of 
VHP after the cycle and 
the profile of concentra-
tion due to air changes
Filter into 
Filling 
System
Filter contact time
Restricted time limit from 
bacterial retention study
Medium
Bacterial retention study 
over a designated time 
range
Filling
Fill speed
Need to ensure that 
appropriate filling speed range 
is defined for the product to 
prevent product impact
Medium
Shear level assessment of 
product for filling process
Filling
UV light exposure 
level from LPP
Possible effect on product of 
exposure to UV light 
Low
Light level reading during 
LPP cycle
Stoppering 
Stoppering speed
Possible effect on product 
and process of speed of 
stoppering 
Low
Assessment of stoppering 
speed during operational 
qualification runs on isolator
Inspection
Syringe 
specification
Possible effect on product of 
specification of the product 
contact parts 
Low
Confirmation that syringe 
is not damaged during 
loading and unloading from 
inspection equipment
14.2	Key Product and Manufacturing Attributes
14.2.1	Stability Studies
Stability studies that monitor the product in the syringe are critical to understanding the impact of the 
PFS on product characteristics. The stability studies should include studies in the expected/recom-
mended storage conditions, as well as in stress temperatures to assess thermal stability in support of 
the intended usage and excursions. For example, if the recommended storage temperature is 2–8°C, 
a study may evaluate the effects of an accelerated temperature of 25°C or 30°C (depending on the 
stability of the drug product) and stress storage condition of 30° or 40°C. Care should be taken to 
choose a stress temperature based on the specific properties (e.g., melting temperature) of the prod-
uct. Manufacturers should monitor photostability according to ICH guidelines to determine the ef-
fects during exposure to light (106). 
Other studies to consider are discussed in Section 14.8, including freeze and thaw cycling to under-
stand the impact on protein stability in case of shipping excursions; CCI and shipping simulations via 
shear studies; or actual transit trials depending on the clinical phase of the product. In addition, stud-
ies to evaluate silicone and tungsten may be useful as discussed in Section 14.5. Manufacturers should 
also evaluate exposure to vapor hydrogen peroxide or other sterilizing agents used prior to filling the 
syringes. Finally, if the syringe will be used in conjunction with a device, the final drug product pre-
sentation can include stability studies as suggested by ICH Q1A(R2), Stability Testing of New Drug 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
89
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Substances and Products (107). Table 14.2.1-1 presents an outline of the stability studies that may be 
used to assess a typical PFS program. 
Table 14.2.1-1	
Outline of Typical Stability Studies Used to Assess PFSs
Study 
Purpose
Considerations
Product Compatibility
Assess impact of product in 
siliconized PFS
If siliconization is an issue, process optimization 
should be considered. Options without silicone, 
such as polymer syringes, may also be considered 
if process optimization does not adequately address 
compatibility issues.
Comparability
Compare stability to previous 
drug product presentation in 
vials, if available
Leveraging of drug product data in vials may result 
in an advantage for the shelf-life setting if compara-
bility of dosage forms can be established.
Long-Term Stability
Assess impact of product 
when stored at recommended 
temperature and in accelerated 
and stress conditions over time
The impact on the product and the ability of the 
syringe to deliver the product after stability test-
ing must be assessed. Potential problems should 
be noted (e.g., needle clogging, changes in forces). 
Long-term stability tests should include the volumes 
used in clinical studies. May include a bracketing 
approach if the exact dose is not known at the time 
of the study (58).
Freezing and Thawing
Assess impact of freezing and 
thawing on product when it is 
stored in PFS
After the cycling, assuming that the syringes main-
tain stability, stability testing of the syringes should 
be considered to assess any reductions in the ex-
pected stability based on the initial freeze/thaw cy-
cling of the product in the PFS.
Shear 
Assess impact of shear on 
product in PFS
Shear may be introduced during the drug product 
manufacturing process and subsequent distribution 
steps. Shear impact may be different in benchtop 
testing and commercial processes. 
Silicone Sensitivity
Assess impact of silicone 
levels on product
A PFS with appropriate control of silicone levels 
must be chosen.
Tungsten Sensitivity
Assess impact of tungsten on 
product
Select a PFS with minimal tungsten that is compat-
ible with the drug product
Photostability
Required as per ICH guidelines 
(107)
Provide secondary packaging and include labelling 
text. Additional studies might be required in typical 
light conditions if photostability proves to be detri-
mental to the product.
Device Stability
Required as per ICH guidelines
This study determines whether an ancillary device 
will be used and must take into account the stability 
of the device when it is stored in nonrecommended 
conditions.
14.2.2	Analysis of Stability
Analysis of stability should include physical, biochemical, and potency/activity measures as outlined 
in Table 14.2.2-1. The tests in the table are examples and include characterization assays, which are 
not tested for each batch. Characterization can be conducted only on selected batches until sufficient 
knowledge for this parameter is obtained. Regulatory agencies have requested to consider particulate 
analysis as an additional assessment of the stability of the drug product (82,108).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
90
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Table 14.2.2-1	
Stability analysis for PFS contents
Category
Parameter
Test Methods Examples
Physical
Appearance/Particulates 
Light obscuration, microflow imaging
Viscosity
Cone or plate viscometer/rheometer, Force measurement
Biochemical
Aggregation
Size exclusion chromatography, dynamic light scattering
Deamidation/Oxidation
Reverse-phase HPLC, capillary isoelectric focusing gel, peptide 
mapping
Conformation 
Fluorescence, circular dichroism (CD)
Potency/Activity
Biacore, ELISA, cell-based assays
During all analyses, manufacturers must give special consideration to the presence of the silicone 
coating in glass PFSs and the potential for the product to interact with the silicone, as well as the 
movement of the silicone over time or when the product is delivered (109; 110). Beyond having a 
direct product impact, the presence of the silicone affects the analytical techniques employed. For 
particulate analysis in particular, silicone must be distinguishable from other product-related particles 
as mentioned in Section 10.8 (108). 
Depending on the fill volume of the syringe, there may be challenges for the analysis of the volumes 
required for visual inspection and particulate testing according to USP <788>, Particulate Matter in 
Injections. Manufacturers and suppliers commonly use small amounts of tungsten in the tips of glass 
PFSs with staked needles. The presence of tungsten has been shown to be incompatible with some 
products. This should be a consideration when regarding product quality. Refer to Section 14.6.2.1 
(81) for further discussion.
14.2.2.1	Force Measurements
The ability to measure the forces required to inject the drug product by means of the PFS is an im-
portant component of the stability testing process. This parameter may have an impact on a patient’s 
ability to self-inject, or a healthcare provider’s ability to use the product, as well as the reliability of 
the injection if the delivery is via a device. Monitoring the forces for delivery initially upon release is 
important. It is equally as important to monitor the forces for delivery over the intended shelf life of 
the drug product. This is to confirm that the potential physical changes in the drug product or in the 
silicone distribution in the syringe do not affect the ability of the PFS (or of the PFS in conjunction 
with a device) to deliver the required dose to the patient. The siliconization of the PFS, the properties 
of the drug product, and the needle gauge and its variability affect the forces required for delivery of 
the drug product. All of these issues should be a consideration when evaluating the force measure-
ments for the drug product. Finally, syringeability, which measures the force required for delivery 
at a given injection rate via a needle of a predetermined gauge and length, will enable the optimal 
injection conditions to be determined for the drug product, taking into account the product’s physical 
properties, flow rate, injection force, and needle gauge (111–114).
14.2.2.2	Special Considerations: the Effect of Silicone on Analytical Testing, including 
Particle Analysis
To evaluate the effect of silicone on analytical testing and particle analysis (including light obscuration and 
other orthogonal analytical techniques), pooling practices are often required to overcome the challenges 
of low volumes per container. In addition to having a potential impact on drug product stability, the pres-
ence of silicone has a significant impact on particulate analysis via light obscuration and other orthogonal 
techniques used for particulate testing, such as microflow imaging. The amount of silicone oil droplets 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
91
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
generated is dependent on the sampling method (removal from the barrel or injection via a needle) used 
to obtain the sample from the PFS for analysis. As a result, the sampling method that is used for the drug 
product should be evaluated and consistently used to analyze effectively the results of the particulate anal-
ysis. In addition, degassing and/or dilution may be needed to assist in providing consistent results. USP 
<788> and European Pharmacopeia, Section 2.9.19 require a volume of at least 25 mL, which is challeng-
ing to obtain when the volume in a PFS is generally 1 mL or less. When considering small-volume light-
obscuration methods to overcome the volume requirement, the sampling plan must be properly qualified 
and validated for the specific drug product. Finally, because of the impact of the silicone, using both light 
obscuration and orthogonal techniques capable of identifying silicone within the sample matrix during 
development will assist in the interpretation of the results generated during particulate analysis.
14.3	Compatibility of the Drug Product with the Plunger Stopper 
and Needle Shield
Drug products may come in contact with rubber material in the plunger stopper and needle shield 
during stability testing. For some bioproducts, incompatibility between the drug product and the 
plunger stopper or needle shield can lead to aggregation, increased chemical degradation, and loss of 
drug product potency.
14.3.1		Impact of Interaction between the Drug Product and  
Rubber in the Needle Shield
Incompatibility between the drug product and needle shield can lead to increased polymer formation 
resulting in partial or complete needle clogging. The increased risk of clogging can lead to obstruc-
tion of liquid flow, and therefore, to the requirement for higher forces to expel the product. The high-
er forces required to push liquid out of the syringe can cause great discomfort, especially to patients 
with dexterity limitations. An increase in force to expel the product could also lead to the patient not 
receiving the dose. There is also a risk that injecting the patient with higher-order aggregates and 
polymer can potentially lead to an immune response (115). Thus, a comprehensive characterization 
of incompatibilities between the needle shield and drug product is essential. 
Experiments conducted to evaluate incompatibility of the needle shield with the drug product need 
to account for the surface area to volume ratio between the product on the tip of the needle and the 
contact surface of the needle shield material. During product stability studies in syringes, the product 
solution may or may not come into contact with the needle shield. Thus, to evaluate the impact of 
the needle shield on product quality and stability more rigorously, extractables and leachables evalua-
tions, such as those described in Section 5, may be useful.
14.3.2 	Impact of Interaction between the Plunger Stopper and  
Drug Product
Section 5 discusses further considerations of extractables and leachables related to the plunger stop-
per. To evaluate the impact of the plunger stopper on product quality and stability, some or all of the 
following studies may be performed.
• Impact of leachables from the plunger stopper on the product — Plunger stoppers can have met-
als that are leachable. It is critical to evaluate the impact of metals on drug products in stability tests.
• Impact of silicone oil on the product — Plunger stoppers may be coated with silicone oil that may 
or may not be cross-linked. Section 14.5 provides the evaluation of interactions between silicone 
oil and the product.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
