sensitive products but requires that “[w]holesale distributors must have suitable and adequate premises, 
installations and equipment, so as to ensure proper storage and distribution of medicinal products. In 
particular, the premises should be clean, dry and maintained within acceptable temperature limits….” 
(Sec. 3.1.) and “[t]he premises should be designed or adapted to ensure that the required storage 
conditions are maintained….” (Sec. 3.2). Furthermore, “[s]uitable equipment and procedures should 
be in place to check the environment where medicinal products are stored. Environmental factors to 
be considered include temperature, light, humidity and cleanliness of the premises….” (Sec. 3.2.1). 
In general, a guiding principle underpinning operations and actions undertaken by wholesale 
distributors is that “[t]he wholesale distribution of medicinal products is performed according to the 
information on the outer packaging” (Sec. 5.1) (9). 
The chapter of the EU GDP on transportation specifically targets temperature-sensitive products 
insofar as “[t]he required storage conditions for medicinal products should be maintained during 
transportation within the defined limits as described by the manufacturers or on the outer packaging” 
(Sec. 9.2). In the event of a temperature excursion, the incident should be reported to the distributor 
and recipient of the affected product. In that regard, it must be emphasized that the information on 
temperature control originates from either specific information from the manufacturer or the 
information on the outer packaging of the product. In any case, a risk-based approach should be used 
when planning transportation. As such, and because there is no further precision or requirement of 
stability data, any deviation of the temperature indications must be reported, in compliance with EU 
GDP. 
Although the general regulatory framework laid down by Directive 2001/83/EC and the EU GDP 
guidelines originate at the EU level, member states are responsible for implementing these rules: 
“checks on the persons authorized to engage in activity as a wholesaler in medicinal products, and the 
inspection of their premises, shall be carried out under the responsibility of the Member State which 
granted the authorization for premises located on its territory” (Art. 1) (8). These provisions are 
binding in the EU and are implemented in all member states. Each member state will entrust one or 
more competent authorities, to carry out inspections on the premises of wholesalers to check their 
compliance with the Directive and GDP.  
Wholesale distribution authorizations and GDP certificates are available in a central database called 
EudraGMDP, the content of which is provided by the National Competent Authorities of the 
European Economic Area and is maintained and operated by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) 
(10). 
3.4 Supply Chains in Africa 
Many African countries have adopted the World Health Organization (WHO) GDP guidance, applying 
Annex 5, Annex 7, and Annex 9, often in conjunction with local GDPs (5, 11, 12). For example, 
Zambia, Kenya, Ethiopia,  Nigeria, and Uganda have developed country-specific GDP guidelines and 
the Union Economique et Monetaire Ouest Africanine has established GDP guidelines for French-
speaking African countries (13-18). In Africa, many countries import about 90% of their 
pharmaceutical products, and customs and the inspectorate play a major role in the lead time needed 
to deliver products to the central warehouses, both in the private and public supply chains. 
The African continent faces major challenges to delivering pharmaceuticals of the right quality and 
quantity to the patient, at the right place, and in a timely manner. Some of these challenges include the 
poor infrastructure of motorways, vehicle conditions, high temperatures and humidity, dry and rainy 
seasons, and power outages that impact temperature-controlled stores. The limited financial resources 
and lack of local manufacturers can create a dependency on donations from Faith-based Organizations 
(FBO) and NGOs for the import of medicines and, in some countries, poor supervision from health 
inspectorates and unstable political and governmental circumstances stand in the way. 


In Africa, the population has relatively less to spend on medication compared to other continents, and 
reimbursement for the cost of medications by insurance companies is limited. Therefore, the public 
pharmaceutical supply chains play a larger role in supplying medication for free to the population in 
Africa than they do on other continents. Public supply chains typically deliver medication to the 
population for HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, nutrition, reproductive health, hepatitis, and 
noncommunicable diseases, while private supply chains provide other medications.  
Public supply chains for health products in Africa are relatively long and generally follow the four- or 
five-level health system architecture (see Figure 3.4-1). Typically, a central warehouse distributes the 
goods to regional warehouses in the province. From the regional warehouse, goods are shipped to 
district warehouses/stores, and subsequently the goods are shipped via the district warehouses to the 
health facilities to reach the patient. In these supply chains, it may take 6 to 18 months to move goods 
from the central warehouse to the health facilities.  
Given the complexity of the distribution networks, the procedures generally necessitate maintaining 
security stocks of one to two months at the SDP level, three months at the health district level, and 
four to six months at the regional and central levels. As a consequence, out-of-stock situations have a 
major impact on patient health, but the financial consequences of overstocking with safety stocks must 
also be considered.  
Note: Red boxes show the private supply chain, green boxes display the public supply chain. 
Figure 3.4-1 Example of Pharmaceutical Supply Chain in Senegal  
In contrast, the public supply chain in Zambia was reorganized recently from a Tier-3 distribution 
network to a more last-mile model wherein the storage capacity at central and regional warehouses was 
expanded and all district warehouses were eliminated. A central information technology inventory 
management system for stock and purchase-order management and visibility was implemented for the 
entire supply chain, and a last-mile distribution system was established from the central warehouse and 
six regional warehouses to 3400 health facilities which included hospitals, clinics, centers, posts, and 
huts. In addition, regional warehouses are no longer present in each province; instead, their locations 
are based on population distribution, geographical environment, and distance to health facilities 


(allowing for a maximum eight-hour drive). As a result, the distance between distribution points is 
shorter than before, total inventory stock level is lower, and medicine accessibility has been improved. 
3.5 Supply Chains in Brazil 
In Brazil, wholesalers, logistic service companies, distributors, pharmacies, clinics, and hospitals must 
be licensed to distribute, store, commercialize, and administrate an approved product, according to the 
Portaria CVS 1/2020 as shown in Figure 3.5-1 (19). The MAH may engage a third-party company for 
the distribution or logistics services, according to Resolution of the Collegiate Board (RDC) n° 234/2018, in 
which case the contracted company is jointly and severally liable with the contracting company for the 
technical and operational aspects of the inherent activity (20).  
GDP is regulated by RDC n° 430/2020 (modified by RDC n° 653/2022) which requires suitable and 
adequate procedures, premises, installations, and equipment that will ensure proper storage and 
distribution of medicinal products. This requirement includes temperature-mapping of distribution 
routes, temperature-monitoring during product distribution, and shipping qualification for all 
medicines (not only temperature-sensitive products) employing a risk-based approach for product 
quality (21, 22). Humidity monitoring during the last mile is not considered necessary as properly 
chosen container closure systems protect against any humidity excursions which might be experienced. 
However, Brazilian regulation does require humidity monitoring unless a risk assessment conducted 
by manufactures and wholesalers determined there is no product impact prior to last mile. Overall, 
product distribution within the temperature and humidity approved in the regulatory application is an 
expectation, and the range of allowed temperature and humidity excursions must be technically 
justified, supported by data, and documented in a risk analysis. 
The MAH of a medicinal product must ensure appropriate and continued supply of that medicinal 
product. In event of a temporary supply discontinuation, a notification to health authorities is required, 
according to the RDC n° 18/2014 (23). 
The main challenge in last-mile transport via road, air, and water, is the size of Brazil as the mode of 
transport is executed by a logistic operator who subcontracts trucks, flights, and boats. 
Note: Private supply in red, public supply chain in green       * Sistema Unico de Saude (Unified Health System) 
Figure 3.5-1 Example of Brazil’s Supply Chain  


3.6 Supply Chains in the United States 
In the United States, there is little difference between the public and private supply chains as public-
health efforts normally use private supply chains to achieve their goals. Most prescription drugs travel 
through a complex system that includes large primary wholesalers, smaller secondary wholesalers, and 
a small number of specialty wholesalers. In addition to purchasing overstock from manufacturers and 
primary wholesalers, secondary wholesalers buy and sell drugs among themselves, as well as selling 
them to pharmacies. Thus, prescription drug products may undergo multiple handoffs within a supply 
chain.  
In the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) defines 
wholesale distribution as the “distribution of prescription drugs to persons other than a consumer or 
patient….” (Part 205.3 (f)) and defines a wholesale distributor as “anyone engaged in wholesale 
distribution of prescription drugs….” (Part 205.3 (g)) (24). Additionally, the CFR defines an authorized 
distributor as “a distributor with whom a manufacturer has established an ongoing relationship to 
distribute such manufacturer’s products” (Part 203.3 (b)) (25). Wholesalers must have a method to 
ensure that shipments of prescription drugs are only sold and delivered to licensed entities. 
Neither 21 CFR 203 nor 21 CFR 205 addresses packaging and shipping requirements for temperature-
controlled products. However, U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) General Chapter <659> Packaging and Storage 
Requirements and General Chapter <1079> Risk and Mitigation Strategies for the Storage and 
Transportation of Finished Drug Products are very clear in their guidance for the storage, distribution, 
monitoring, calibration, training and qualification of “cold chain” equipment (26, 27). USP <659>, 
revised in 2020, gives specific guidance on packaging, temperature, storage, and distribution 
requirements.  
Also revised in 2020, USP <1079> provides specific responsibilities, not just for manufacturers but 
for all last-mile participants, including wholesalers, distributors, pharmacies, compounding pharmacies, 
hospitals, healthcare providers, brokers, and logistics service providers. It addresses the responsibilities 
for storage, transport, supplier qualification, quality agreements, excursion handling, training, 
calibration, monitoring systems, staffing, temperature mapping, and shipping package qualification. 
USP <1079> focuses on development of a quality management system and includes a section on the 
“Risk-Based Approach to the Storage and Transportation of Finished Drug Products.” Under 
“Distribution and Shipment of Pharmacopeial Articles,” it states that:  
Shippers and distributors are to follow the proper storage and shipping requirements 
as indicated by the manufacturer….The manufacturers and distributors should work 
together to establish proper distribution and product-handling requirements for the 
purpose of ensuring appropriate product maintenance in transit.  
In addition, under “Temperature Challenges,” USP <1079> states that “Storage temperature ranges 
may not be indicative of the allowable tolerances during shipping. Articles labeled for special storage 
conditions (between 2 °C and 8 °C) vary widely in their tolerance of short-term exposure to heat and 
cold.” Manufacturers ship refrigerated pharmaceuticals in a variety of ways, ranging from protective 
packaging or temperature-controlled trailers to no temperature protection or control at all. The 
decision about how a manufacturer will ship a product depends on the stability data a manufacturer 
provides, which may not be included in the product labeling. 
Shipments from wholesalers are made via private fleet (vehicles owned by the wholesaler), commercial 
carriers, and local courier services. Typically, the duration of these shipments from the wholesaler’s 
distribution centers to the point of dispensing facilities ranges from several hours to multiple days. 
The National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP) Drug Distributor Accreditation program, 
(formerly the Verified-Accreditation Wholesale Distributors program) is designed to protect the U.S. 
prescription drug and medical device supply chain. The accreditation process changed in January 2022 


and no longer requires on-site visits. This program involves a self-conducted supply chain inspection 
of a facility’s procedures and practices. Nearly half of the states require NABP Drug Distributor 
Accreditation for distributors who are licensed to distribute in their state, whether or not they have 
facilities in their state, while some states, such as Florida, have a more rigorous licensing process that 
also involves passing state-certification exams (28). Manufacturers can and often do take state 
accreditation and licensing into account when evaluating the relationship they have with a wholesale 
distributor. Other states, such as Georgia and Oklahoma, have started to review their regulatory 
requirements related to the distribution of finished drug products. Public awareness has also increased 
in patient claims of improper handling of temperature-sensitive drug products within the last mile that 
might have adversely impacted patients. 
Without specific regulatory requirements, wholesale distributors have only the manufacturer’s 
instructions to ensure they are providing adequate, appropriate, and proper packaging and shipping 
temperature ranges to maintain product integrity, stability, and potency. In the absence of specific 
packaging requirements or stability data provided by a manufacturer, the distributor should use 
qualified packaging or transportation to maintain product-storage labeling requirements for the 
duration of the shipping time from the removal from the distributor’s temperature-controlled 
environment to delivery at their customer’s location.  
If available, manufacturers should be encouraged to provide specific packaging requirements or 
stability data that supports shipping within parameters outside of storage-labeling requirements, since 
this would reduce environmental packaging waste and costs that are passed on to consumers. In either 
case, the distributor is responsible for having data showing that the package and shipping method 
ensures the product’s temperature will stay within the storage-label requirement or specified time and 
temperature parameters. See Figure 3.6-1 as an example.  
Figure 3.6-1 Example of U.S. Private Sector Supply Chain 
