=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-Aug-2022
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-D516FF11-E0D7-4288-9979-2074A9B283FD_3_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7411_03_01
DOI Ref:
7m5wx
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈1229.2〉 MOIST HEAT STERILIZATION OF AQUEOUS LIQUIDS
INTRODUCTION
Steam sterilization of aqueous liquids (including both suspensions and emulsions with mixing), also known as sterilization of nonporous
loads, is the method of choice for aqueous parenteral products, in-process aqueous liquids, laboratory media, and biological waste materials.
This type of sterilization is accomplished primarily in closed containers. During steam sterilization by direct contact (also called steam
sterilization of par ts, hard goods, or porous items) the steam in the chamber directly contacts the surface of load items to effect sterilization
(see Steam Sterilization by Direct Contact 〈1229.1〉). In contrast, sterilization of liquids in containers is accomplished by application of heat to
the container, heating of the container wall, and ultimately heating of the internal liquid volume. This can be accomplished using steam,
superheated water, and air in various combinations. Some aqueous liquids are susceptible to over-processing that could render them un«t
for their intended use. Manufacturers should consider the in¬uence of these differences when they establish a suitable process.
During the sterilization of liquid-«lled containers, differential pressures between the interior of the containers and the sterilization chamber
may potentially impact container integrity. Air over-pressure is used to minimize the pressure differential between the container and the
sterilizer to protect the integrity of the container, especially pre«lled syringes and plastic containers. Before sterilization of product
containers, manufacturers should consider the potential adverse consequences of excess heat on the materials. In order to ensure sterility
as well as functionality, the process de«nition and validation method used must incorporate both lower and upper temperature and time
limits on the process conditions.
When the overkill method can be used for sterilization of sealed liquid containers, it is the preferred method and is described in 〈1229.1〉.
When product quality attributes can be impaired by excessive heat, the sterilization process should use less time or a lower temperature to
minimize the adverse effect on the materials. Sterilization time–temperature or F
 conditions (F
 is de«ned as the equivalent sterilization
time relative to a base temperature of 121°) include both lower (sterility-related) and upper (stability-related) limits.
1
 Manufacturers
commonly employ the bioburden/biological indicator (BB/BI) or bioburden methods when constraints on the material's ability to withstand
the process require the use of less aggressive conditions. This approach requires appropriate controls on presterilization bioburden and/or
product-related D-values in conjunction with bioindicators of lower spore count or resistance to ensure sterilization.
Terminal Sterilization of Products
The maintenance of product attributes may require the use of sterilizing conditions that are less aggressive and sterilization equipment,
cycles, and validation methods adapted to these more restricted circumstances. The substantial variations in equipment designs and
methods for terminal sterilization preclude a singular description of a typical cycle. All terminal sterilizers heat the load, but they accomplish
this in varying ways: saturated steam; steam–air mixtures, steam–air–water mixtures, and superheated water. Air over-pressure for
maintenance of container integrity and cooling containers and water for heating/cooling of the load may be present depending upon the
autoclave size, throughput expectations, and container.
In-Process Fluids
In-process ¬uids are used for pH adjustment, dilution to a speci«ed volume, lubrication, and other purposes. In many instances these
liquids are sterilized in conjunction with items that must be sterilized by direct steam contact, and the sterilization process must ensure that
all items are adequately sterilized.
Laboratory Media
Laboratory media often are sterilized in standard steam autoclaves with minor adaptations. Provision for slow exhaust (to reduce stress
on container integrity and minimize boil over) and jacket cooling can help improve the basic steam sterilizer design and operation to better
accommodate the materials. The sterilization process may be speci«c for media containers or a combination of both liquid-«lled containers
and hard goods. This process may resemble the methods used for terminally sterilized products (see above). The sterilization of laboratory
media may entail the processing of a number of different containers that contain different materials. Manufacturers should be aware of the
potential for under- and over-processing across the load and must consider container size, container contents, and position. When liquid-
«lled containers are combined in the same load with hard goods, manufacturers must consider the unique concerns of each to ensure all
items are properly sterilized. Because laboratory media are considered self-indicating with respect to sterility, the use of internal biological
indicators during validation is not required.
Biowaste Sterilization
The sterilization of biowaste in sealed containers from laboratory or production use is similar to par ts sterilization. The process is de«ned
to ensure a minimum time–temperature exposure or attainment of a speci«ed F
 value throughout all items of the load. Depending on the
0
0
0
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:42 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.2〉 Moist Heat Sterilization of Aqueous Liquids


=== PAGE 2 ===
potential contaminants present, the autoclave design may incorporate condensate collection/sterilization or sterilizable exhaust «lters to
ensure that pathogens are adequately contained. Because the objective of biowaste sterilization is to render the materials safe for contact
and disposal, the overkill method described in 〈1229.1〉 is employed.
Change to read:
BIOBURDEN/BIOLOGICAL INDICATOR METHOD
Application of the BB/BI method requires a thorough understanding of the bioburden type, population, and resistance typically present in
the presterilized product-«lled container. The method relies on substantial differences between moist heat resistance and the population of
the bioburden present and the biological indicator used during validation (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Relative resistance and population of typical bioburden and biological indicator microorganisms.
BB/BI is a method in which the incomplete destruction (or destruction of a modest population) of a resistant biological indicator can be
used to demonstrate the capability of the process to reliably destroy any bioburden. This is accomplished using detailed knowledge of the BB
and BI populations and their relative resistance.
Typical BB microorganisms have only minimal resistance in comparison to BIs, and this can be con«rmed by heat screening of BB isolates.
The BB population is controlled by «ltration steps for the ¬uid, process time limits, environmental controls, gowning systems, and other
means. The conventional BIs for terminal sterilization using the BB/BI method are Clostridium sporogenes ATCC 7955 and Bacillus subtilis
ATCC 5230, although other strains can be used. The use of Geobacillus stearothermophilus for terminal sterilization is uncommon with the
BB/BI method because the organism's strong resistance to moist heat makes it poorly suited for this application.
Con«rmation of an acceptable probability of a nonsterile unit (PNSU) can be accomplished using physical measurements and BI response
(which de«ne the lethality of the process) in conjunction with processing limits for the BB population and resistance (which de«ne the N
 and
D-value). D-value is the time (customarily in minutes) required to reduce the microbial population by 90% or 1 log
 cycle (i.e., to a surviving
fraction of 1/10) and must be associated with the speci«c lethal conditions at which it was determined. For example, D
 is the D-value at
121°. Ar ticles intended to be sterile must attain a ≤10
−6
 PNSU, i.e., less than or equal to 1 chance in 1 million that viable bioburden
microorganisms are present. The PNSU can be determined from Equation 1.
log N
 = −F/D + log N
 
 
 
 
[1]
N
= PNSU
F
= F
-value of the process (lethality)
D
= D-value of the natural bioburden
N
= bioburden population per container
The following example indicates the resulting PNSU under the de«ned conditions of validation and routine operation (Table 1).
T
able 1. Examples of PNSU Calculation
0
10
121
u
0
u
0
0
0
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:42 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.2〉 Moist Heat Sterilization of Aqueous Liquids


=== PAGE 3 ===
Validation
Routine Usage
F
 = 8.0 min
F
 = 8.0 min
D
 of BI = 0.5 min
D
 of bioburden = 0.005 min
N
 of BI = 10
6
N
 of bioburden = 100 (or 10
2
 )
PNSU for BI = 10
–10
PNSU for BB = 10
–1598
Determining the resistance of the bioburden is accomplished using a heat-screening process during which a pure culture (a laboratory
culture containing a single species of organism spores with minimal vegetative cells) is boiled at 100° for various periods. If the bioburden
microorganism is viable after exposure, its resistance at 121° can be estimated for use in the PNSU calculation (▲
see Methods for
Determination of Resistance of Microorganisms to Sterilization Processes 〈56〉▲ (USP 1-Aug-2022)
). ▲▲ (USP 1-Aug-2022)
Bioburden Method
In most respects the BB method is similar to the BB/BI indicator method. The difference lies in the isolation and characterization of the
most-resistant bioburden microorganism. The worst-case isolate is used as the biological indicator in the evaluation of the process. For use
in this manner, it must be cultured to produce a suitable challenge population. When this method is used, the bioburden of each process
cycle must be closely controlled with respect to population and must be monitored for resistance.
Sterilization Cycle Control
Process equipment for terminal sterilization typically is controlled by calibrated and pressure sensors in/on the chamber/equipment.
During the exposure por tions of the cycle, attainment of a minimum dwell time at a prede«ned temperature is used to suppor t process
lethality. Cycle lethality for terminal sterilization customarily is measured using F
, which is de«ned as an actual exposure time at a variable
process temperature that is equivalent to an exposure at 121° based on an ideal microorganism with a z-value of 10°. This can include
lethality delivered during the heat-up and cooling phases of the sterilization process. A z-value is de«ned as the number of degrees of
temperature change necessary to change the D-value by a factor of 10. The F
 approach is used to evaluate to a single standard sterilization
processes that are operated at varying temperature conditions. The process lethality at temperatures other than 121° can be calculated to
determine lethality equivalent to that provided at 121°. Sterilizer control systems for terminal sterilization deliver conditions within a
prede«ned time–temperature or F
 range to avoid over-processing.
Simple mathematics can be used to calculate the total lethality over the course of the process. For the speci«c reference temperature of
121° and a z-value of 10.0°, the F
 calculation can be determined by Equation 2:
 
 
 
 
[2]
t = time
T = temperature
Summing the instantaneous lethality contributions over the entire sterilization process allows the calculation of the overall process
lethality or F
 delivered over the course of the entire process at varying conditions.
Validation of Liquid-Filled Container Sterilization
As previously noted, the preferred method for steam sterilization is the overkill method as de«ned in Sterilization of Compendial Ar ticles
〈1229〉 and 〈1229.1〉. However, when the processed materials are susceptible to damage by moist heat at the overkill conditions, the BB/BI
method is better suited because it results in reduced heat input while affording the same degree of process e­cacy but with different
controls. As noted above, terminal sterilization processes require greater consideration of the effects of the treatment on material proper ties.
This has implications for many of the elements of the quali«cation and validation exercises as indicated below. The validation requirements
for the BB/BI and BB methods are more rigorous than those associated with the overkill method. Although the overkill method can be
con«dently used without detailed consideration of the presterilization bioburden, application of the BB/BI and BB methods require continued
monitoring and control of the bioburden, speci«cally the population and resistance. This is accomplished by testing of «lled containers just
before sterilization and measuring the number of colony-forming units per container and con«rming the absence of resistant BB isolates.
When resistant isolates are found, their thermal resistance in the ¬uid should be determined.
effect of the sterilization process
A preliminary determination of the liquid and the container–closure system's ability to withstand the expected sterilizing conditions
should be made during product development. This can be accomplished by sterilization at conditions slightly in excess of the maximum
expected and evaluating the effect on the material. The evaluation should encompass the essential quality attributes with attention focused
on known and potential new impurities. Appearance and other physical proper ties also should be evaluated as a par t of this effor t.
0
0
121
121
0
0
0
0
0
0
=  
10(
)dt =   10(
)Δt
F0
∫ts
t1
T − 121
10
Σ
t1
ts
T −   121
10
0
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:42 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.2〉 Moist Heat Sterilization of Aqueous Liquids


=== PAGE 4 ===
equipment qualification
Equipment quali«cation is a prede«ned program that con«rms the equipment has been properly installed and that it operates as intended.
Quali«cation of the sterilizing equipment provides a baseline for preventive maintenance and change control for the sterilizer. The
sterilization equipment may require quali«cation of air, water, utility, and other systems that impact the sterilization equipment's
performance.
empty chamber temperature distribution
The dual considerations of sterility and stability commonly associated with sterilization of liquids require that equal attention be paid to
potential under- and over-processing of the load. For this reason the temperature gradient across the sterilizer may require substantially
tighter control than that expected in sterilization by direct contact. The objective is to minimize the time–temperature or F
 differences
across the load throughout the process. Biological indicators are not required in the evaluation of empty chamber temperature distribution.
biological indicators
The selection of a BI must be considered carefully because of the balance that must be maintained between attaining sterilization and
maintaining the sterilized material's essential quality attributes. The biological challenge is either directly inoculated into a liquid-«lled
container or is introduced via self-contained units provided there is adequate correlation between their resistance and the resistance that
would occur in the process ¬uid. The liquid can be either the product or a surrogate ¬uid. The resistance of the indicator in the product (and
surrogate ¬uid, where used) must be known. The surrogate's physical proper ties should approximate those of the product. If there are
surfaces within the container that are not presterilized, biological challenge of those surfaces may be required.
liquid D-value determination
Determination of the thermal resistance (D-value and z-value) for the biological indicator in the liquid is required. This must be performed
in a Biological Indicator Evaluation Resistometer (BIER) in replicate. The thermal resistance of each BI lot in the liquid should be determined.
When a surrogate liquid is used for convenience (e.g., a master solution approach) or because of microbial inhibition of the BI by the liquid,
the thermal resistance in the surrogate must be determined.
container mapping
Liquid-«ll containers with volumes greater than or equal to 100 mL should be mapped to determine internal cold spots. The mapping
should be performed with product containers oriented as they would be within the load. The temperature probes should be introduced into
the containers using methods that maintain container integrity. Internal suppor ts (of minimally heat-conductive materials) may be required
to ensure proper positioning of the probe within the container. After these locations are determined, they are used as either monitoring
locations or are correlated to external conditions on the container during validation and routine processing. Smaller containers (less than
100 mL) have fewer discernible cold spots, the impor tance of which is reduced as container size decreases. Smaller containers (less than
100 mL) can be monitored with temperature probes secured to their exterior. The “cold spot” should be considered a “region” and not a
single point in the container.
load positioning and mapping
A «xed loading position within the sterilizer may be necessary for proper sterilization to ensure uniformity of heating and cooling in
routine use. Once the load is positioned properly, its size can vary within a de«ned range. Load-mapping studies should be performed to
determine the coldest and hottest locations within the load. These locations may not be speci«c individual containers but rather regions.
This ensures that the containers are neither under- nor over-processed in routine operation of the sterilizer. Validation of variable-size load
patterns is accomplished using a bracketing approach for which success with maximum and minimum loads (avoiding both under- and
over-processing) establishes the acceptability of intermediate-size loads. However, evaluation of intermediate load sizes may be bene«cial.
In product sterilization, only a single-size container with a single product lot is processed concurrently.
heat penetration and microbiological challenge
The core of the validation activity is con«rmation of acceptable heat penetration using temperature measurements and microbial
challenge inactivation. Temperature probes and biological indicators are placed within the load at worst-case locations (e.g., the coldest
por tions of the loaded chamber). Introduction of the thermocouples must not alter the integrity of the container. Biological challenges are
placed in containers adjacent to those that contain heat penetration probes (or the same unit with external temperature measurement).
Proof of cycle e­cacy is provided by replicate studies in which the BIs perform as expected and the physical measurements correspond
to the expected values of time and temperature or F
. If the microbial and physical measurements do not correlate, an investigation is in
order, and corrective action must be taken to rectify the discrepancy. Samples from the hottest regions of the load are used for evaluation
of material stability and quality.
product quality and stability evaluation
Manufacturers must conduct ongoing evaluation of the product's ability to withstand the routine sterilizing conditions. The evaluation
should encompass the essential quality attributes with attention focused on known and potential new impurities and those materials that
receive the most heat input. Manufacturers also should evaluate appearance, other physical proper ties, and container–closure integrity as a
par t of this effor t. For microbiological media, the ability of the media to meet growth promotion and other requirements is required as
indicated in the appropriate test chapter(s) (e.g., Microbial Enumeration Tests 〈61〉, Tests for Speci«ed Microorganisms 〈62〉, and Sterility
Tests 〈71〉).
0
0
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:42 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.2〉 Moist Heat Sterilization of Aqueous Liquids


=== PAGE 5 ===
Routine Process Control
All sterilization processes should be subject to formalized practices that maintain them in a controlled state. The practices outlined in
〈1229〉 include the general requirements appropriate for all sterilization systems. This is accomplished by a number of related practices that
are essential for continued use of the process over an extended period of time. The practices include: calibration, physical measurements,
physicochemical integrators, indicators for sterilization, monitoring of bioburden, ongoing process control, change control, preventive
maintenance, periodic reassessment, and training.
The use of parametric release is common in the terminal sterilization of «nished product containers. This subject is addressed in
Terminally Sterilized Pharmaceutical Products—Parametric Release 〈1222〉.
REFERENCES
Berger T & Trupp K, Validation of Terminal Sterilization. In: Validation of Pharmaceutical Processes, 3rd edition; Agalloco J & Carleton F
J, eds.;
InformaUSA, New York; 2007.
Owens J, Sterilization of L
VPs and SVP's, In: Sterilization Technology—A Practical Guide for Manufacturers and Users of Health Care Products.
Morrissey R & Phillips GB; Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York; 1993.
Young J, Sterilization with Steam under Pressure. In: Sterilization Technology—A Practical Guide for Manufacturers and Users of Health Care
Products. Morrissey R & Phillips GB, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York; 1993.
1
Degradation kinetics may differ from those of microbial kill, and F
 values may not be su­cient to fully evaluate “worst case” effects.
Loading Auxiliary Information…
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. 45(6)
Current DocID: GUID-D516FF11-E0D7-4288-9979-2074A9B283FD_3_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7411_03_01
DOI ref: 7m5wx
0
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:42 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.2〉 Moist Heat Sterilization of Aqueous Liquids
