25
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
• 
Confirmation of microbial control in controlled areas prior to use (e.g., manufacturing suites, 
gowning rooms)
• 
Rapid assessment of controlled areas during facility qualification activities (e.g., EM PQ) 
• 
Evaluation of contamination remediation efforts and root cause analysis (e.g., using rapid 
methods to find a source of contamination and/or determine the effectiveness of cleaning and 
disinfection procedures)
Subsequently, the industry should look toward utilizing innovative approaches for the detection and 
quantification of microorganisms as part of a holistic EM program. From a QRM perspective, the 
benefits of implementing rapid microbiological testing strategies can help to design robust processes 
that prevent contamination, ensure that a state of microbial control is maintained, evaluate the impact 
of human interventions during aseptic filling, establish recovery time after power shortages, develop 
more effective strategies to correct a contamination problem, continually improve processes and prod-
ucts, and quickly and efficiently assess the potential impact of failing results on the patient. 
Additional, detailed guidance related to Sections 5.7.1–5.7.5 may be found in PDA Technical Report 
No. 33: Evaluation, Validation and Implementation of Alternative and Rapid Microbiological Methods (22).
5.5.1	 Rapid Microbiological Method Scientific Principles Applied to Environmental 
Monitoring
Rapid methods appropriate for EM are based on a wide variety of scientific principles. Some methods 
still require growth of microorganisms using conventional microbiological media; however, detection 
and enumeration can be faster if using novel detection techniques, such as:
• 
Digital imaging and autofluorescence of microcolonies
• 
Fluorescent staining and laser excitation of microcolonies
• 
Rapid detection of carbon dioxide (CO2)
• 
Detection of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) after a brief microbial enrichment period 
Other rapid methods do not require microbial growth prior to detection or enumeration and, as such, 
the time to result can be instantaneous or close to real-time. Rapid technologies that achieve these 
results include:
• 
Flow and solid-phase cytometry using viability stains and laser detection systems
• 
ATP bioluminescence, when enrichment is not required due to the concentration of microor-
ganisms in the sample
• 
Intrinsic fluorescence and optical spectroscopy detection of microorganisms in air or water
• 
RAMAN spectroscopy coupled with viability staining
• 
Nucleic acid amplification techniques, when enrichment is not required due to the concentra-
tion of microorganisms in the sample
The most appropriate technology and detection method to consider will depend on a variety of factors, 
including, but not limited to:
• 
Sample type
• 
Sample size required for analysis
• 
Sample compatibility with the rapid method workflow and instrumentation
• 
Desired time to result
• 
Level of sensitivity required
• 
Need to neutralize antimicrobial activity for methods requiring growth
• 
Ability of the rapid method to allow identification of any recoveries (destructive vs. non-destructive assay)
• 
Potential for false positives or false negatives due to cleaning or disinfectant residues
Automated and high-throughput methods using conventional media are also available that may afford 
faster results with better efficiency in terms of automation, and data management and data integrity. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


26
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
5.5.2	 Benefits of Using Rapid Microbiological Methods 
The implementation of rapid methods for EM may present the industry operational enhancements 
related to product quality, process knowledge, and regulatory acceptance, such as: 
• 
Potential for reduced in-process microbiology testing and finished product release cycle times
• 
Reduction in risks associated with forward processing 
• 
Elimination or reduction of off-line microbiology assays
• 
Increases in laboratory automation and reductions in manual testing, sample handling, and/or 
data management and data integrity
• 
Reduced overhead and/or headcount for sampling and/or testing
• 
Ability to make immediate quality decisions on the state of microbial control
• 
Faster response to contamination events and initiation of investigations
• 
Reduced repeat testing, lot rejection, reprocessing, and rework
• 
Reduction in room or facility downtime and investigations
• 
Faster confirmation of contamination remediation efforts 
5.5.3	 Validation of Rapid Microbiology Methods and Equipment
Rapid microbiology methods vary in complexity and in the associated equipment required. The vali-
dation of software and equipment follows the equipment validation model as found in USP <1058 
>; the validation of the methods is discussed in compendial chapters of U.S. and EU pharmacopeias, 
USP <1116> and Ph. Eur. 5.1.6. respectively. (9, 23, 24) PDA Technical Report No. 33 also provides 
industry-proven strategies that may be employed during validation. (22)
The most recent public draft of EU Annex 1 (Feb 2020) recommends that when a different or new 
microbiology technology is used that presents a result in a manner different from the CFU, the manu-
facturer should scientifically justify the limits applied and, where possible, correlate them to the CFU 
(see Table 3.0-2, footnote #2). This is true for Grade A areas in which “no growth” is expected from 
active air, passive air, and surface samples during the qualification of the area and routine monitoring. 
The use of a rapid method for EM may result in data that can be compared with existing alert levels and 
action limits, especially when the rapid method relies on the growth of microorganisms and the data 
signal is the CFU. If the data signal is not a CFU, however, the possibility exists that the resulting quan-
titative result will not align with existing alert levels and action limits, even though a correlation between 
the CFU and the new signal can be made. In this instance, the end-user may elect to generate sufficient 
data to modify the existing alert levels and action limits based on historical data associated with the new 
method and data signal. The new levels that are applied to the rapid method should be rationalized and 
meaningful, and a risk-based analysis or approach should be used to finalize the setpoints.
Alternatively, trending the EM values may be more appropriate than looking at individual counts, as 
this approach may be more suitable for determining when a microbiological problem is occurring. 
This may be especially apt when performing EM in well-controlled environments in which zero cell 
counts are expected (e.g., Grade A (ISO 5) areas). 
Results obtained using a rapid method may differ from traditional methods that have been used for routine 
EM. Traditional EM utilizes standard nutrient agar plates and depends on a number of factors (i.e., time, 
temperature, humidity, nutrients) in order to recover microorganisms. Many rapid methods do not require 
recovery and growth of the microorganisms to generate a quantitative result. Therefore, it may not be possible 
to draw a direct correlation between the number of CFU generated from an EM sample compared to the 
result generated by a rapid method during side-by-side equivalence testing. In this case, additional statistical 
analyses between the two data sets may be warranted. Furthermore, recovery may be numerically higher us-
ing a rapid method that does not rely on microbial growth, as organisms that would not be detected using a 
traditional, growth-based method could be detected using alternative methods. This is especially true when 
the organisms are viable, but not culturable (VBNC), physically stressed, damaged, or in a dormant state.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


27
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.6	
Identification of Isolates 
Identifying and strain-typing of microorganisms is not only important as part of the cleanroom quali-
fication or when related to EM excursions but should also form an integral part of routine surveillance 
monitoring programs. 
The identification program selected by the laboratory should be defined in writing, including the 
frequency of identification, standard procedures for the methods used, and consistency with regula-
tory expectations for identifications. Companies that rely on the services of contract laboratories for 
microbial identification should qualify them per the requirements of their own supplier qualification 
procedures and have a quality agreement in place.
The identification of microorganisms recovered within the different cleanroom environments forms an 
important element to assess its microbial state of control, allowing:
• 
Detection of any microbial changes and potential seasonal variations of the flora
• 
Definition of potential sources of the microbial isolates related to a detected contamination (e.g., as part 
of an investigation)
• 
Assessment of the level of contamination control
• 
Response upon recovery of undesirable organisms that might pose particular risks
The Grade A environment is expected to be completely free of recovery of viable organisms because 
any presence of an organism within this area is considered undesirable. Within its surrounding envi-
ronment (e.g., Grade B), an additional challenge might come from organisms that are spore forming 
(mold species, Bacillus species) and put additional stress on the Grade A/B barrier. In this context, 
water-borne Gram-negative microorganisms should be considered undesirable and of particular con-
cern since the use of nonsterile water sources is not authorized within aseptic cleanrooms. Therefore, 
presence of Gram-negative microorganisms may indicate water intrusion which would also increase 
the potential risk for mold proliferation.
In Grade C and D environments, levels of undesirable organisms should be controlled in order to limit 
any microbial stress on surrounding aseptic cleanrooms.
Table 5.6-1 illustrates an example of a scheme for the extent of identification that may be used for the 
recovered microbial isolates. The extent of identification and rationale should be documented and should 
be determined on a case-by-case basis, risk assessment, facility validation, and appropriate trend analysis.
Table 5.6-1		
Typical Scheme for Microbial Identification
Extent of Identification
Isolate and Origin
Identification to species  
(or genus where speciation is not possible)
All recoveries in Grades A & B 
Grades C & D, for alert level or action limit excursions
Periodically as part of the ongoing surveillance program
Strain typing or molecular fingerprinting
Significant product failure (e.g.)
• media fills
• sterility test
• significant adverse trends
For some types of processes and products, concern regarding specific organisms may determine the 
level of identification required.
Initially, many isolates may be identified to establish a database of the representative microorganisms 
found in the area. Periodic identifications should be performed on routine monitoring to check for any 
changes in the predominant microflora, even if no excursions have occurred in the Grades C and D ar-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


28
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
eas. A change in the microflora might signify a change in the environmental controls in the facility that 
should be investigated. Identification can be useful information as to the possible source of isolates. 
For example, Staphylococcus species are commonly found on skin, Pseudomonas species are usually as-
sociated with water sources, and Bacillus species and mold are generally connected to soil, dust, and air.
5.7	
Investigations and Corrective Actions
Investigations are needed in response to an action-limit excursion and to address an adverse trend in 
order to determine a cause-and-effect relationship or most probable cause (i.e., sources of contamina-
tion). For consistency in the response to excursions, investigative and corrective action steps should be 
specified in a written procedure (see Table 5.9-1). The procedure should define the level of investiga-
tion required if there are multiple or sequential excursions. The investigation should include a product 
impact assessment and evaluate the risk to other batches of the same or related products manufactured 
in the same time frame. Critical investigation should be closed prior to product release. 
Table 5.7-1	 	
Examples of Investigation Elements for Different Systems 
System
Investigation Elements
Compressed gas 
system
Repeat test immediately. Perform filter integrity testing.
Replace filter if excursion is confirmed on retest.
Evaluate impact on processed component and/or product.
Room air/ HVAC
Review level of personnel activity.
Review/perform airflow patterns and HEPA integrity tests.
Review aseptic technique of personnel and training records.
Review gowning procedures and requirements for area.
Review trends and any incidents of HVAC outages, if any occurred.
Inspect incoming air filters for leaks and pressure differential across filter.
Review room cleaning and disinfection and procedures. Review training records of individuals performing cleaning 
and disinfection.
Check area pressure differentials, particularly with respect to the last sanitization.
Evaluate mechanical equipment in the area as possible source of contamination.
Review prior and subsequent monitoring results. 
Review sterilization cycle records.
Facility surfaces
Perform investigation for possible sources of contamination.
Evaluate cleaning and disinfection practices; review preparation of disinfectants, cleaning records, and training 
records of individuals performing cleaning and disinfection.
Review possible unusual events during manufacturing operation.
Examine areas during operation.
Review closed-circuit video (if applicable).
Verify that environmental controls were not circumvented.
Review risk of direct or indirect product contact with impacted surfaces.
Review isolates for occurrence in other types of EM tests.
Evaluate condition of the room (e.g., peeling paint or cracks in ceiling, walls, and floor).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


29
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
System
Investigation Elements
High purity 
water system 
(WFI, clean steam, 
purified water)
Review upstream water treatment systems (e.g., carbon beds used to remove chlorine from municipal water 
systems).
Examine bioburden data for other samples or sites in system—port contamination vs. system contamination.
Examine endotoxin and water chemistry data for system.
Review efficacy of sanitization procedure and schedule.
Inspect system preventive maintenance records. Evaluate impact on product.
Verify integrity of sample collection and use procedures.
Inspect system for dead-legs, proper sloping, hose management, and sample-port design and location. Review 
data for generation and distribution system for potential trends. Determine whether system is functioning properly. 
Review data for flow rate, pressure, and vent filter integrity wherever used.
Personnel 
gowning 
(gowning and 
gloves)
Evaluate possible operator impact on product.
Review EM data and sterility test data.
Review preparation and expiry dates for disinfectants used on gloves.
Identify all morphologically unique isolates (human vs. environmental).
Interview operator for potential cause and retrain or requalify operator. Check the system for integrity of isolators 
and RABS gloves.
Evaluate training of operator. Review sanitization and disinfection records of area.
Review closed-circuit video (if available).
Review previous gowning data for the operator and other operators on the same day. 
The points listed in the table are not all-inclusive, as these recommendations are intended only to 
suggest investigative activities. Corrective actions based on process knowledge and understanding can 
be implemented when sampling and laboratory failures have been ruled out. Appropriate corrective 
actions arise holistically from evaluation of the investigation elements, leading to the root cause.
The reviewer may employ scientific judgment to postpone any corrective action until the result is con-
firmed and/or an investigation has been completed. It may also be appropriate to provide management 
with a routine summary of action-level excursions for review. All corrective actions listed include an 
evaluation of the action for effect on the product.
5.8	
Documentation
The types of records that should be maintained as part of a routine EM program include:
1.	 Date and time of sampling
2.	 Product identification
3.	 Identification of the individual performing test
4.	 Test method or procedure reference
5.	 Activity level at site during test 
6.	 Sampling equipment identification
7.	 Physical parameters like temperature, relative humidity, and differential pressurization
8.	 Sample site
9.	 Area classification
10.	 Schematics of areas showing sample site locations
11.	 Sample site criticality 
12.	 Sampling frequency
13.	 Test results with units (e.g., CFU/plate/hour)
14.	 Identification of the analyst recording results 
(Table 5.7-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


30
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
15.	 Date results read
16.	 Alert level and/or action limit
17.	 Temperature and duration of incubation
18.	 Traceability of the certification date, release date, lot number, and expiration date of media used 
19.	 Microbial Characterization of contaminants
20.	 Name of reviewer
21.	 Approval of data
22.	 Review of historical data
23.	 Calibration due date for sampling instrumentation and equipment
24.	 Methodology and analysis used to specify action and/or alert levels
25.	 System for documenting investigative and corrective action:
• 
Description of deficiency
• 
Possible causes of problem
• 
Identification of persons responsible for relevant corrective action
• 
Description of action steps and their schedule for implementation
• 
Evaluation of effectiveness of corrective and preventative action steps
6.0 
Environmental Monitoring by Manufacturing Application
The levels and types of monitoring conducted may vary based on the type of product being manufac-
tured, the attributes of the product, and the manufacturing areas and processes used.
6.1	
Terminal Sterilization
Environmental monitoring in support of terminal sterilization monitors microflora from all sources—
manufacturing environment, process gases, water used in product formulations, sterilizer feed and 
cooling water—that have the potential to contribute to product bioburden or endotoxin. This includes 
testing of air, surfaces, and water for pharmaceutical use. 
Microbial levels of incoming containers and closures may also be monitored periodically (e.g., if the 
product is not terminally sterilized using an overkill cycle). While control of the environment in which 
the products are prepared is important, the most critical aspect of the program is the bioburden of 
the product and components to be sterilized, including both the number and type of microorganisms 
found. 
6.2	
Aseptic Processing
Environmental monitoring in support of aseptic processing is specifically designed to determine the 
number and type of microorganisms associated with the direct assembly or preparation of product 
prior to sealing the filled containers. The number of sample sites and frequency of monitoring are 
considerably greater than those for established terminal sterilization programs. Air, water, personnel, 
compressed gases, machinery, and other surfaces within the filling room and associated support areas 
are routinely monitored. Microbial levels may be periodically checked on incoming containers and 
closures. Adequate environmental control is an integral part of the aseptic manufacturing process and 
is critical to sterility assurance. EM data must be reviewed prior to product batch release and investi-
gation of excursions closed. EM should also be conducted when operator interventions are required 
during aseptic processing. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.