
--- PDF Page 77 ---
Table 3.0-1 Filling Needle Design, Uses, and Limitations
Needle Type Design Attributes Uses Limitations
Open Needle Designs1
Cylindrical Straight cylindrical tube with no diameter All-purpose usage. May not be effective for highly
Needles difference from inlet to outlet. viscous products or for
Appropriate for SUS due to simplicity of
products which have low
design and low cost.
surface tension.
Cylindrical needles are employed in a
For large fill volumes a large
double needle design for gassing during
diameter needle may be
filling (see below).
desirable, however this may
result in problems with surface
tension (e.g., dripping) as a
consequence, a tapered tip or
diameter reduction may be
indicated.
Single-Use Typically, cylindrical in design (although some Intended for SU May be designed with thinner
Needles may be supplied with a diameter reduction gauge stainless steel to control
across their length). cost which might make them
more susceptible to damage but
Designed to withstand gamma or steam
more cost-effective for SU.
sterilization (with integrated tubing set).
Needles can be supplied as either stainless SU needles cannot be used for
steel or polymer. gassing during filling nor for
vacuum filling.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 63

--- PDF Page 78 ---
Needle Type Design Attributes Uses Limitations
Basket Needle is closed at the outlet and the closure Intended for product that has a Complex geometry at the tip
Needles is either perforated or slotted. tendency to drip. Slotted or perforated may complicate cleaning (more
outlet increases the surface tension by so than the cylindrical needle).
creating multiple smaller outlets over
Smaller orifices at the outlet
which the liquid must bridge. Basket
may create a tendency to foam
needles have also shown improvements
(unless the filling curve is
for some products that are subject to
adapted to manage the fill
rapid drying or crystallization.
speed appropriately).
Crimped Needle narrows at the tip reducing the outlet Intended for products with low surface Pressure drop may occur at tip
(or Reduced to the needle, thereby helping to better tension. during cleaning.
Diameter) control products with low surface tension.
Commonly prevents droplets from
Needles
forming at the tip which can improve
filling accuracy for low volume or high
accuracy fills.
A common design for SU needles as
well.
Cut or Needle is chamfered at tip allowing for a Intended to decrease needle exit May not be effective for
Fluted larger cross-sectional area for product exit. velocity, and to decrease impingement products with a tendency to
Needles velocity of product against the bottom drip, unless a liquid retraction
of the container. feature is used on the filling
(tip at 45
pump.
degrees or This needle type can be effective in
crab-claw applications where filling speed must be
design) maximized.
64 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 79 ---
Needle Type Design Attributes Uses Limitations
Slotted Needle has one or more narrow openings Like the basket needles, intended for Complex geometry may
Filling located on the slides of the needle tip. product that has a tendency to drip. complicate cleaning (more so
Needles Slotted outlet increases the surface than the cylindrical needle).
tension by creating one or more smaller
Smaller orifices may create a
openings over which the liquid must
tendency to foam (unless the
bridge.
filling curve is adapted to
manage the fill speed
appropriately).
Jacketed Needle Designs2
Jacketed Double needle designs include a cylindrical Used for oxygen sensitive products Special care has to be taken on
Needles needle surrounded by a secondary jacket for which require inert gas flushing during small diameter containers such
(also known inert gas flushing or other gas to container the filling process. as 0.5 mL syringe due to
application that encloses the filling needle. combined diameter of needle
as Gassing
In some cases, jacketed needles have
and jacket.
Needles) The outer jacket ends slightly higher than the also been found to help with products
filling needle. The filling needle is removable that crystallize on the tip of the needle. Generally, not compatible with
for cleaning or replacement. CIP/SIP applications.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 65

--- PDF Page 80 ---
Needle Type Design Attributes Uses Limitations
Closing Needle Designs3
Closing Closing needles are needles that have a Closing needles are used for highly Closing needle designs are
Needles pneumatic drive that opens and closes the viscous products. Inside closing needles complex in geometry which
opening of the needle using a central plunger. are generally for smaller volumes. makes CIP and SIP challenging.
Product flows when the needle is open and is
(Outside closing needles are generally These needle types are
cut off when the needle is pneumatically
for larger volumes and generally not for relatively rare in aseptic
closed. (When no air is applied the needle fails
aseptic use.) operations as a result.
open which enables it to be cleaned and
sterilized without the application of
pneumatic pressure.)
1Open Needle Designs see Figure 3.0-1.
2Jacketed Needle Designs see Figure 3.0-2.
3Closing Needle Designs see Figure 3.0-3.
66 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 81 ---
Figures 3.0-1, 3.0-2, and 3.0-3 depict the major needle types described in Table 3.0-1: open, jacketed, and
closing needle designs.
Figure 3.0-1 Open Needle Designs
Figure 3.0-2 Jacketed Needle Configuration
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 67

--- PDF Page 82 ---
Figure 3.0-3 Inside Closing Needle Schematic and Cutaway
68 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 83 ---
Part 2: Technical Engineering
Considerations
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 69