
--- PDF Page 115 ---
5.0 Designs for Dose Control Systems
To ensure that the delivered parenteral dose to the patient is highly accurate, the filled volume must be
controlled during the filling process. Whether filling a SU container (e.g., a prefilled syringe in an
autoinjector or a vial where all the contents are fully withdrawn for injection) or a multi-use container (e.g.,
a cartridge in a device or a multi-use vial), the amount of drug product filled into the container is of the
utmost importance. To ensure this CQA for each container, the system must be designed to accommodate
either 100% weight checks or intermittent (statistical) weight-check for IPC of dosing accuracy. Sections
5.1-5.1.4 explore the benefits and risks of both approaches, design options, and factors that influence system
stability.
Note: This section does not discuss Quality Control methods such as United States Pharmacopeia <697>
Container Contents for Injections (harmonized with European and Japanese Pharmacopeia). Such methods
are typically designed for off-line use, are destructive tests, and are not typically employed for in-process
control purposes.
5.1 Dose Control Systems Risks and Benefits
Whenever possible, 100% of container doses should be checked as an integral part of the filling process, as
long as line speed and line design permit this approach. If this is not possible, an intermittent statistical dose-
check should be done automatically on-line. Both approaches have advantages and disadvantages that will
be described in this section.
Quarantine buffers are required for all intermittent on-line weight check systems to ensure that the
automation is accurately tracking any container between the last good weight check and a failing weight
check. For filling systems that make use of nested components, part of the design approach for on-line
intermittent weight checks should be to ensure the quarantine buffer enables the identification of entire nests
between weight checks so that they can be easily segregated for further investigation or discard.
Typically, off-line IPC, which is not automated, has the disadvantage of introducing a high degree of human
error either during the weight-check procedure or the documentation of the results. Off-line weight checks
are commonly required to be destructively tested (e.g., emptying the product in the container for weighing
on an external laboratory balance), which also makes this process undesirable. Throughout the remainder of
this section all check-weigh descriptors will describe on-line techniques unless specifically identified.
A thorough risk assessment, such as that described in the International Council for Harmonisation’s Quality
Guideline Q9(R1): Quality Risk Management, PDA’s Technical Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality
Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations or PDA/ANSI
Standard 03-2025, Standard Practice for Quality Risk Management of Aseptic Processes might be
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 101

--- PDF Page 116 ---
employed to assess the risks associated with the various weight-check approaches for a specific filling
configuration (7-9). See TR 54-2 for applied examples of packaging risk assessments (10).
The benefits and risks of on-line intermittent and on-line 100% weight-check approaches are described in
Sections 5.1.1–5.1.4.
5.1.1 Benefits of Intermittent Weight Checks
The benefits of intermittent statistical weight-check approaches include:
• For RTU primary packaging material, the containers can remain within the nest, and no denesting
process is needed.
• Filling lines can run at a higher speed as samples are only taken statistically, depending on the IPC
rate.
5.1.2 Constraints of Intermittent Weight Checks
The risks of an intermittent (statistical) weight-check approach include:
• Potential missing detection of underfills between the IPC sampling points
• Quarantine handling between the IPC sampling points (e.g., with a 10-fill station RTU filling line
running IPC at a 1% rate with 100 containers per nest, 1 row of 10 syringes in each of 10 nests will
be weighed; in this case, 10 nests must be held in a quarantine buffer awaiting results of subsequent
check-weigh results)
• Filling control strategy must take bias between the measurements tare and gross into account,
whether two scales or a single scale are used, potentially resulting in a smaller filling range to
compensate (see Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 for additional details on dose control).
5.1.3 Benefits of 100% Weight Checks
Typically, 100% IPC weight checks are accomplished using a tare scale (which weighs the empty container
prior to filling) and a gross scale (which weighs the container after filling). Tare and gross scales are
provided for each filling station so that each dosing path is verified for weight. (Configurations with a single
scale per dosing path are also available for low-throughput applications, where the single scale is used for
both tare and gross.) The benefits of 100% weight checks include:
• Possibility to dose-in, re-dose, and dose-out for maximizing product yield:
̶ Dose-in means the filling set is primed, where air is expelled into the container until a
constant flow of product is achieved, on the gross scales until the correct filling volume is
achieved. After priming is accomplished for the initial setup of the filler, this dose-in
process will generally not need to be repeated, unless there is downtime where prime is
lost. Normal filling operations will follow the dose-in (priming) step.
̶ Re-dosing means that there is the ability to add small increments of product to an individual
container if the net weight is lower than the target to bring the container to volume before
acceptance. When re-dosing is performed, it should be performed (or simulated) as a
standard part of the APS, as the extended filling time has the potential to increase risk. Re-
dosing is generally not practical for very small fill volumes.
̶ Dose-out means the line will be run until the filling path to each needle is completely empty
on the gross scales; underfilled containers will be rejected, but any containers that achieve
target weight before reaching empty may be retained. For high-value products, the increase
102 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 117 ---
in time to execute the dose-out is compensated with the savings achieved by minimizing
scrap. The dose-out process will typically start when the intermediate vessel is below the
lower replenishment level and there is no further product to be supplied. For specialty
products, like suspensions, dose-out may not be advisable as mixing may no longer be
sufficient.
• Constant final dosing is possible where two-step filling is performed; the first filling step fills more
than 80-95% of the volume, with a second dose provided by the filler to provide a fine-tuned
quantity of product. This conserves product by not requiring an excess fill, while providing a highly
precise final volume within the container. The two-step filling approach is especially valuable for
rare or expensive products, or for products where the dose must be very precise due to clinical
effect.
• Data is available for each container, and each container can be rejected directly after the net-
weighing; as a consequence, there is no quarantine handling.
• Detection of low or high doses due to undetected special-cause variation is possible at the filling
process (e.g., an air bubble in the filling hose).
• Constant feedback will be provided to the filling system, which may be beneficial to systems such
as PP for correcting drift (see Section 2.0).
• A 100% check-weigh enables the filling target to be closer to the lower limit, maximizing product
yield.
Historically, mass flowmeters were used for some continuous motion, high-speed machines as a 100% IPC
for dosing management; however, the mass flowmeters were poor options for low-volume fills, which
resulted in the need for overfilling. Mass flowmeters are capable of withstanding CIP and SIP; however, it is
difficult to verify their cleanliness and sterility, so the validation can be challenging. As a result, the
gravimetric approach is by far the more common approach.
5.1.4 Constraints of 100% Weight Checks
The risks of 100% weight checks include:
• Limited filling speed
• Denesting is typically required for RTU containers that are provided in nests
• Filling control strategy must take bias into account between the two measurements, tare and gross,
whether a single scale or two scales are used, potentially resulting in a smaller filling range in order
to compensate (see Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 for additional details on dose control).
• Depending upon system design, 100% weight checks can result in additional handling and/or
exposure time prior to stoppering
Finally, concerning risks for both intermittent and 100% IPC, weight-check systems are much more robust
than earlier generations of equipment, and therefore are much less likely to be damaged should mishandling
of containers on the line occur. Nevertheless, care should be taken to ensure that the container transport and
movement is aligned. To facilitate aligning these elements, ergonomic devices such as locating pins can be
used. Confirming alignment during setup avoids incurring costly replacement or repairs or product-reject
losses.
5.2 Dose Control System Design Options
For some filling lines with singularized containers, especially in filling rooms with limited size and required
high throughput, a 100% check-weigh is not possible. In this case, a statistical dose-control model must be
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 103

--- PDF Page 118 ---
used. Statistical dose-control is also used on a majority of nested filling lines. In statistical check weighing,
every container fill-weight is not known, and extra protection must be incorporated to protect for the filling
variability for containers not checked for dose. Typically, this results in target-fills set farther away from the
lower fill-reject limit, and filling reject-limits set farther away from the maximum and minimum filling
limits. Practically, this results in a smaller operating window for products with both upper and lower filling
limits and in more overfill for products with only a lower filling limit.
The greatest disadvantage of statistical dose-control is the handling of rejects. Should a dose-check for a
filling pump or needle exceed the reject limits, all filled containers from the last good dose-check to the
current failing dose-check must be discarded for that pump position. In a nested line, it is relatively simple
to segregate underfilled containers based on position in the nest (which correlates to the filling needle);
nevertheless, a quarantine system must be in place to ensure that the “faulty” containers can be rejected,
whether the nests are fully held on the line or have exited the line. For a line that handles individual
containers, such as a vial line, segregation is more difficult depending on container-handling and shift-
register control, and it is often simpler to discard all units filled for all pump positions back to the last good
dose, resulting in more rejects.
Figure 5.2-1 provides an example of statistical dose-control in a nested filling-machine, where one row out
of every six nests is tare-weighed, filled, and then gross-weighed. Figure 5.2-1 shows the removal of the
syringes from the nest, the filling of the units, and the dose numbering-system needed to associate the units
in each tub to the last good dose-check. This association is critical for handling rejects.
Figure 5.2-1 Statistical In-Process Control for Nested Containers – All Doses Within Limits
104 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 119 ---
Figure 5.2-2 depicts the same nested filling process but, this time, a dose-check fails either high or low
reject-limits. In this case, the filler will reenter a dose “in process” to center and control the dose for each
pump, and all containers back to the last passing IPC check will be discarded (either per pump position or
for all, depending on the reject control strategy).
Figure 5.2-2 Statistical In-Process Control for Nested Containers – Dose Outside of Limits
There are two main methods to control the dose in parenteral containers—gravimetric and volumetric fill—
to a physical stopping point (e.g., laser-fill endpoint detection on a cartridge).
5.2.1 Method 1: Gravimetric Dose Control Process
The basics of gravimetric dose control are simple and well understood. An empty container is weighed on a
load-cell to obtain tare weight; the container is filled, and then the filled container is weighed again on a
load-cell to find gross weight. The net weight is calculated from those numbers.
The tare and gross load-cells can be the same, as is the case in many nested filling lines. However, on many
bulk or singularized filling lines, two separate load-cells are used to measure tare and gross weight.
5.2.1.1 Gravimetric Dose Control Considerations
To ensure the dose delivered to the patient is correct, several sources of uncertainty need to be considered.
These sources of uncertainty, when applied to the label claim and maximum- and minimum-fill weights, can
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 105

--- PDF Page 120 ---
be used to calculate the filling-machine’s adjust and reject limits. However, some parenteral products do not
have maximum-filling weight limits (e.g., a multi-use cartridge or a vial in which the patient uses a syringe
to determine the dose delivered).
Below are the sources of uncertainty that must be taken into consideration when applying a gravimetric
dose-control strategy:
1. Container Holdup – Container holdup is the undelivered volume that cannot be dosed to the
patient due to such features as container geometry, device limitations, or plunger compliance.
Container holdup can be empirically determined with a Gage Repeatability and Reproducibility
Study or using the relevant U.S. Pharmacopeia estimates. Because the label claim is the mandatory
lowest volume (or weight) that can be delivered to the patient, protections must be built into the
dose-control strategy to account for container holdup.
2. Scale Bias – In filling machines with separate tare and gross scales, the bias between the two scales
must be considered to protect the maximum and minimum fill-weight. In filling machines with only
one scale for both tare and gross weights, an analogous calculation for the two measurements that
are taken on the single scale is applicable. To ensure no units exceed the minimum or maximum
fill-weight, the upper and lower filling-machine reject limits should be protected against scale (or
measurement) bias by including guard-banding from the minimum and maximum fill-weight limits.
A guard-band is an adjustment or offset to the pass/fail process limits that include known
uncertainties (such as the potential bias between the two measurements).
3. Scale Measurement Uncertainty (sMU) – Measurement uncertainty of the scale must be known in
the range of the weights being considered. To ensure that no units exceed the minimum or
maximum fill-weight, the upper and lower filling-machine reject limits should be protected against
sMU by guard-banding in from the limits by a correction factor of k , shown in Figure 5.2.1-1. The
1
scale calibration should be checked periodically to ensure its uncertainty does not exceed the value
used for the dose limit. Checking the scale calibration before and at the end of the batch, at a
minimum, is also recommended. It is also common for machines equipped with IPC to periodically
tare (i.e., zero) the weighing cells at defined intervals, especially for long fills. If this feature is not
included, then the scale-calibration checks should be executed more frequently.
4. Filling Standard Deviation (sFill) – The standard deviation of the fill process must be empirically
determined for the dose and the container being filled. The filling standard deviation, when
multiplied by correction factors k and k , is used to set the target of the dose a distance away from
2 3
the upper and lower reject limits. In Figure 5.2.1-1, the target is centered between the upper and
lower reject limits, when the target most often is closer to the lower reject limit to minimize
overfills. The filling standard deviation is also multiplied by correction factor k to set the adjust
4
limits for the filler. This adjustment is discussed further in Figure 5.2.1-1.
106 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 121 ---
Figure 5.2.1-1 Gravimetric Dose-Control Range Determination Depicting K Factors and Standard Deviation
Key for Figure 5.2.1-1:
• k = Controls the risk that a container determined to have an acceptable weight is actually within the minimum- and maximum-fill weight
1
requirements. Recommended that k is set to have a high statistical confidence of containers meeting the weight requirements.
1
• k = Controls the number of containers that will fail the lower reject limit by controlling how close the average fill weight can be to the lower
2
reject limit. The larger k is, the lower the risk of rejecting containers; also, a larger k raises the target and allows more product to be put into
2 2
each container, which increases the cost. Rejection risk vs. overfill must be balanced to choose the appropriate k.
• k = Calculated value of the number of filler standard deviations between the target and the upper reject limit, it determines the number of
3
containers that will fail the upper reject limit by determining how close the average fill weight is to the upper reject limit. The larger k is, the
3
lower the risk of rejecting containers. If the difference between the maximum and minimum fill-weights is large compared to filler variability,
then the target can be closer to the minimum fill weight requirement to minimize overfill. In this case, k will be larger than k ; otherwise, k
3 2 3
will be equal to k .
2
• k = Controls the average container weight so it is near the target. The smaller k is, the more adjustment will occur to keep the filler on
4 4
target; if adjustments are manual, it could slow down the line. If k is too large, the filler could drift significantly far from the target before an
4
adjustment occurs.
• σ = Scale measurement uncertainty (standard deviation). (See k above.)
MU 1
• bias = Measurement bias between tare and gross. (See k above.)
1
• σ = Filling standard deviation. (See k , k , and k above.)
Fill 2 3 4
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 107

--- PDF Page 122 ---
5.2.2 Method 2: Volumetric Filling Process
In a volumetric filling process, the volume of product filled into the container is not controlled
gravimetrically by scales, but instead relies on container geometry, plunger position (for cartridges), and
residual air-bubble (air gap) size to determine sufficient filling. In the cartridge-filling example below
(Figure 5.2.2-1), a laser and sensor are used to detect the filling endpoint. As filling occurs, the laser light is
deflected by the empty neck of the cartridge and does not reach the sensor. As the container is filled and the
neck fills with product, the laser light is transmitted through the neck of the container, signaling the control
system to stop dosing.
Figure 5.2.2-1 Volumetric Dosing Triggered by Laser Sensor
5.2.2.1 Volumetric Filling Dose-Control Considerations
For a volumetric filling process to deliver repeatable doses to the containers, the container geometry must be
well understood. This includes both the length and the ID of the container and, for cartridges, the precise
placement and installed height of the plunger. In addition, the setup of the laser and sensor must be precise,
as must be the presentation height of the container to the laser. In practice, each laser-sensor fill station will
have an individual adjustment for delay, allowing milliseconds of additional fill after the sensor detects the
laser. Operators on the line must be well trained to fill the container with an appropriate residual air bubble,
guaranteeing an adequate dose is in the container. Volumetric filling is most appropriate for containers that
do not have maximum-fill weight limits (e.g., a multi-use cartridge or a vial in which the patient uses a
syringe to determine the dose delivered).
5.2.2.2 Adjustment of Dosing
Stability differs across the various filling–pumping systems (see Section 2.0). Consequently, there are also
differences in philosophy on whether filling machines should automatically correct doses based on feedback
from the filler. For stable systems, such as RPPs or rolling DPs for liquid filling, the doses delivered at the
end of the batch will show no drift relative to the doses delivered at the beginning of the batch. For this
reason, many stable fillers will require manual adjustment of the dose to prevent autocorrecting of the dose
based on common-cause variability, thereby preventing overcorrection and the potential oscillation of filling
weights.
For PP filling, stress on the pump tubing can cause a reduction of dose given the same number of rotations
from the beginning of the batch to the end of the batch. To compensate for this reduction in pumping
108 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 123 ---
efficiency, many fillers use automatic dose-correction to compensate. The algorithm used in that automatic
dose-correction can be simple or sophisticated depending on the filling-machine supplier. Most are
designed, however, to not overcorrect for small changes and use a time-averaged dose to make corrections
more stable.
For TP filling, automatic dose-correction is standard, due to the need to perform constant calculations to
adjust pinch-valve timing owing to the everchanging intermediate vessel or manifold pressures as they
empty and fill.
5.3 External and Internal Influences on Dose Control Systems
On filling machines, the weighing cells are constantly being confronted with external and environmental
factors that will ultimately negatively influence the ability of the weighing cells to provide accurate
readings. This drives many manufacturers to cross-check the IPC readings during production using
destructive methods (i.e., sampling). Therefore, in the design phase, it is crucial to ensure that good design is
implemented, and risk-based methodology is used to define the steps of weighing and check-weighing.
Typically, these factors can be categorized into three groups: (1) Statistical weighing sources of variability,
(2) Constant weighing sources of variability, and (3) Machine- and product-related sources of variability.
1. Statistical weighing sources of variability
̶ Unidirectional airflow above weighing cells in the Grade A environment
̶ Release mechanism, design, and speed thereof to ensure the objects being weighed set on
the weighing cells are freestanding
̶ “Time-settling” (the longer the time allocated for weighing, the more reliable the readings
will be)
̶ Vibrations of the building where the line is placed
̶ Machine vibrations (e.g., vibratory sorting systems) can be reduced if the weighing scales
are decoupled from the machine baseplate, which reduces the influence of vibrations on the
accuracy of the weighing cells; alternatively, a vibration compensation system can be used
(e.g., physical compensation or software compensation)
̶ Static charges on objects (e.g., vials coming out of the dry heat depyrogenation tunnel) can
also affect the weighing performance of the cells
2. Constant weighing sources of variability
̶ Unidirectional airflow offset
̶ Vibrations, if constant
̶ Load-cell offset (from the manufacturer)
3. Machine- and product-related sources of variability
̶ Filling-line setup, nest vs. bulk, multiple filling steps
̶ Filling time allocated to filling individual containers
̶ Filling volume (smaller volumes are more difficult to weigh with the same accuracy as
higher volumes)
̶ Product characteristics (e.g., foamy products)
̶ Built-in taring
̶ In-process calibration
̶ Automated vs. manual setup and in-process calibration
̶ Weighing cell “filters” to identify and cancel out vibrations
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 109

--- PDF Page 124 ---
5.3.1 In-Process Control Production Limits and Weighing Accuracy
Weighing cells during production, if not equipped with a defined recipe and programmable correction-
factor(s) as explained in Figure 5.3.1-1, will deviate from the actual weight of the container (empty and
filled or tare and gross). Therefore, it is not practical to use IPC values as parameters to depict the actual
filling weight in a filled container.
The approach to compensate for weigh-scale measurement uncertainty compared to the actual weight of the
empty and filled containers will vary slightly from end user to end user but, in principle, defining the IPC
parameters will typically require an overall understanding of the deviations caused by the external factors.
Some points to consider include:
• Weighing accuracy always refers to the net weight; there is no separate accuracy considered for
tare-weighing and gross-weighing
• Weighing accuracy of the net weight consists of the sum of the two deviations (see Figure 5.3.1-1):
̶ Statistical weighing error (σ): Normally distributed scatter of the weighing process
(multiple weighings of an identical weight on the same scale)
̶ Constant weighing error: Constant offset of the net value due to the difference between
the target weight and the achieved mean value of the test quantity per digit
Figure 5.3.1-1 In-Process Control Production Limit
A good way to analyze the influence from external factors is to check the actual readings of several fill
weights against their readings of the IPC cell. Assuming only one IPC cell is being checked against one
laboratory balance, using standard-deviation(s) methods, a bell curve can be plotted that would look
something like Figure 5.3.1-2. Because a laboratory balance is not affected by typical external factors on a
filling line such as unidirectional air flow, it will be more accurate, and the bell curve would be narrower.
110 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 125 ---
Figure 5.3.1-2 Actual Weight Versus In-Process Control Balance Reading
Now, if constant offset deviations of the weigh cells to the left and the right of the IPC bell curve are added,
a wider and flatter bell curve will result, as seen in Figure 5.3.1-3.
Figure 5.3.1-3 Actual Weight Versus In-Process Control Balance Reading including Weighing
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 111

--- PDF Page 126 ---
Scale Offset
If one of the weights in this example is taken, and the reading of the laboratory balance and the reading of
the weight of the IPC cell are compared, two different readings would result that may be significantly
different from each other (see Figure 5.3.1-4).
Figure 5.3.1-4 Significant Delta Between Actual Weight and In-Process Control Balance
Reading
If the end user decides to define production limits according to lab-scale results, with the actual weight of
1.001 g, the fill weight would be acceptable since it lies in the bell curve of actual accepted weights. If,
however, the end user interprets the weighing-cell reading of 1.005 g to be out-of-specification, then they
would define this unit as a reject, although in reality, it fulfills the specifications.
A good approach would be to define the IPC limits (accepted minimum and maximum limits) according to
the widest IPC bell curve (which will mean that the “true” weight of the filled container is assured to be
within limits). This would represent an actual distribution if weighed on a laboratory balance of the narrow
bell curve shown in Figure 5.3.1-1.
5.3.2 In-Process Control Production Limits in Relation to Process Capability Index
Some manufacturers will define the robustness of their design in terms of the system’s capability. This is an
outcome based on upper- and lower-specification limits and the dosing accuracy of the pumps built into the
filling machine. Equation 5.3.2-1 describes the inversely proportional relation of the capability index to
relative standard deviation (σ).
112 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 127 ---
Equation 5.3.2-1:
𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑥𝑥̅ −𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿,𝑈𝑈𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿−𝑥𝑥̅)
𝐶𝐶𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 =
3𝜎𝜎
C checked with a test where:
pK
= measured average by the test
σ𝑥𝑥 ̅ = standard deviation calculated by the test
Given limits:
LSL = Lower specification limit
USL = Upper specification limit
A process capability index (C ) value between 1 and 1.33 is typically accepted as the industry standard
pk
(although the exact capability of any system will be dependent upon its design). A C value of 1 to 1.33
pk
translates to a calculation of ± 3 - 4σ on the bell curve. The higher the accuracy (higher σ) that an OEM can
give, the tighter the upper and lower limit specifications that can be defined. Because this is a statistical
calculation, it deals with how many rejects are allowed per number of filled containers due to bad fills. For
example, in the case of C = 1.33, the stable process would be expected to deliver no more than 66 fills,
pk
which are outside of the dose weight limits in every one-million filled units (see Table 5.3.2-1).
Table 5.3.2-1 Process Capability, Parts Per Million Units Outside of the Limits, and Relative
Standard Deviation for Every One-Million Units Filled in a Stable Process
Process Parts Process Parts
Capability Per Sigma Capability Per Sigma
Index Million (σ) Index Million (σ)
(C ) (ppm) (C ) (ppm)
pK pK
0.50 133614 - 1.33 66 4σ
0.67 44431 - 1.40 26 -
0.75 24448 - 1.50 6 -
0.90 6933 - 1.60 1 -
1.00 2699 3σ 1.67 0 5σ
1.30 96 - 2.00 0 6σ
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 113

--- PDF Page 128 ---
6.0 Special Considerations for Advanced Container–Closure
Design and Implementation
Container–closure design is an area of intense research and development within the pharmaceutical and
biopharmaceutical industries. As stated in Section 1.2, container–closure materials of construction and
design will influence the design of the aseptic filling line and will also affect the selection of the closing
system (see Section 7.3). When considering the use of a novel container and/or closure, it is essential to
involve potential component suppliers as early as practicable with the design and selection of the equipment
to ensure suitability and compatibility.
6.1 Container–Closure Design
Some recent examples of advanced container–closure systems in development and in the market include:
• Multi-chamber vials
• Multi-chamber syringes
• Multi-barrel, single-plunger syringes
• Multi-chamber cartridges
• Autodisable (nonreusable) polymer-pouch intramuscular (IM) delivery system
• Nested micro-vials
• Multi-container-type association (e.g., vial connected to infusion bags)
• Crush-proof vials
• Silicone-free syringes
• Needle-through-septum filling of presterilized, fully closed vials
• Press-fit vial closures
The design objectives of the more advanced containers and closures can be varied, but often include:
• Enhanced shelf life
• Improved ruggedness in handling, transportation, storage (e.g., extreme low-temperature storage),
and use
• Enhanced SA at the point of filling or point of administration
• Simplification and improvement of accuracy of patient administration
• Reconstitution close to the time when the injection is to be administered
• Reduction of waste in the extractable volume
• Prevention of reuse or diversion of syringes
• Reduction of components and reduction of waste during manufacturing and/or administration
• Elimination of specific quality-attribute failures (e.g., silicone-induced protein agglomeration)
• Simplification and improved quality of closing operations (e.g., elimination of vibratory feed
systems, reduced risk of particle generation, reduction in closing steps, reduction in non-product
contact parts, all closing operations completed under Grade A immediately after fill)
114 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.