
--- PDF Page 101 (doc p87) ---
Different products will have different filling curves depending on the characteristics of the products (e.g.,
viscosity, flowability, foaming, dripping). During development, an iterative approach is used to optimize the
filling curve of each specific product. The filling curve consists of the synchronized control of fluid velocity
and needle movement throughout four stages: start of filling, ramping up to filling speed, filling at speed,
and ramping down until the end of fill where filling is stopped. The needle movement is an integral part of
each of these filling stages, where the needle cycles through a synchronized sequence of needle dive in
movement, needle movement above filling level until the fill is ended, and retraction of the filling needle
from the neck of the container once filling is complete.
For a RPP, the filling curve is fulfilled by the speed at which the piston pushes the product out of the cavity.
The rotation of the piston into the position where it will pull product out of the suction side can be
programmed to be as fast as possible. Diaphragm pumps can adjust the stroke of the foot against the
diaphragm, thereby adjusting the speed of fill. The filling curve of a PP is executed by the speed of rotation
of the rollers (the “shoe”), while a TP filling curve is executed by speed and distance of opening the pinch
valve, duration of remaining in the open position, and closing of the valve; the pressure remains constant
during the filling cycle. Of the four technologies discussed in Section 2.0 of this document, the TP filler has
the fewest options to dramatically vary the fill curve. This means that the PP, RPP, and DP are better at
modifying the fill curve when required to adapt to product attributes.
4.4 Functionality Affecting Foam
The tendency to foam is a product attribute and, therefore, may be somewhat unavoidable; however, there
are handling considerations for products with a propensity to foam that can help to control foam formation.
In particular, foam prevention is important at all steps of the process where the drug product is moved from
one location to another, especially at product transfer and filling.
Products with a tendency to foam should never be allowed to drop a long distance in a transfer, for example,
into a vessel from a top outlet, since the impact of the product on the bottom of the vessel or on the surface
of the existing liquid within the vessel will cause agitation of the air–product interface and can cause
foaming. A dip tube (sometimes called a J-tube) should be used to move the product inlet into the vessel to
the lowest possible location, or the product can be filled from the bottom tangent of the vessel or from
below. Every subsequent refill step must be a sub-surface addition, requiring that the vessel level is
known/monitored. In addition, placing the vessel higher than the filling pumps will help to prevent entrained
air, especially at the end of the aseptic fill unit operation. If agitation is required for the product, the agitation
speed should be targeted just above the minimum validated agitation condition to avoid the entrainment of
air.
Having the right size and correct geometry of the fluid pathway and filling needle is also important to avoid
or minimize foaming (due to overpressure) and splashing. Careful priming of the filling or transfer tubing
must be made to ensure that no air is left in the lines, since bubbles in the filling lines can cause foaming and
affect dosing accuracy. A 100% IPC weight check would be beneficial to detect air bubbles in the system
and to initiate countermeasures such as priming.
Foaming is also directly related to the filling curve, with an emphasis on the start and end of container
phases as the points at the highest risk. Slowing the fill rate at these stages reduces agitation of the solution.
Diving needles are a common adaptation for fillers to reduce splashing and foaming. The diving needle
plunges to the bottom of the container just before the filling is started and is withdrawn in coordination with
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 87

--- PDF Page 102 (doc p88) ---
the rise of the fluid level within the container. This needle movement reduces the distance from the outlet of
the needle to the bottom of the container or to the surface of the liquid within the container, thereby reducing
foaming.
4.5 Functionality Affecting Drip Control
Product characteristics (e.g., rheology, elasticity, surface tension, viscosity) may result in a tendency for the
product to drip during filling. For example, when surface tension is too low, there is little to inhibit a droplet
from breaking free at the end of the needle. For highly viscous products, a “string” or “thread” may occur
after completion of the filling cycle when there is incomplete separation of the filled quantity from the
quantity remaining in the filling needle.
There are several design attributes that can exacerbate or prevent dripping, including but not exhaustively:
• Needle geometry (ID, length)
• Needle-diving movement and/or dynamic filling (e.g., fill curve parameters for retraction speed,
retraction amount, adjustments to pump deceleration, distance between meniscus and needle tip at
the end of filling)
• Hose design (diameter, material, hardness, length)
• Hose position
• Fluid pathway sizing
• Long interruptions in the filling process
Larger filling needles may reduce the surface tension at the opening, resulting in a drip. Adapting the needle
ID and length to better match the viscosity, surface tension, and gravitational forces on the product can
prevent dripping.
Needle-diving movement in the container (see Section 4.4) as well as needle-follow-along movement (also
known as dynamic filling) can result in dripping from the motion of the needle during the filling cycle. In
dynamic filling applications, the needle will dive down into the container, begin filling, and rise back up
after filling while moving along with the container as the containers are transported through the machine.
For these walking-beam transport machines, oscillation from the lateral follow-along needle-holder
movement may result in dripping if the tubing is not of sufficient stiffness. Dripping can happen during
dive-out or as the filling needles move back to fill the next containers in line.
Hose design can result in dripping due to various factors such as reduction in surface tension (diameter),
poor fit and compression against the filling pump (material, hardness), excessively long arching of the
tubing which can result in gravitational drips (length), and/or loss of liquid-retraction (i.e., suck-back)
control. Liquid retraction is the process whereby the product is minutely withdrawn back into the filling
needle (usually by a small stroke in the opposite direction of fill) to create a concave, rather than convex,
surface in the fluid at the end of the needle, thereby assisting surface tension to retain the final drop of fluid
at the end of the needle. Active liquid-retraction control by reverse stroke is not possible with TP filling;
however, rapid closure of the pinch valve can disrupt the flow sufficiently to create an analogous effect at
the point of fill.
As a consequence, TP systems may not be the most suitable for products that have dripping characteristics,
because retracting product at the point of filling is not easy to achieve. For such systems, the needles may be
a closeable type, meaning they are mechanically closed after filling has been executed (see Section 3.0 for a
88 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 103 (doc p89) ---
description and diagram), though such needles may be challenging to implement in an aseptic operation due
to their mechanical complexity and the ability to demonstrate cleanliness and sterility.
RPPs, on the other hand, can be programmed to have the servo drive retract the piston upwards or push it
downwards (depending on whether the filling stroke is executed from the bottom up or top down) slightly
after filling. DPs can be operated similarly to coordinate the stroke of the bottom foot (piston) and the
timing of the pinch valves. That will result in slightly pulling product up the needle and thus avoid dripping.
PPs can also be programmed to turn slightly in the opposite direction (opposite to the filling direction) after
filling, which will result in pulling product up the needle (liquid retraction) and thereby avoid dripping
outside of the filling needle. Most of the PP systems available on the market today are servo-driven, so it is
relatively straightforward to handle the challenge of dripping.
When the hose is positioned below the intermediate vessel relative to the point of fill, dripping can result
due to additional head pressure on the point of fill. This could lead to “bleeding” at the opening of the pump.
PPs will also “leak” at some point if the pre-pump pressure breaks the threshold point. Having the hose
positioned above the point of fill provides some benefit in reducing the opportunity for entraining air and
causing foaming; therefore, the tendency to foam and the tendency to drip must be balanced relative to their
competing needs for placement of the bulk vessel and hose.
All components along the fluid pathway must be appropriately sized to work together properly to prevent
dripping. For example, when the pumps are too large, there are limitations on how small the tubing and
filling needles can be. The selection of an oversized pump may result in residual volume that is not
dispensed and may drip.
Long downtimes of the filling machine can also result in dripping as gravitational forces continue to be
applied and pressure may build up in lines.
In summary, dripping can often result when companies try to economize by trying to combine different
products and dosing volumes with “one-size fits all” setups for filling. It is important to ensure that the
characteristics of each product and its intended filling-system design are evaluated for suitability.
4.6 Functionality for Maintaining Homogeneity
Maintaining homogeneity in products that tend to sediment (e.g., emulsions, suspensions, ATMPs, cell
therapy products) may be achieved by keeping the product in constant movement. Typical technologies to
achieve this include stirring and/or recirculation loops (see Figures 4.6.1-1-4.6.1-5). To prevent the
possibility of sedimentation or inhomogeneity, these mechanical systems must be integrated with the filling
mechanism to either ensure constant circulation or to circulate when stopping time approaches the validated
hold time of the product.
Stops of the filling system may arise due to, but not limited to, the following reasons:
• Inherent machine stops (e.g., settle-plate handling after four hours)
• Corrective machine stoppage (e.g., broken glass, stuck stopper)
• Interruption in the infeed of components (e.g., nests, stoppers, caps, containers coming out of a
depyrogenation tunnel)
• Environmental monitoring (EM)-related stops (e.g., rise in particulate count)
• Employee-related stops (e.g., breaks, shift change, gaps in shift coverage)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 89

--- PDF Page 104 (doc p90) ---
Keeping the product in motion can be performed by implementing mixers in the product vessels or by
designing recirculation loops to bring the product back into the bulk product-vessel or back into the
intermediate buffer-vessel or a combination of both. Recirculation may be superior to mixing when it is
necessary to control sedimentation in the connections (e.g., hosing, pipes) between the vessels and the rest
of the dosing path. If these connections are long, sedimentation may occur with mixing alone. Recirculation
will keep the product in motion in both the bulk vessel and the intermediate vessel, as well as in each
portion of the fluid pathway. The major factors to be considered in design are the size of the product vessel
and the length of the connections between the product vessel and the equipment at the filler. For some
applications, due to the size of the vessels or the nature of the product, it may be necessary to include a
mixer in the bulk product-vessel and/or intermediate product-vessel in addition to recirculating.
When considering approaches for preventing sedimentation, a number of design factors should be
considered. These factors include product attributes, equipment selection, instrumentation selection, and
equipment design and operation approach, as well as Quality Assurance controls such as:
• Product/process quality considerations:
̶ Product sedimentation time and risk factors for the product
̶ Shear-force sensitivity of the product, which may limit some recirculation options, or limit
the desirable duration of recirculation
• Major equipment decisions:
̶ Is the system a strictly mixer-based system or a strictly recirculation-based system or a
hybrid?
̶ When recirculating, will an inner loop, outer loop, or a double loop be executed?
̶ Is it sufficient to use one pump in combination with a three-way valve that will either
recirculate or feed the product, or should a second pump be implemented for recirculation
and run constantly, irrelevant of whether or not the product infeed is active?
• Instrumentation to be considered to confirm parameters:
̶ Homogeneity
̶ Flow rates
• System design factors and operational parameters as to whether the design is sufficient to
avoid sedimentation:
̶ Cross section of pipes, hoses, and manifolds to ensure turbulence of flow is guaranteed
̶ Position of the product vessel in relation to the filling machine does not promote
sedimentation (longer fluid paths means a greater volume encountering potential
sedimentation)
̶ Approach should be determined to either employ constant recirculation (even during
filling) or recirculation only after a predefined stop time
̶ Lowest volume that can be mixed or recirculated effectively should be established, based
on the configuration of the vessels and length of the fluid pathway, and it should be
confirmed that the volume is an acceptable loss volume.
Note: Systems that combine agitation and recirculation may be able to ensure homogeneity
below the minimum agitable volume. Studies should be performed to validate the
effectiveness of any approach identified for agitation, recirculation, or a combination of the
two.
90 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 105 (doc p91) ---
• Quality assurance considerations to ensure homogeneity:
̶ Is instrumentation available (e.g., PAT) to confirm homogeneity of suspensions, and is it
appropriately sensitive to determine diversion of flow to waste when inhomogeneity is
detected?
̶ What action is needed after the filler restarts (e.g., discard of predefined volume or number
of containers, predefined period of recirculation before resumption of fill, or proceeding to
fill without any action)?
̶ How will it be ensured that the filling is stopped when the batch reaches the minimum
effective volume for either mixing or recirculation?
4.6.1 Design Options for Maintaining Homogeneity
Figures 4.6.1-1–4.6.1-5 represent just a few examples of common recirculation strategies, although the
possibilities for system design are nearly limitless.
Figure 4.6.1-1 depicts the use of mixing without recirculation. In these cases, there is a mixer present in
each vessel and no recirculation loops. This would be an effective approach for true solutions and for any
product that is unlikely to settle with brief periods of low or no flow. The distance between the product
vessel and the intermediate product-vessel should be considered to ensure that potential sedimentation is
avoided, or that it is accounted for once the filler proceeds to pull product out of the intermediate product-
vessel. The flow rate should always be defined specific to each product to ensure good functionality. When
using mixers, studies should be carried out to determine the speed of the mixer relative to the volume within
the container and to define at what level the mixer is no longer ensuring there is no sedimentation. If the
level of product in the vessel is below the mixer, mixing may become ineffective, and often the remaining
product must be discarded.
Figure 4.6.1-1 Mixing Without Recirculation
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 91

--- PDF Page 106 (doc p92) ---
Figure 4.6.1-2 depicts an example similar to Figure 4.6.1-1, except that instead mixing in the intermediate
product-vessel, a constant recirculation approach has been selected. In this example, the product infeed
pump is constantly running irrelevant of whether or not the filling pumps are dosing due to a machine
stoppage. The recirculation pump in the “inner loop” is also constantly running. The revolutions per minute
(rpm) of the recirculation pump is defined by the amount of product it needs to keep in motion. That amount
is either the product being supplied by the product infeed pump, in case the machine has stopped, or the
product being fed in, less the product being dosed if the machine is running. Here, additional elements, such
as a flowmeter that ensures the flow rate is being maintained to avoid sedimentation and a PAT system for
homogeneity, could also be integrated in the system. In this scenario, when the level in the product vessel
falls below the agitator, this might not lead to complete disposal, if the residual product can be
accommodated in the intermediate vessel and if the recirculation loop can be demonstrated to maintain
homogeneity of the final product volume.
Figure 4.6.1-2 Mixing with Constant Recirculation at the Filling Manifold
Figure 4.6.1-3 depicts a recirculation-only system without mixing. This may be a good solution for systems
where the product vessel is moderately sized and where the vessel is relatively close to the filler. The
product-infeed pump and pipes/tubes are designed to allow for larger volumes than would be needed for a
system that was only feeding the filler. The product-infeed pump should be large enough to support two
functions:
1. replenish the intermediate product-vessel which, in turn, feeds the dosing pumps
2. provide excess flow to keep the product moving through the intermediate buffer-vessel, through the
manifold, and back to the product vessel via the product recirculation pump
92 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 107 (doc p93) ---
Both pumps are constantly running, regardless of whether or not the filler is running); therefore, the amount
of product and the flow rate should be selected to ensure no sedimentation takes place. The rpm of the
recirculation pump increases and decreases depending on whether the product is being displaced for dosing.
A flowmeter can be used to ensure that critical recirculation parameters are continuously met to ensure
homogeneity.
Figure 4.6.1-3 External Loop Recirculation Without Mixing
Figure 4.6.1-4 depicts a scenario where an end user has decided to move away from implementing mixers.
In this example, two recirculation loops are designed, each with their own recirculation pumps. In order to
keep the product in the entire system in motion, the product-infeed pump should be able to do the following:
• Replenish the intermediate product-vessel
• Provide an excess to be recirculated by the recirculation pump in the “external loop” of the product
vessel
• Provide product via the intermediate product-vessel to be dosed by the filling pumps
• Provide an excess of product to be recirculated by the product-recirculation pump in the “inner
loop” of the intermediate product-vessel
Details regarding where to place mass flowmeters or PATs may differ according to end-user decisions and
what they define as critical. For example, while some users may place a PAT sensor immediately after the
intermediate product-vessels, others may conclude that the positioning of a PAT downstream from the
manifold may be more beneficial to ensure there is no sedimentation in the manifold.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 93