
--- PDF Page 155 (doc p141) ---
testing, and flushing is completed, the transfer connection of the sterilized filter-set with the transfer port is
remade, and filling can resume. The overall risk of microbiological contamination is associated with the
aseptic connection inside the Grade A environment. Consequently, the use of the appropriate aseptic
techniques and the qualification of the procedure within the AVS and inclusion within the design of an
appropriate APS are of paramount importance. The general considerations regarding aseptic interventions
outlined in Section 8.2 apply to this activity.
One final point to consider on the replacement of filters is that vent-filters on sterile intermediate-vessels are
also considered part of the sterile fluid pathway. Should a vent-filter become blocked and require
replacement, the same considerations apply as those for replacing the product filter. The ability to replace
the filter will depend on whether the vessel and the vent-filter are inside or outside the Grade A
environment. If outside, a key consideration is whether the vessel can be cleaned and resterilized after
replacement. If inside the Grade A area, a key consideration is whether the intervention has been
appropriately qualified.
8.4 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated
with Filling Needle Adjustment, Repair, and Replacement
If a liquid filling needle is damaged, there are three options from which to choose:
• Turn off the needle
• Repair or adjust the needle
• Replace the needle
The first option does not require aseptic manipulation, as it can typically be accomplished through the
control system and so does not pose any microbiological risk. Regarding repairing or replacing the needle,
the general considerations for performing interventions identified in Section 8.2 would apply. The filling
needle is one of the most critical locations for an intervention due to its position immediately above the open
patient-dose. When designing the intervention for replacing the needle, whether any portion of the sterile
fluid pathway will also be changed at the same time should be considered. A preassembled sterile fluid
pathway may be less risky to replace than one component of the pathway alone. In some cases, replacing a
single component may risk leaks or drips from improper connections, or it may cause greater environmental
exposure to the fluid path, whereas a preassembled pathway may reduce those risks.
In the case of powder filling that makes use of powder dosing-needles, turning off or repairing needles is
typically not possible, and full replacement would be required. For liquid needles, repair/replacement is one
of the highest risk interventions and should not be undertaken lightly.
8.5 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Related to
Broken or Blocked Primary-Packaging Materials
The general considerations for aseptic interventions outlined in Section 8.2 should be followed for the
removal of blocked or broken primary-packaging materials. Such interventions are considered corrective
interventions that should be included in the AVS and included within an appropriate APS study design. The
AVS would be designed to demonstrate that the corrective intervention minimizes airflow disruption and
does not have the potential to add contamination. The intervention should be considered for inclusion in the
APS design at a frequency representative of the rate of occurrence in routine production.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 141

--- PDF Page 156 (doc p142) ---
The intervention should only be performed while using sterilized tools such as forceps. The tools should be
placed at any location along the filling line where this intervention is likely to occur.
The intervention should be reduced to the actions necessary to keep the line running, resulting in shorter
duration interventions that are generally of lower risk. For example, minimizing actions commonly means
that only when debris from a broken container can possibly cause contamination or malfunction of the line
should that debris be fully removed. Similarly, actions below the working height should be avoided. For
example, should materials fall to the machine base plate, they would commonly remain there until the
conclusion of the filling operation unless they posed a risk of malfunction. An intervention risk assessment
should describe each required intervention and its associated risks and define the required controls. The
intervention and controls should be included in the CCS.
8.6 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated
with Supply of Components
Automated transfer of components to the aseptic filling line is preferred to reduce microbiological risk. An
automated system is repeatable, can be biodecontaminated, and can be validated. Depending on the primary-
packaging materials used, different automated solutions may be required (e.g., e-beam, depyrogenation
tunnel, RTP transfer, no-touch transfer). All interventions in a Grade A environment linked to the automated
transfer of materials should be designed and performed taking into account the general rules for aseptic
manipulations (see Section 8.2). The supply of components should be included in a representative manner
within both the AVS and APS. Transfer technologies are further discussed in Sections 9.0 and 10.0.
Manual transfer of components is only possible in cleanroom conditions where the transfer occurs from a
Grade B environment to the Grade A environment. As the components transition through the cleanroom
classifications, successive layers of sterilized wrapping are removed. Special attention is required to avoid
contamination of the outer surfaces of the inner bag at each transition. The second-to-last bag should be
removed, using aseptic techniques under unidirectional airflow, when transferring the materials from Grade
B to Grade A. The layers of removed wrapping materials should be prevented from contacting surfaces
within the Grade A space. The final bag should only be removed within the Grade A environment.
When using a mousehole, RTP, or other equipment doors for transfers, dynamic airflow pattern studies in
the AVS should prove that the transfer of materials to the inside of the barrier does not result in turbulence
inside the barrier or result in airborne contamination transfer. In the case of a mousehole or door (such as
those that may be opened to restock elastomers), it is important to demonstrate that there is no ingress of air
from Grade B into Grade A. In both cases, the addition of components from a bag to a hopper should be
executed considering the general rules for aseptic manipulations (see Section 8.2). The transfer and addition
of components should be demonstrated in a representative manner and frequency within an appropriately
designed APS.
8.7 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated
with Sorting Systems for Components
Sorting systems are each independently machined (custom made), so there can be small geometric
differences between each sorting system. Characterizing and qualifying each stoppering-set is recommended
to define optimal settings, as this will reduce the requirement for fine-tuning during both the LSU and the
aseptic filling operation.
142 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 157 (doc p143) ---
Sorting systems should be designed to be handled and assembled by touching only the external surfaces
(e.g., outside of the feeder bowl) avoiding any manipulation in the portion that is in contact with
components. Sorting systems should be controlled (e.g., using kitting procedures or through the use of ID
numbers) to ensure that all required parts are used together consistently. Checks should be performed at the
start of a batch or campaign to optimize the setup and adjustment prior to the start of fill. Any fine-tuning
after setup should focus on optimization of machine parameters that do not require an aseptic intervention.
Any aseptic interventions required should apply the general considerations regarding aseptic interventions
(see Section 8.2). The intervention actions associated with initial setup and fine-tuning should be
demonstrated through both AVS and APS.
Sorting systems are indirect product-contact parts; consequently, they should be sterilized before use. When
transporting and installing the sorting systems, especially the large and often-awkward feed bowls,
protective covers are recommended to avoid recontamination after sterilization during LSU (see Section
8.1). In the case of isolators, several approaches have been acceptable to regulators and have been justified
through risk assessment and validation. For some facilities, the outermost protective bag (of the sterile
sorting bowl) will be removed prior to biodecontamination, but a protective cap will stay in place over the
opening of the stopper bowl to maintain the sterility of the interior surfaces until the isolator is
biodecontaminated. After the end of aeration an intervention will be performed using a glove, tool, external
manipulator, or robot to remove and discard the protective cap. For other facilities, the cap is removed just
before or just after the door is closed, but before the biodecontamination is initiated so that the internal
surfaces of the sorting bowl are also fully exposed to the biodecontamination. The approach to be taken
should be established through risk assessment and included in the CCS (12). The PDA Points to Consider
for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators may be referenced for additional
approaches and details about the risks (16).
Biodecontamination effectiveness can be affected by any residues that remain on surfaces after cleaning
(and sterilization). For sorting systems which are used with siliconized components, special care should be
taken to remove any residual silicone oil from surfaces during cleaning before sterilization as it may inhibit
effective biodecontamination.
8.8 Microbiological Considerations for Mechanical Interventions
Mechanical interventions to repair or replace parts fall into one of four categories:
1. Sterilized or disinfected mechanical components within the cleanroom environment for which
failures have been anticipated
2. Disinfected mechanical components within the cleanroom environment for which failures have not
been anticipated
3. Mechanical components that are not disinfected due to being occluded (and, therefore, not
disinfected during preparation of the line)
4. Equipment located in enclosed mechanical cabinets, also known as technical areas or gray zones
The microbiological risk of each of these four categories is directly related to the ability to perform the
intervention in an aseptic manner, while minimizing airflow disruptions and without risk of compromising
the aseptic condition of the equipment, personnel gowning, or the environment. While Categories 2 and 3
are far less frequent, and perhaps entirely unanticipated and rare, they should not be executed without risk
assessment (including risk assessment of the means for execution of the intervention), and approval of the
risk by the quality unit. If risk is high or not acceptable, then steps should be performed to reduce the risk or
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 143

--- PDF Page 158 (doc p144) ---
to eliminate the intervention. If the activity cannot be eliminated or the risk reduced to an acceptable level,
then the activity should not be allowed to be performed. Category 4 (also subject to risk assessment) should
rarely, if ever, be permitted from the cleanroom without discontinuing the batch. Some of the specific risks
associated with all four categories are described below.
The first category, sterilized or disinfected mechanical components, involves interventions that were
anticipated, risk-assessed, and followed the standard practices for interventions, including the performance
of the intervention under both AVS and APS. These are standard corrective interventions that must be
documented within the batch record and executed by personnel who have been qualified in the performance
of that or similar interventions (see Section 8.2 for standard intervention practices).
The second category, disinfected mechanical components, can generally be manipulated during aseptic
operations. If the specific intervention was not included in a procedure and challenged during AVS and APS
a risk-based decision should be made by operations and the quality unit to allow the intervention, stop the
aseptic process, and/or to address it as a deviation, which may result in additional investigation, actions, and
the potential loss of the portion of the batch that follows the required intervention. For this reason, it is
important to have procedures that plan for and address unexpected interventions. Planning for unexpected
interventions must include appropriate Quality Assurance involvement in risk assessment and decision-
making at the time the mechanical failure occurs. Considerations for improved detection may include
additional supervision or oversight and sampling (e.g., risk-based EM samples collected after the conclusion
of the fill to represent the surfaces associated with the intervention, sterility samples). Also included in the
plans for the unexpected intervention are stringent requirements to isolate and quarantine portions of the
batch that are associated with or that follow the performance of the intervention.
For equipment in the third category, where a surface is potentially occluded during surface
biodecontamination (e.g., a nut or a bolt in a difficult-to-reach area) but there is a known risk of needing
access to the surface during interventions in the filling process, the risk should be assessed and the approach
for accessing this area should be considered as part of any potential interventions. Some firms may disinfect
this area with a sporicidal disinfectant prior to LSU (during open-door phases of the setup) in order to
reduce the risk of exposing this occluded surface during any potential interventions. The exposure of this
surface, however, and the manual disinfection should be considered as part of the original qualification of
the line, and all intended actions should be included in the appropriate AVS and APS. The ability to perform
this activity in a manner that is appropriate to prevent microbiological risk should be considered on a case-
by-case basis and pre-approved by the quality unit if it is determined that the intervention should proceed.
For the fourth category, opening of technical areas of the filling line that are not biodecontaminated or
disinfected is not allowed during aseptic processing with one exception. A technical area that is accessed
from a service area that is isolated from the cleanroom that the filling line is installed in can be allowed
during aseptic processing. Should a repair or replacement require access to an area that is only accessible
from the cleanroom, the fill needs to be suspended, and a line clearance should be conducted in the affected
zones. Technical measures should be taken to restrict the scope of the impact to the cleanroom and isolator
or RABS. Even with these technical measures, such access will require disinfection of the portion of the
equipment, isolator, or cleanroom impacted by the opening. Depending on the extent of the exposure to the
nondisinfected zone and the possible pressure differentials experienced after the work is complete, the
cleanroom may require more than one successive cleaning and disinfection event. Equipment will also need
to be recleaned and resterilized prior to restarting. For many products, such an interruption could cause
product hold times to be exceeded or would represent such a high sterility-assurance risk that the filling
144 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 159 (doc p145) ---
operation is discontinued, and the remaining product is rejected, filled via a re-setup of the line, or
reprocessed (if permissible and justified by site SOPs and by product license).
8.9 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Related to
Environmental Monitoring
EM includes viable particulate-monitoring (e.g., settle plates, volumetric air, swab, and contact plates for
surface, gloves, and gowns) and total particulate-monitoring (e.g., particles greater than or equal to 0.5 µm
and 5 µm). Risk-based EM should be undertaken for the full duration of critical processing, including LSU
(17). Manually manipulated EM techniques or activities taking place in Grade A and B spaces prior to or
during the aseptic process are interventions and should follow recommendations associated with
intervention design and qualification. New techniques such as biofluorescent particle counting offer a non-
invasive method to measure airborne viable particles and should be considered as an alternative to
conventional monitoring when seeking a less invasive method.
Total particulate EM sampling should be continuous throughout the entire operation. The EM
microbiological sampling plan is both event-driven and time-driven, meaning the EM sampling plan is
designed to measure across the full duration of the aseptic operation. Samples, like settle plates and
volumetric air samples, are taken for specific intervals throughout the operation (time-driven), whereas other
microbiological samples, like contact plates and swabs, are taken to represent the monitoring of specific
events (event-driven). Examples of event-driven monitoring include samples collected during setup, aseptic
interventions, exit of personnel after shift, end of the batch, and/or line-changeover during a campaign. The
sampling sites and critical control points should be justified and included in the CCS.
Personnel represent the greatest risk to microbiological control during aseptic processing. EM is conducted
by people; therefore, it follows that people are the greatest risk to both the environment during the sampling
activities and to the integrity of EM samples. In addition, the introduction of growth-promoting media into
the aseptic environment for the purpose of sampling represents a risk that growth-promoting residues are left
behind if sampling sites are not appropriately cleaned after sampling.
Therefore, the design of the viable monitoring program should ensure controls for the full lifecycle of the
EM samples (plates and swabs) to ensure the validity of the results, including:
• Media supplier management
• Receipt
• Quality control of incoming media (including identity, general condition and appearance, growth
promotion, sterility check, and expiration dating)
• Handling and storage prior to use
• Use in aseptic operations:
̶ Transport into cleanrooms (and removal of outer wrapping/layers)
̶ Sampling aseptic techniques and minimized sample-handling within the cleanroom
̶ Closing of plates and swabs to maintain integrity after sampling
̶ Cleaning and disinfection after sampling (of gloves and surfaces)
• Reconciliation, labeling, and chain of custody
• Transportation to incubators (including any taping, bagging, or wrapping to protect samples)
• Incubation, reading (with confirmation of results), and subculture (if any)
• Identification and specification
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 145

--- PDF Page 160 (doc p146) ---
• Handling of any discrepancies
Risk assessment tools should be used to define the controls to be put in place for the end-to-end chain of
custody for all phases of the plate- or swab-handling process, with specific focus of reducing the following
contamination risks during the process:
• Handling and labeling of media prior to sampling
• Sample collection by EM sampling personnel
• Handling, labeling, and transportation following sample collection
• Laboratory handling for incubation and reading post-monitoring
Detailed procedures, training, and qualification of personnel are essential to ensure that these technique-
driven handling procedures (especially during the exposure of the samples in the cleanroom) are well
practiced and performed effectively by each person assigned to a role in handling EM samples.
SOPs should be established to define the processes to be followed for atypical events including desiccated
plates, cracked plates, dropped plates, nonviable particulate matter on plates, and viable growth (which
should be atypical in Grade A and B). These SOPs should include documentation containing example
pictures of the impacted plates and details on how to handle atypical plates. A deviation, out-of-limits, or
equivalent laboratory investigation should be raised to initiate the examination of any abnormal result. The
impacted plates should be retained until completion of the investigation (18).
146 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.