
--- PDF Page 48 (doc p34) ---
2.1.4 Peristaltic Pump Advantages and Disadvantages
Table 2.1.4-1 identifies the advantages and disadvantages of PPs.
Table 2.1.4-1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Peristaltic Pumps
Characteristic Advantages Disadvantages
Viscosity None Not good for high viscosity products
Durability Product not in direct contact with Tubing wears, so tubing
moving parts; only moving parts are the longevity/particle-generation studies
rotors and rollers in the pump head required
Single Use Designed for SU Tubing may need to be changed or
moved during filling due to tubing wear,
especially on prolonged fills
Changeover Rapid changeover of filling path For high-dose accuracy applications,
rigid tubing between the pump and
Closed system design can limit product
needle can be hard to aseptically install
exposure when working with potent
products
The use of intrinsic sterile connectors
can facilitate leak prevention when
tubing is removed from the vessel
Sterilization Entire train can be disposable and System can be CIP/SIP, but tubes need
sterilized together from intermediate to be dismounted from pump;
bag to filling needle nevertheless, CIP/SIP is rarely used for
PP
Shear Level Very gentle low-shear technology None
Dosing Range Wide dosing volumes achievable just by Very wide dosing ranges may require
changing disposable tubing sets change of pump occlusion-bed change
part
Operability Can institute feedback control/dosing Tubing deforms over time; potentially
to compensate for tubing deformation impacts dosing for long fills
The capability to install outside of the Slower filling-speed required to avoid
containment simplifies operability and splashing if soft tubing is used between
can improve SA by removing pump and filling needle
mechanical systems from the critical
zone
2.1.5 Peristaltic Pump Sterility Assurance: Microbial and Total Particles
A major driver in choosing a suitable dosing system is the risk of contamination that is posed during setup,
handling, and production, as well as clean up or disassembly after the conclusion of the batch. Assuming
34 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 49 (doc p35) ---
there is absolute flexibility regarding the choice of the dosing system, PPs are always especially appreciated
for the simplicity of the setup. Systems have minimal product contact parts (e.g., tubing and needles); this
simplicity makes these systems especially suitable for SU applications. SU applications have the benefit of a
reduced microbial contamination risk as the preassembled components are commonly gamma-irradiated. As
a consequence, there are fewer required connections compared to other technologies. Connecting to the
holding vessel or for recirculation purposes is also quite straightforward, and most of the connections can be
executed outside of the Grade A area (e.g., using an RTP bag or intrinsic sterile connection device), which
makes handling (including maintenance) easier.
Particulate in the sourced components may be identified by extractable and leachable testing as well as
ongoing quality control of received components, but the disadvantage with a PP system is that the constant
compression of the tubing by the rollers against the backplate will lead to further particle-generation as the
tubes are subject to stretching and wear and tear. Therefore, it is crucial to always validate the use time of
the tubes. This use time may need to be established in conjunction with the products being filled, as some
products could potentially impact the speed of degradation (i.e., particle-generation).
The length of tubing used with PP is longer than with some other technologies, which can result in more
product contact with elastomers. In addition, several types of tubing may be in use, as the different sections
of tubing benefit from different stiffness, and there are substantial mechanical forces applied to the tubing
(especially within the rollers). As a consequence, extractables and leachables testing is of particular
importance for the range of materials and exposure conditions (e.g., times, temperature, friction forces).
Small cracks and breaks in the tube may not be immediately identified with PP technology. If a 100% IPC
system is not in place for dose control, small breaks may go undetected for a period of time until the next
statistical IPC (see Sections 5.1-5.1.4 for additional information on IPC strategies). The wear profile of the
tubing within the rotors or the connectors that are employed for the fluid pathway can elevate this risk. As a
consequence, leakage could result in contamination of this “closed system.” In addition to the sterility risk,
leakage will be problematic with potent or toxic products and may require reconsideration of the installation
position to locate the mechanical components within the containment barrier.
There is no vertical movement on top of the machine table plate, therefore, machine-generated particles are
minimized with PP systems. Since PPs can be placed outside of the barrier or isolator, the risk of particle-
generation from the friction on the tubing can be reduced within the critical zone.
2.1.6 Peristaltic Pump Efficiency and Impact on Risk
Once personnel have been properly trained in the installation and proper functioning of PP systems, the
associated risk of contamination to product is relatively low, as no direct contact by personnel with the
product or product-contact parts (tube) occurs. Visibility of the equipment is also superior to some of the
other systems, as a group of PPs can also be set up either vertically or horizontally to enable easy handling
(e.g., improving ergonomics) and to decrease error probability (e.g., incorrect tubing placement, incorrect
mounting of the wrong tube, leakage/damage to tube). The selected mounting position should take into
account gravitational forces between the pump and filling needles and between the intermediate vessel and
pumps to ensure consistency of dosing accuracy for all of the pump heads. Because no aseptic connections
to the pump itself have to be made, the risk is considerably lower than with a manually assembled RPP.
However, when the RPP is CIP/SIP-capable, the technologies are more comparable.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 35

--- PDF Page 50 (doc p36) ---
Containment is also straightforward with highly potent products if the PPs are placed within the isolator,
which is necessary due to the comparatively higher potential of leaks and breakage. Detection systems for
leaks can be implemented to trigger an alert should there be a breach in tubing. However, if a tube breaks,
the standard operating procedure (SOP) for system operation should define whether to continue without that
dosing head or to replace the tube, in addition to addressing quality implications (i.e., deviation) associated
with breach and required isolation of any associated product containers. Replacement of the tube can take
place easily without breaching containment of neighboring product paths.
The pumps run with very high efficiency due to the direct translation of servo drive to pump head (e.g., no
gears as with RPP), and the pump heads show minimal wear and tear over multiple years of use. Therefore,
pump heads do not normally require regular replacement.
2.1.7 Peristaltic Pump Costs: Initial and Lifecycle
Initial costs are comparable to initial investment costs for other systems for dedicated fill volumes. If
multiple fill volumes are required, the PP becomes commercially superior, as the same pump head can cover
a much higher dosing range in comparison to other technologies such as RPP. Lifecycle costs are negligible
as pump heads seldom require replacement. Breakage of the servo motors can occur, but that is an
infrequent failure mode. If single-use systems (SUS) are implemented, which is common with PP, the costs
associated with the disposable components can be high. The total cost of ownership (TCO) calculations
would take consumables into account; therefore, a TCO comparison might be made between the SU
disposables and a reusable RPP system with CIP/SIP capability. Examples of considerations for the TCO
calculations should be appropriate to the system design and may include, but are not limited to time,
utilities, cleaning validation, maintenance, process know-how, training of operators, and downtime due to
CIP/SIP cycles, and extended times in cases where parallel processing is not possible (such as not being able
to run the biodecontamination cycles simultaneously with the CIP/SIP) (see Section 2.1.10 on SUS).
2.1.8 Peristaltic Pump System Complexity: Setup, Handling, and Changeover
System complexity is very low as the pump only consists of a rotor and a housing, which can cover a large
filling range (e.g., 0.01 mL to 50 mL); therefore, the pump does not need to be changed to accommodate the
filling of multiple product volumes. The setup of the pump is the installation of the housing, and the rotor.
Neither requires sterile connections nor sterilization as the pump has no direct product contact;
biodecontamination with hydrogen peroxide or another qualified SOP-driven disinfection procedure as
appropriate for cleanroom use is sufficient. The tubes require proper handling, as they need to be mounted to
the pump system either as a SU gamma-irradiated component or as an in-house autoclaved component.
With a two-tube PP, tube clips are commonly employed, which hold the two pump tubes going into and out
of the pump heads (see Figure 2.1.8-1). The tube clips are attached to the tubes, typically by pressing the
tube into the corresponding slot on the clip. The tube clip is then mounted to the pump by simply clicking it
into position, and the tubing that is internal to the rotary pump head is centered within the rollers. Special
care must be taken so the fixed and loose sides of the clips are not confused; this is typically prevented by
mistake-proofing the setup procedure (e.g., with appropriate photographs, marking of components, flow-
direction indication). Tube clips are format-specific as the size of the slots within the clip are specific to the
tubing outer diameter (OD) in use.
36 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 51 (doc p37) ---
Figure 2.1.8-1 Diagram Showing the Positioning of Tube Clips used with Peristaltic Pump
Because the pump is a closed system, it may be located outside the barrier, which would add further
simplicity to the setup and handling. Changeover would be necessary if the filling volumes exceeded the
limits covered by the pump head. The changeover is the same procedure as the setup, and only the housing
and rotor would need to be changed if there were a large volume change on the line. It should be established
whether an adapter or changeable plate will be required to accommodate the range of filling, and whether
this will also require a different housing or rotor sizes.
There are some pumps that are designed to have small adjustment springs between the backplate and the
rotor, which may be helpful in compensating for the stress effects on the tubes. However, the proper
installation and adjustment of such springs typically requires expert setup knowledge. Therefore, it is
important to understand the specific design of the PP when considering overall system complexity.
Because different batches of tubes may have different geometry (e.g., inner diameter (ID), OD, thickness,
length, elasticity), ensuring during setup that the fill volume is established to match the specific batch of
tubing in use is important. A best practice is 100% IPC. Should a strategy for weight check other than 100%
IPC be employed, maintaining a high monitoring frequency at the beginning of the batch is particularly
critical, and there may be other points of criticality as well, particularly over long production durations when
wear may start to affect performance. An appropriate risk assessment should be performed to justify the
dose control approach if other than 100% IPC (see Sections 5.1-5.1.4 for additional content on weight-
check strategies).
2.1.9 Peristaltic Pump Maintenance and Aging
As described in the preceding sections, the focus for this system must be on the aging and replacement of
tubing.
The pump system itself is essentially maintenance-free, although the original equipment manufacturer’s
recommendations for checking the operation of the roller bearings should be observed.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 37

--- PDF Page 52 (doc p38) ---
The original equipment manufacturer (OEM) should provide a replacement strategy for the servo motors
(although infrequent), to avoid unnecessary downtimes or potential loss of batches.
2.1.10 Peristaltic Pump Single-Use Versus Reusable Strategy
Use of the SU strategy is much more common than the reusable strategy with PP due to the simplicity of the
installation of presterilized components without any need for aseptic connections. The reusable strategy
brings added risks to the process, for example, offline sterilization gives added complexity to the process,
and cleaning for the tubing and filling needles requires validation and monitoring.
Regulatory guidance (e.g., European Commission Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products,
EudraLex-Volume 4-EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human
and Veterinary Use (2022)) clearly states that any aseptic connections made for parts that come into direct
contact with product should be sterilized in place whenever possible (3). It is generally always possible to
sterilize in place if a CIP/SIP system is designed for the filler, so the cost for reuse (and the increased costs
associated with engineering and initial capital) should be weighed against the costs of SU.
For example, when the PPs use SU tubing (and connectors, where necessary), there are consumable costs
associated with the system. These are additional ongoing costs as compared to a RPP or TP filler that might
have more fixed piping, which is a greater initial capital investment. PPs are commonly used in a full SUS
(e.g., disposable SU bags) due to the ease of setup. A comparison of expense between a fully disposable SU
PP system and a conventional filling system with fixed piping that is CIP/SIP capable must take into
account not only the initial installation and validation costs, but also the ongoing cost of utilities, manpower,
time of changeover, maintenance of the validated state, and calibration, as well as the associated
consumables.
2.1.11 Peristaltic Pump Clean-In-Place/Sterilize-In-Place Feasibility and Pitfalls
CIP/SIP may be restricted to cleaning and sterilizing the intermediate vessel, tubes, and dosing needles.
Because of this, the decision to implement a CIP/SIP system on a PP, and the practicality and the benefits
thereof, will usually be considered to see if use of a SUS will not outweigh the CIP/SIP approach in terms of
complexity.
In the case where CIP/SIP is applied, two main considerations apply:
• Initial CIP/SIP of the interior surfaces
• Subsequent biodecontamination of the exterior surfaces prior to the start of operations
For the initial CIP/SIP, the tubes cannot be mounted within the pump, as the pump rotor and rollers would
restrict CIP/SIP media flow (e.g., cleaning fluid, steam). For the biodecontamination, tubes cannot be
mounted within the clips or the pump as it will restrict biodecontamination (e.g., vapor phase access to
surfaces that are in contact with each other). If the tubing biodecontamination is performed prior to SIP, the
SIP will reduce the risk of residual absorbed biodecontamination agent (e.g., vaporized hydrogen peroxide
absorbed in silicone tubing). Alternatively, after biodecontamination, a WFI flush or CIP might be applied
to the tubing followed by SIP. The chosen sequence and process steps should be validated to be appropriate
to ensure the residue-free, sterile condition of the tubing. During SIP the tube to needle, tube to Y-
connectors, and vessel to tube connections must be fixed with a connector to ensure that the tube does not
disconnect from the needle when under pressure for SIP. After SIP, manual assembly must take place,
which again poses risks as a result of aseptic manipulation.
38 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 53 (doc p39) ---
2.1.12 Peristaltic Pump Benefits and Risks
Table 2.1.12-1 highlights the common benefits-and-risks analysis that is pertinent to the use of PP systems.
Table 2.1.12-1 Benefits and Risks of Peristaltic Pump Systems
Benefits Risks
Highly beneficial when combined with SUS High dependency on SUS suppliers
Closed system can be used outside aseptic barrier Wear and tear of the tubes may limit the period of
use for a single set of tubing; tubing failure
conditions may be exacerbated due to specific
product characteristics (e.g., solvents)
Easy assembly and handling May have slower reaction time for sensor-filling
and, therefore, is less suitable than TP for
containers that require sensor-filling
Low maintenance Consideration should be given to product viscosity
Range of filling volumes Tube breakage is a greater risk than with other
systems; leak detection systems are available, but
Reduced technology know-how needed due to the risk of leaks may require installation inside the
reduced complexity and reduced setup aseptic barrier in order to potentially conserve a
portion of the batch upon failure; installation
within the barrier is especially critical for potent or
Limited operating costs for SUS after initial
toxic products
investment other than consumables (e.g., no use of
water for injection (WFI), clean steam, cleaning
validation)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 39

--- PDF Page 54 (doc p40) ---
2.2 Aseptic Filling Technologies: Rotary Piston Pump
The rotary piston pump consists of a cylindrical housing and a piston, as shown in Figure 2.2-1. The
product is the lubricant between the piston and the cylinder; no other source of lubrication is required or
appropriate. The dosing system is seal-free.
Figure 2.2-1 Diagram of the External Components of the Rotary Piston Pump
As depicted in Figure 2.2-2, when the pump piston is fully rotated to the suction side and the piston is in the
bottom position, the product outlet is automatically closed. From the suction position (the pump piston at the
lowest position of the pump cylinder), the pump piston is then raised, creating an under-pressure, through
which the product is drawn into the pump.
The pump piston rotates towards the dosing side and moves from the bottom to the top position, closing the
product inlet automatically. Once at the dosing position (the pump piston at the highest position of the pump
cylinder), the pump piston is immediately lowered again, displacing the product from the pump and pushing
it into the filling tube. The piston then rotates back to the starting suction position, automatically closing the
product outlet, with the piston remaining at the bottom position to start the next cycle.
40 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 55 (doc p41) ---
Figure 2.2-2 Rotary Piston Pump Motion Associated with Product Suction and Dispensing
Figure 2.2-3 depicts a RPP filler fluid path. Because there is no seal between the cylinder and piston, there
is a possibility of product exposure to the environment (especially if over-pressurized or with product that
has low viscosity). This makes the pump unsuitable for installation outside of the isolator or RABS.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 41