
--- PDF Page 95 (doc p81) ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Robotics Clear design Easier to set up with Robotic fluid path Robotic fluid path Robotic fluid path
objectives for the aid of robotics, setup with setup with setup with
robotics functions as the PP is a closed conventional RPP is conventional TP is conventional DP is
with demonstrable system. Also, as the difficult. difficult. difficult.
advantage of pumps can be
Commonly, fluid Commonly, fluid Commonly, fluid
replacing human located outside the
path setup is not a path setup is not a path setup is not a
intervention. containment, a
requirement for requirement for requirement for
robot would be
Computational Fluid systems that are systems that are systems that are
easily able to install
Dynamics (CFD) for CIP/SIP-enabled CIP/SIP-enabled CIP/SIP-enabled
the preassembled
modeling airflow (unless a pump (unless a change is (unless a pump
filling needles within
around robotics change is required required as part of a change is required
the Grade A.
movements during as part of a campaign). as part of a
design phase. campaign). campaign).
Design of robotic
movements so that
they minimize
turbulence and avoid
the introduction of
contamination.
Technical expertise
in robotics control
and calibration.
Change parts or
consumables that are
not too heavy or
awkward.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 81

--- PDF Page 96 (doc p82) ---
4.1 Continuous Filling/Campaign Filling Versus Batch Filling
In manufacturing, a batch is defined as the complete production procedure from compounding, product
filtration, filling-line preparation, filling, and closing all the way up to final packaging (end-to-end). The
batch size can typically be defined by the volume of product that is manufactured or by the number of units
that are processed.
Some users will perform continuous filling operations where the definition of batch is volume or time-based
(e.g., every ## of liters filled, one batch per ## operating shifts or ## days). As an example, continuous bulk
drug substance to bulk drug product formulation systems will also make use of continuous aseptic filling.
However, continuous formulation is not the only time that continuous filling may be employed. In these
cases, large volumes of bulk product are filled into identical container–closure systems. The designation of a
batch (or filling order or section) is primarily to facilitate quality control approval and release of the product,
as well as to enable a clear initiation and conclusion of monitoring and sampling that are assigned to each
batch
In contrast, some users who happen to have a single bulk formulation that is filled with different fill
volumes may choose to run the product in campaigns. Therefore, in a campaigned process, the same product
is filled in two or more container–closure formats, where each format represents an individual batch, and the
sum of batches would be considered the campaign. For example, a user may formulate a product batch of
1,000 liters, fill half of the bulk solution (500 liters) in 6R vials and, when that fill is complete, switch to fill
the last 500 liters of the same product, with a different filling volume in 10R vials. Other campaign designs
are also possible (e.g., production of two or more bulk solutions requiring a fluid pathway change,
campaigns that require modest format part changes, etc.).
In the case of both continuous filling and campaign filling, the most common use case is that the user is
filling the same active substance, as a different active substance would pose a risk of cross contamination. If
different active substances are to be used, appropriate contamination control strategies should be employed
to minimize the risk.
4.1.1 Environment for Filling
Isolators are the most common environment for manufacturers who intend to operate in a continuous filling
or campaign mode for the production of a sterile product. The use of isolators for prolonged processing is
the strongest option for SA, as the initial surface biodecontamination provides an extremely high-quality
environment, and the ability to operate for long periods without opening the doors is assured by the design.
4.1.2 Sterility Assurance
When running a continuous or campaigned process, the major objective SA is to minimize the disruptions
within the barrier between batches. Therefore, when designing filling systems for continuous/campaign
production, it is crucial to plan them in a manner that allows batch completion and modest changeover
(when required) to be made with closed doors. This requires that the introduction of tools, format parts,
wipes, environmental monitoring supplies, and the like, are properly planned during the design phase (e.g.,
implementing RTPs and material transfer chambers to avoid the need to open the barrier). Careful thought
82 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 97 (doc p83) ---
should be given to whether a filter change will be needed during the prolonged production period2. Design
of the sterile fluid pathway will determine whether a presterilized SUS can be introduced easily or whether
the sterile fluid pathway will require recleaning and resterilization, as this will influence equipment layout,
design, controls, and environment. Risk analysis is recommended to determine the associated risks. In some
cases, parallel filtration pathways are established at the outset so that the change-over activities (which may
include PUPSIT of filters) are minimized at the time the new pathway is to be connected.
The length or duration of the production period should be established based on production needs and the
process designed to meet those needs. The process should then be qualified based on equipment/process
capability and limitations. Once established, that period and duration, as well as duration-related
interventions and conditions, including those associated with equipment change-over, should be taken into
consideration in the design of the APS. However, the APS should not be used as the primary means to
establish or validate the duration of the aseptic process (3). Continuous manufacturing/campaigns may be
able to last multiple weeks within an isolated environment if the process is properly designed and validated.
4.1.3 Benefits and Risks
The most significant benefit of continuous or campaign production modes is the total production-time to
turnaround-time ratio. For example, every time a line is turned around, time is needed to clean, set up,
perform integrity tests on filters, perform (isolator) leak tests and glove integrity tests and, of course, to
decontaminate the isolator itself (e.g., using hydrogen peroxide). Continuous and campaigning filling
processes save by reducing the number of times that these activities need to be performed. Other benefits
might also be realized, such as a reduction in product losses, as a proportion of the total volume filled.
Despite the benefits, the feasibility of running in a continuous or campaigned mode is not always
straightforward as the limitations of the filling technology and changeover requirements must be weighed in
the decision-making. For continuous-filling operations, there may be little to no mechanical changeover
required between batches as the containers and closures will typically remain identical from batch to batch.
For campaigns, the primary limitation is the size difference of the formats that need to be processed. As an
example, if a manufacturer intends to run the first batch with a 2R vial with a 13 mm stopper, and then run a
second batch in the campaign, filling the same product in a 10R vial with a 20 mm stopper, the transport
parts, star wheels, sorting systems, product fluid-path components, and everything needed for further
batches must either be placed in the barrier before beginning the campaign, or should be aseptically
introduced via RTP or material transfer chambers after finishing the first batch. Due to the size and handling
of some of these components (e.g., sorting systems), it may not be feasible to carry out the campaign under
these constraints. Batch-wise filling would be a better option to reduce risk rather than attempting a
campaign.
4.1.4 Equipment Design Options
Some OEMs have technologies where format parts are reduced or even eliminated. For example, some
manufacturers have constructed universal feeding bowls that will feed stoppers of relevant sizes to the
sorting tracks where the orientation takes place. In these cases, the large bowls need not be exchanged,
thereby reducing changeover and disruption of the campaign.
2 Annex 1 indicates that a liquid sterilizing filter should not be used for longer than one working day unless such
process has been validated. See filter use considerations under Annex 1, Section 8.95.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 83

--- PDF Page 98 (doc p84) ---
For varied container sizes, OEMs have introduced technologies, such as universal or adjustable rake,
walking-beam systems, or transport with prismatic (i.e., triangular) carrier pockets with an adjustable rail,
that enable the transport of containers of different dimensions (e.g., diameter, height, neck) without having
to replace or change the transport system. An adjustment is commonly required during changeover to the
next size, but this adjustment is automated as part of the recipe to enable touchless adjustments. Vendors
may also implement adjustable or universal star wheels, which contain pockets for each of the pertinent
diameters in adjacent positions. The automation then ensures that the containers are held within the
appropriate-sized pocket. The ultimate goal of the universal star wheel is to eliminate or reduce the needed
interventions for changeover. While these universal technologies are designed to accommodate a wide
variety of sizes, there are practical limitations to the number of sizes that the various transport mechanisms
can accommodate. Therefore, when planning for campaign production, it is important to ensure that the
required sizes are known in advance and included in the system design.
With regard to dosing systems, the same constraints on the feasibility of changeover would apply. For
example, if RPPs are used and the intention of the campaign is to fill containers with two different fill
volumes of 2 mL and 14 mL, this change in volume would typically necessitate exchanging the RPPs. This
campaign would not be considered feasible if the barrier has to be opened in order to exchange the pumps.
Breaching sterility by opening the barrier to accommodate the larger-format RPP would jeopardize the
campaign. As a consequence, if the design requirement included the ability to campaign these two disparate
fill volumes, a different filling technology might need to be selected to enable the intended range of fill.
Where a RPP’s limitation is the filling range, other technologies have different limitations. For example, a
PP can only run for so many revolutions until the hoses begin shedding particles. Therefore, if the duration
of the continuous process or campaign is longer than the permissible use-time of the hoses, the hoses must
either be repositioned or exchanged. This procedure has to be validated and qualified.
For continuous manufacturing or campaigns, manual interventions associated with batch changeover
represent possible contamination-control risks that should be assessed and evaluated as part of the intended
control strategy for the line.
4.2 Changeover Functionality
For any production line, the uptime-to-downtime ratio (e.g., overall equipment effectiveness) is a critical
factor in the return on investment and profitability of the line. For facilities with the ability to fill in a
continuous batch or campaign mode, the speed of setup/changeover may be less of an issue as there is a
significant boost in uptime with the ability to make multiple batches in a row without (or with reduced)
changeover. However, for companies that produce single batches, the speed of setup/changeover can have a
significant influence on efficiency and, ultimately, cost per unit. The impact of setup/changeover time is
especially severe for companies that may be capacity-limited.
The advent of SU technology in the industry has resulted in significant gains in efficiency in all phases of
the manufacturing process, including the filling operation. SU technology can reduce or eliminate the need
for offline or in-place cleaning and sterilization of many critical components. However, while this approach
may be useful for filling systems that make use of PP fillers, for example, the same level of benefit will not
be achieved for RPPs where pump cleaning and assembly will still be required even with SU tubing sets.
Lines that are designed to make use of fewer format parts, or that make use of format parts with a greater
range of capability, have reduced time devoted to setup/changeover. The ergonomics of the line can also
84 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 99 (doc p85) ---
facilitate or hinder rapid setup/changeover. When all parts to be changed or adjusted are within easy reach
from a limited number of positions on the line, setup/changeover can be performed with less time-
investment. Similarly, lines that make use of features, such as “tool-less” adjustments for guides and
conveyance parts, can simplify and speed setup/changeover.
4.3 Functionality Affecting Line Speed
When user requirements specifications designate the speed of filling, it is usually based on calculations that
either directly or indirectly relate to production (throughput) requirements. Some examples of factors that
determine (or limit) the speed of filling include:
• Cycle-time limits (after priming)
̶ Filling volume (e.g., number of pump cycles)
̶ Number of cycles per minute of the conveyance system (e.g., walking rake servo motion,
weight-check cycle-time/frequency of weigh checks)
̶ Fill curve (e.g., end-to-end cycle-time for single-filling cycle)
• Deceleration and acceleration limits
̶ Product characteristics may affect fill curve (e.g., foaming, viscosity, flowability, dripping,
temperature exposure)
̶ Required dosing accuracy may affect fill curve (e.g., could be influenced by factors such as
container type (e.g., vial vs. prefilled syringe), contents (i.e., single-dose vs. multi-dose),
overage limits (cost of product. i.e., high-volume production vs. niche high-cost products)
• Other factors that affect the overall duration of fill/readiness to fill
̶ Priming time (e.g., filling any oversized sections of fluid path, eliminating air bubbles,
standardizing fill)
̶ Batch size
̶ Shift length (the time allocated to filling a batch)
̶ Turnaround time (the time needed to prepare the line for the next batch)
The first two categories will have an influence on the selected filling technology. The final category affects
the acceptability of the speed of filling but has no significant influence on the selection of the filling
technology.
4.3.1 Dosing Accuracy, Weight Verification, and Speed
With some high-volume applications, where dosing accuracy is only of moderate importance (e.g.,
conventional vaccines or heparins), the batches are typically large and the containers are usually slightly
overfilled, as the product is not very expensive. In such applications, a 100% IPC, where the empty
containers are weighed prior to filling and then check-weighed after filling to determine the filling volume
in 100% of the containers, may not be opted for if the user decides that a statistical check is sufficient. The
higher the output requirements of such lines, the bigger the possible influence the weight check would have
on cycle-time. If statistical weight checking enables faster production with continuous transport machines, it
would be the desired option for high-speed fills where slight over-filling is acceptable. 100% IPC weight
checks, on the other hand, would typically require intermittent transport and, hence, lower filling-line
speeds. In contrast, small batches of expensive products will commonly target 100% IPC (or net-weight
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 85

--- PDF Page 100 (doc p86) ---
filling) for accuracy and reduction in product losses through tighter fill-volume targets. For additional
information, refer to dose control in Sections 5.1-5.1.4.
The nature of the containers/container packaging (e.g., nesting) could also determine whether a 100% IPC is
feasible. For example, filling machines that fill presterilized containers in a nest will typically run a 0.2-10%
statistical check. In this case, 100% IPC will only make sense (from a line-speed and waste perspective) if
the containers are removed from the nest before filling and are filled in single file on an intermittent
transport machine.
4.3.2 Product-Conserving Features Which Can Affect Speed
Additional controls for high-cost, small-batch products that will conserve product include, but are not
limited to:
• Net-weight filling or filling on weighing scales at the beginning of the batch to ensure no product is
discarded due to air bubbles during priming and batch initiation that might result in underfills.
• Automatic correction of underfilled containers in order to avoid having to discard them due to not
reaching the target fill.
• Systematic emptying of the product vessel at end of the aseptic fill-unit operation by filling on load
cells to ensure that the containers discarded due to underfills are kept to the minimum.
• Automatic checks for stopper presence and raised stopper detection (see Section 7.0).
• Automated re-stoppering capability in order to ensure that correctly filled containers are not
discarded due to missing or raised stoppers while they are still under Grade A controls.
• Force and rotation control during capping-and-crimp operations and quality inspection (e.g., vision
system inspections for stopper height and correct crimp seal) to ensure the container is closed
correctly before leaving the line.
• Recapping in order to ensure that correctly filled and stoppered containers are not discarded due to
missing or bad crimp seals.
• Component checks, such as glass breakage, empty container inspection, and cap quality, in order to
ensure rejection of bad components so as, for example, not to fill good product in faulty or missing
containers.
See Section 12.0 for additional causes of routine and nonroutine product rejection such as priming and end
of the aseptic filling-unit operation (along with strategies for conservation of product.)
Many of the features listed here can take additional time for the verification and correction steps, which will
increase the overall duration of the filling and closing operation and, therefore, will reduce the comparative
“speed” of the fill. However, they each help to ensure product quality and reduce waste, which can be an
important trade-off for speed.
4.3.3 Filling Curve and Speed
The filling time of a single container is governed by the filling curve specific to the product being filled and
the required volume to be filled in each container. The filling curves are independent of the speed of the
filling machines. It could be quite possible to have a high-speed line with multiple filling needles but with a
relatively slow filling curve. A typical example of this would be sensor-filling of bulk cartridges, where the
filling curve is programmed to fill up to the brim of the container, which will require slowing the rate of fill
as the top of the container is reached. Another example would be the filling of products that tend to foam.
The filling curve is slowed intentionally to reduce the possibility of foam generation, which can arise if the
containers are filled too quickly.
86 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.