
--- PDF Page 140 (doc p126) ---
Feature Vented Insertion Vacuum Insertion Vacuum-Assisted Vented Vacuum-Assisted
Insertion Short Vented Insertion Long
Consistency of Highly consistent for Vacuum alone not highly More consistent for elastomer Long vent tube permits
Elastomer elastomer consistent for elastomer placement than vacuum alone, accurate elastomer
Placement placement. placement. but short tube will be more placement.
variable with a deeper
placement requirement.
Prevention of Higher risk of Low risk of wrinkling or Low risk of wrinkling or Higher risk of wrinkling or
Wrinkling or wrinkling or distortion with vacuum alone. distortion of elastomers, distortion of elastomers due
Distortion distortion of similar to vacuum-bell to compression.
elastomers due to application.
compression.
126 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 141 (doc p127) ---
Mechanical insertion may be used for the insertion of stoppers into cartridges from the bottom prior to
filling, as shown in Figure 7.3.2-2.
Figure 7.3.2-2 Mechanical Insertion from the Bottom of a Cartridge Prior to Filling
In this case, the cartridge is then filled from the top. Whether from the bottom or top, stopper insertion has
the same risks and required controls as those compared and contrasted in Table 7.3.2-1.
7.3.3 Common Defects in Elastomer Placement Operations
There are a number of defects that routinely occur with elastomer placement, among them:
• Incomplete seating (vials) or inconsistent seating position (syringe/cartridge)
• Disruption or smearing of silicone or fluoropolymer coating on elastomer
• Wrinkling/distortion of ribs on syringe/cartridge elastomers during placement
• Liquid in ribs of elastomer for syringes/cartridges, or product under the stopper flange on vials and
bottles
• Damage to plunger (e.g., bending, distortion of ribs)
• Insufficient control of headspace (air or inert gas)
Many of these defects can be reduced through proper selection and design of the elastomer placement
system. However, careful adherence to consistent, validated setup parameters of the insertion system is
necessary to maintain quality control. Quality control is also important during the incoming inspection of
elastomers to ensure that dimensional tolerances and quality of coatings is maintained.
As a final note, elastomers are subject to an array of testing for extractables and leachables (during initial
qualification), as well as chemical and particulate contaminants (with each batch). Container-closure
integrity is commonly tested on every batch, with careful adherence to the validated parameters for closing
the containers (both with elastomer and mechanical seal) (see Section 7.7). Visual inspection of sterile
products includes inspection of the elastomer for abnormal appearance or improper insertion. As a
consequence, elastomer placement is an important part of the ongoing quality of the container-closure
system and for the overall integrity of the sterile product.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 127

--- PDF Page 142 (doc p128) ---
7.4 Mechanical Seal Application and System Design
Mechanical seals are inherent components in many container–closure systems. As with the primary
packaging, the choice of mechanical seal will influence the design of the aseptic filling system. The use of
more than one mechanical closure type on a line may require flexibility in the closing system design and use
but, as with primary containers and closures, the objective is to ensure an integral seal on the container to
protect its contents throughout its shelf life.
7.4.1 Mechanical Seal Application
There are specialty closures, such as press-fit caps or cartridge disc seals, that integrate both the elastomer
and the mechanical seal in a single closure and, often, a single closing step. However, there are other
processes where the mechanical seal is separate from the elastomer and is applied in a dedicated process
step.
Mechanical seals for vials and bottles, often called overseals or crimp seals consist of a crimpable “skirt”
with either a button, or dust cover (flip seal) over the top of the stopper. These mechanical seals are
commonly produced of aluminum or aluminum with a polymer component (see Figure 7.4.1-1).
Mechanical seals are specified to be slightly wider and longer than the combined dimensions of the flange or
finial of the stopper plus the lip of the container. With these dimensions, they can be placed over top of the
stopper, and the skirt of the seal can be folded under the lip of the container to secure them and supply
sufficient downward pressure on the elastomer and glass to seal. A similar mechanical seal is commonly
applied to cartridges.
Figure 7.4.1-1 Example of a Flip-Off Crimp Seal Before Crimping
Mechanical seals come in several common designs:
• Flip-off – Has a removable button (often polymer) that can be detached to expose the stopper
underneath during administration while leaving the aluminum skirt in place, which continues to
secure the stopper on the container; this is the most common crimp seal for vials that are intended
for syringe administration
• Flip-up/tear-off -- Has a button that, when flipped up, is used to help tear off the aluminum skirt so
the stopper can be removed; not used for parenteral applications but may be used for ophthalmic
solutions
• Flip-off/tear-off – Offers the combination of features of the first two mechanical seal types,
allowing access to the stopper only to remove the aluminum skirt; this is not used for parenteral
applications, but may be used for sterile fluids that are used in testing settings
• Center-tear seal – Usually all aluminum, these seals are most like the flip-off seal but, in this case,
the center tab of aluminum is integrated with the aluminum skirt and can be lifted and removed for
access to the center of the stopper flange while leaving the skirt in place; although intended for
syringe administration, the risk of glove tears with the aluminum tab reduces the frequency that this
design is used
128 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 143 (doc p129) ---
• Complete-tear crimp seal -- Like the center-tear seal, these are all aluminum, however, when the
center tab is lifted, it can be used to remove the entire crimp seal from the container; like the flip-
up/tear-off seal, this is not used for parenteral applications
Mechanical seals are expected to be applied under Grade A air supply (at minimum) that is contiguous with
the filling line. Some systems include the mechanical seal application within the Grade A cleanroom or
isolator adjacent to the filling station. Whether within the cleanroom, isolator, or supplied with Grade A air
supply the intent is to ensure the protection of fully stoppered vials where the mechanical seal has not yet
been crimped. The mechanical seals are not required to be sterile, although in some applications they may
be rendered sterile. The process of forming the aluminum around the lip of the container may generate
significant particulate (as does the rapid spinning of the sealing machine). Therefore, the sealing equipment
for vials is often separated from the rest of the filling line by having a physical barrier (often with a
mousehole) in between the stoppering and seal placement sections of a filling machine within a RABS or
isolator.
Successful sealing station design will depend upon advanced knowledge of those elements described in
Table 7.4.1-1.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 129

--- PDF Page 144 (doc p130) ---
Table 7.4.1-1 Attributes Impacting Sealing System Design
Attribute Impact(s) to Closing Station Design
Seal Dimensions and Will define sorting-system bowl and track dimensions and design.
Overall Shape (and
Will influence issues where one seal is inside another (i.e., twinning) which, in turn, may require different features of
Features)
the sorting-system bowl or differing levels of vibration for manipulating them.
Will influence detection-system capability, such as missing flip-seal detection, or missing elastomeric disc-
seal/missing stopper detection.
Batch/Campaign Details Size of the batch/campaign will influence the number of times that replenishment of the sorting system will be
required, which will influence decisions such as whether a bulk hopper should be provided for feeding the sorting
system.
Filling speed will determine the required speed for the sealing system; commonly, sealing systems operate at a higher
speed than the filling system does to prevent any interruption in the continuous operation of the filler.
Filling speed will also influence the size of the sorting-system bowl to provide the best balance between continuous
operation and replenishment.
Method of Introduction Location of the sealing system will dictate whether the seals require sterility (i.e., sealing system located inside of an
to the Filling Line isolator) and, in turn, the preparation of the components will dictate such elements as methods of introduction and
replenishment quantities (see Sections 9.0 and 10.0).
The sealing station is considered to contribute to the CCI, which is a CQA; therefore, the equipment must be qualified, calibrated, and maintained in
accordance with strict standards. Routine testing during setup should be performed to ensure that completed seals deliver integral units that are shown
to be defect-free (e.g., no missing caps, no wrinkles in crimped skirt, no loose seals). Visual inspection of finished pharmaceuticals will also inspect
the mechanical seals to check for, and cull, any sealing defects.
130 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 145 (doc p131) ---
7.4.2 Mechanical Seals Applied to Nested Containers
Nested containers may be de-nested for the application of mechanical seals. This is the traditional approach
for closing nested containers.
Special systems are available where the mechanical sealing is conducted while the containers are within the
nest. These systems can be used with press-fit caps or integrated stopper–seal combinations, which are also
in a type of nest or plate that matches the configuration of the vial or syringe nest below. For these systems,
the nest must remain separate from the tub to permit sufficient space between the tops of the containers, and
a special sealing head descends to close all of the containers at once. The risk with this type of closure of a
full nest of containers at one time is ensuring that each individual container has had sufficient force to fulfill
the closing specifications, thereby assuring CCI.
Innovations continue to be made with both containers and closures, therefore, additional features and
capabilities may also become available (see Section 6.0).
7.5 Cartridge Disc Seal Application and System Design Considerations
Cartridge disc seals (also called lined seals) consist of a flat elastomeric disc that is integrated with an
aluminum seal (see item E of Figure 7.2-1). These combination closures are applied in a single step.
As the elastomer is applied at the same time as the seal, these combination closures need to be fully
sterilized before application, and the location of the sealing equipment will also need to be within the aseptic
boundary; it should be close to the point of fill in order to reduce the duration of exposure of the open
container to the environment.
Different crimping processes are used, depending on the system procured; however, all systems have a high
risk of particulate near the critical filling station due to the particle-generation at the crimping station. As a
result, some specific precautions should be considered:
• Airflow should be designed to ensure that no air from the crimping station will move toward the
filling station.
• Crimping technology should be designed to minimize the generation of particles (e.g., minimizing
the shear of blades over the metal seal, using seals that minimize particle-generation during
crimping).
7.6 Container and Closure Defects
PDA’s Technical Report No. 76: Identification and Classification of Visible Nonconformities in Elastomeric
Components and Aluminum Seals for Parenteral Packaging and Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023):
Identification and Classification of Nonconformities in Molded and Tubular Glass Containers for
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing: Covering Ampoules, Bottles, Cartridges, Syringes and Vials provide more
detailed information on the most common quality defects for container–closures and for glass (11, 12).
Defects or damage that occur on the line to either component can result in failed package integrity as
discussed in Section 7.7.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 131

--- PDF Page 146 (doc p132) ---
7.7 Requirements for Effective Container–Closure Integrity and Validation
The goal of CCI validation is to ensure that integrity can first be established in packaging development
studies and, subsequently, can be tested and confirmed with the actual manufacturing equipment and
intended process parameters to fully demonstrate process control, thereby providing integrity assurance.
When performing CCI assessments, the selection of manufacturing conditions should include worst-case
factors impacting CCI characteristics. Additionally, variability in the manufacture of each of the primary
components must be considered and represented in such assessments.
The following are common considerations that may impact component characteristics, and resultant closure
integrity, that should be evaluated during development studies for each supplier (as applicable to the
selected container–closure system):
• Component fit for integrity—Stacked dimensional tolerances
• Inherent-component CCI—Ensures a container system can provide the appropriate level of
tightness for the intended application, for instance, maintaining a modified headspace or vacuum
throughout the shelf life
• Performance with intended capping force or residual seal force
• Raised stopper threshold
• Multi-puncture closures and limited microbial ingress and product leakage between doses
• Plunger-insertion depth and critical bubble-size to support maintenance of sterility during shipment
and transportation
• Utilization with semiautomatic dosing pens that require minimal priming
• Headspace maintenance for lyophilized and inert-gas overlay product
• Cold-storage performance and maintenance of integrity under cold-storage conditions below the
material properties (i.e., glass transition temperature) for elastomers
• Freeze–thaw/thermal-cycling performance, for example:
̶ Freeze–thaw impact on fragile containers (e.g., bags)
̶ Impact to integrity of mechanical closures (e.g., threaded caps, snap caps) upon thermal-
cycling
• Carbon dioxide (CO ) ingress, if transported or stored with dry ice
2
• Maintenance of closure over time and transport, including relaxation over time under the proposed
storage conditions, and impact of transport (e.g., shock and vibration, pressure change in headspace
due to altitude/temperature)
Once development work has been completed, the following are general considerations for inclusion in CCI
evaluations:
• Multiple primary component-batch combinations – To account for batch-to-batch component
variability, validation samples should consider multiple (e.g., three) unique component-batch
combinations from each supplier where each combination of components consists of a unique
pairing (e.g., stopper batch “A” with vial batch “A,” stopper batch “B” with vial batch “A,” stopper
batch “B” with vial batch “B”).
• Alternate component suppliers/sources – If multiple suppliers/sources are used for a single
component, where an “identical” version of that component exists, CCI testing using components
from each supplier/source should be considered. This approach is commonly applicable to
components using identical dimensional specifications and material types. In these cases, the vendor
must first affirm that they have qualified their fabrication processes. The supplier’s qualification of
132 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 147 (doc p133) ---
components is a complex and separate exercise because, depending on the technology chosen, the
supplier must be shown to qualify different fabrication lines on which they might produce the same
component, for example:
̶ Glass forming equipment
̶ Needle insertion equipment
̶ Open mills, mixers, molds, and presses for polymers
̶ Crimp seals aluminum forming and assembly with either polymers or flip-off tops
• Preparation – The impact of preparation processes that precede the filling operation (e.g., cleaning,
sterilization) needs to be evaluated. These may be at the vendors, in the case of RTU components, at
the filling site, or both, in the case of ready-to-sterilize (RTS) components.
• Closing process – The aseptic filling line intended for routine production of the final package
configuration should be used to generate the validation test samples. Process parameters impacting
closure integrity should be identified prior to initiating CCI activities, with the intended production
parameters used to generate validation test samples. Where a parameter is variable or has a range,
the range should be supported by validation testing. For example, for vials, the capper testing
should consider performing CCI testing at high, medium, and low application-force settings when
variable forces may be applied during production setup and operation.
• Manufacturing conditions – Test samples should represent the complete sequence of the final
commercial process, including component cleaning and sterilization. In addition, terminally
sterilized products would require test samples to be processed through the entire terminal-
sterilization operation before testing.
• Storage conditions and shelf life – CCI validation should consider the intended storage conditions
of filled product containers, which are typically supported by development activities. All
manufacturing conditions, including storage intervals where filled containers are held for a
predefined period prior to final sealing operations, should be incorporated into the CCI validation
study.
• Packaging and secondary assembly – CCI and the impact of closure characteristics should be
considered for additional processing steps following primary container-sealing and can include
technical assessment or direct testing. Typically, the impact from the labeling and packaging of
vials does not require additional CCI testing; however, the secondary assembly of plunger rod or
safety devices and their incorporation into the final device delivery system can present risks
requiring additional CCI evaluation.
• Shipping and transport – Evidence that a container–closure system maintains integrity throughout
shipping and distribution is expected. This can be achieved by either testing a container–closure
system that has undergone actual or simulated shipping, or by providing robust evidence within a
validation assessment that builds on the knowledge from development and CCI-validation activities
and focuses on failure modes specific to shipping and transport. If shipping-and-transport CCI-
testing is executed, it is typically a separate study from the filling-line CCI validation.
• Vial–stopper and syringes – These do not typically benefit from additional CCI testing following
shipping and transport if worst-case conditions have already been characterized in development and
are demonstrated to be comparable or worse than the conditions experienced during shipment, for
example:
̶ Worst-case pressures via tests (e.g., helium leak, dye ingress, vacuum decay)
̶ Plunger-movement characterization studies for syringes
̶ Maintenance of headspace on cold storage
̶ Resistance of CO ingress from dry-ice exposure
2
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 133