
--- PDF Page 161 (doc p147) ---
9.0 Component and Filling Supply Handling Considerations
PDA has published several technical reports that deal with the handling of components and supplies for
aseptic filling (e.g., steam sterilization, depyrogenation, defects in glass, defects in elastomeric closures), as
well as addressing common defects (11, 12, 15, 19-21). None of these, however, presents an integrated
standard for aseptic filling as it relates to filling technology. Section 9.0 defines the various methods for
preparing and handling components and filling supplies. Section 10.0 discusses the mechanisms for getting
materials to the point of the aseptic fill while minimizing risks.
9.1 Considerations for Component Handling and Impact on System Design
The most important considerations for handling the components and supplies for aseptic filling include:
• Utilizing methods of introduction that will minimize the inherent interventions for the line
• Protecting the filling operation from viable and total particulate and other forms of contamination
• Minimizing disruption of the unidirectional airflow
Key considerations for the selection of the components to be used on the line include:
• Type of primary containers (e.g., vials, ampoules, cartridges, syringes, bags) and their associated
materials of construction (e.g., glass, cyclic olefin copolymer, plastic) required for the product
• Pretreatment needed for the selected components (e.g., siliconization)
• Packaging, sterilization, and pretreatment methods that facilitate the handling of components (e.g.,
reduce risks of twinning/sticking/clumping/nesting of stoppers or caps, reduce risks of entanglement
of plungers)
With these considerations in mind, the points to be considered for the selection of handling mechanism are
outlined in Section 9.1.1.
9.1.1 Ready-To-Sterilize or Ready-to-Use Versus In-Line or On-Site Pretreatment
When making the essential decision of selecting either RTU containers—those that have been sterilized,
depyrogenated, or pretreated (e.g., siliconized), or selecting in-line or on-site treatment of containers—the
key considerations include the batch size, available processing time, and overall complexity required for
introduction of the components. For RTU components, the integrity of the components in their supplier
packaging must be maintained during the handling and transit from the supplier to the point of use. For in-
line or on-site treated containers, there are often engineering controls that ensure the integrity as these
components are conveyed or introduced to the line directly.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 147

--- PDF Page 162 (doc p148) ---
9.1.1.1 Large Batch Production
In the case of large batch production in glass, the primary containers are commonly supplied untreated, as
the economics of handling large quantities of sterile or RTS components can be prohibitive. The glass
handling is simplified when managed before both cleaning and sterilization or depyrogenation. In such
cases, applying in-house pretreatment that includes a glass washer and depyrogenation tunnel (or oven) is
necessary in order for the components to enter into the Grade A environment (20, 21). The exact break-even
cost where on-site pretreatment is less expensive than RTU or RTS components is dependent upon the
number of units planned as well as the style of containers, and the required packaging needed to
accommodate handling the RTU or RTS components. Wide-spread adoption of RTU and RTS components
by industry has reduced supply costs for the most common sizes and styles. The economic analysis should
consider fully absorbed labor, facility costs, equipment life cycle, energy, and reject costs for the on-site
treatment. Therefore, the break-even point may need to be considered for every project.
9.1.1.2 Specialty Components with Complex Pretreatment, Assembly, or Orientation
Complexities arise with the processing of specialized components, such as syringe barrels. Complex
interactions such as on-line siliconization of the barrel to provide the necessary lubrication for the plunger,
gluing of staked needles, assembly of luer tips, or assembly with the needle shield can complicate
processing (22). In addition, the orientation requirements for syringe barrels during filling make it far more
convenient to provide these components within a tub (or nest) that orients and supports the syringes during
the filling process. Rather than trying to control these processes in-line, RTU components have become the
industry norm for these primary containers, regardless of batch size.
Another advantage of nested containers is the reduction of container contact with adjacent containers during
conveyance, reducing glass-to-glass contact, and consequently defects (e.g. scuffing, cracks, chips). Nesting
may be in use for other container types, not just syringes, for the same reason. As with syringes, the use of
nesting commonly mandates a RTU format so that the nesting container, and the primary container it
houses, can be prepared and sterilized together. When introducing nested containers to the filling line, the
airflow cascade and pressure cascade around the large opening required to permit the nested containers to
enter which is much larger than a single-container mousehole for a single vial, will need to be demonstrated
during air flow visualization (i.e., smoke studies) and qualified. There could be various possible solutions.
Two common approaches include placing a container nest at the beginning and end of the process to block
the opening and make the smallest possible opening around the nest or incorporating an automated baffle
which opens just as a tub enters or exits the barrier.
When making use of any opening with a sliding baffle or door, care should be taken to ensure that the entire
surface can be cleaned and decontaminated. Furthermore, with either design, airflow studies should examine
the pressure cascade and turbulence during the transition.
Additional technology is usually required to remove the lids and coversheets (commonly Tyvek®) from the
nest to expose the open containers to the filling line (commonly called delidding). This operation generates
particles; thus, it is positioned upstream and separate from the filler. Various technologies are used for the
removal of the lids and coversheets including but not limited to robotics. The selected mechanism should be
evaluated for suitability to the operation, and EM should be employed near the delidding operation to
monitor particulate during routine operation.
Often, fewer container types are available for nested formats; therefore, long lead-times may be encountered
if a new configuration is to be designed and qualified with a vendor. While vials, cartridges, and syringes
148 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 163 (doc p149) ---
may all be filled on the same line, selecting a handling mechanism of one-by-one or nesting is common.
Creating a filling line that is capable of crossing over between single units and nested units, especially when
handling different container types, can be achieved with proper design, but it is a significantly more
complex design, fabrication, and operation.
Section 12.0 and Section 5.0 discuss considerations associated with the rejection of containers while
working in a nested format when undertaking activities such as weight-checks or when handling nests of
containers at visual inspection stations after filling.
9.1.1.3 Small Batch Production
RTU glass vials may be well-suited for small batch-size production, as the handling of the pretreated
components is quite simple. A smaller batch size also shifts the economics of washing and preparing
components to favor the additional expense associated with RTU or RTS components. However, for more
complex containers that consist of multiple components (e.g., barrel, needle, needle-shield for syringes) with
multiple materials of construction, the assembly and manufacture of the components leads to the necessity
of pretreatment (e.g., gamma sterilization), which drives the use case even for small batch sizes. As stated
previously, it is best to evaluate the economics on a case-by-case basis (see Section 9.1.1.1).
9.1.1.4 Considerations for Ready-to-Sterilize
RTS primary containers (prewashed) are introduced before the depyrogenation step; therefore, it is
necessary to have a loading section to transfer the primary containers into the tunnel or oven. The loading
section must be designed to protect the glassware from any particle contamination during this stage, similar
to preventing any particle contamination from the end of washing in-line and the entrance into the tunnel.
Sterilization or depyrogenation of glassware in ovens currently is being discontinued throughout the
industry due to the contamination risks caused by manual operations, the use of stainless-steel boxes (which
themselves require washing), and additional controls needed to introduce containers to the line.
9.1.1.5 Cyclic Olefin Copolymer and Plastics
For COC and other plastics, RTU containers are the most common choice. These materials of construction
are commonly subjected to a sterilization mechanism, such as gamma irradiation or ethylene oxide (EtO)
sterilization, which is difficult to integrate directly into filling lines. Consequently, these sterilization
services are typically performed by external suppliers, in part due to the economics of implementing these
sterilization methods with the appropriate controls at the scale required. The industry continues to innovate
with sterilization technologies for COC and plastics (e.g., gamma irradiation, X-ray). As additional
technologies emerge that are cost-effective and compact, it may be that on-line treatment of polymers will
become a more standard practice. For COC components, an additional complication of their supply is that
they tend to scratch very easily. Because nested processing lowers the risk of damaging the component, this
must be considered in any on-line pretreatment.
9.1.1.6 Transfer of RTU Primary Containers
In the case of RTU primary containers, which are sterile or depyrogenated (regardless of the container
material of construction), a mechanism must be in place to aseptically transfer the containers directly into
the Grade A infeed-filling section. Some of the mechanisms of transfer include (see Section 10.0):
• No-touch transfer (NTT) as an automatic or semiautomatic system for inner-bag and outer-bag
removal while introducing the tub or tray into the barrier (23)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 149

--- PDF Page 164 (doc p150) ---
• Conveyor or other transfer equipment (e.g., transfer isolator) that includes an automatic external
biodecontamination system (e.g., hydrogen peroxide, e-beam, ultraviolet light, pulsed light)
• Sterile-container transfer through beta-port bag, container, or transfer isolator provided by the
supplier
With plastic containers (e.g., droptainers, polypropylene syringes), the interface has an additional need for
unscrambling and orienting the components at the filling section.
It is important to ensure that the chosen supplier can provide the RTU components in the selected transfer
modality during the filling system design stage. Significant delays have occurred to filling system
implementation when suppliers are not capable of providing the correct packaging or the appropriately
dimensioned transfer device.
9.1.1.7 Advantages and Disadvantages of the Various Approaches
The advantages and disadvantages of on-site treatment vs. RTU primary containers are highlighted in Table
9.1.1.7-1.
150 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 165 (doc p151) ---
Table 9.1.1.7-1 Considerations for In-Line Treated Versus Ready to Used Transfer Unit Containers
Consideration In-Line and On-Site Ready to Use Ready to Use (RTU) with Ready to Use (RTU) with
Treatment (RTU) with No- External External
Touch Transfer Biodecontamination — Biodecontamination —
Hydrogen Peroxide E-Beam
Contamination On-site management of Reduced Simplified due to in-line Simplified due to in-line
Control sterilization results in all contamination risk management of management of
Strategy parameters being known with automatic biodecontamination. biodecontamination.
to the team drafting the handling.
CCS, however controls
Inspection required
must exist for processing
for supplier of
conditions, cleaning
primary packaging
agents, and equipment.
for SA controls and
Supplier surveillance for quality of the
pre-treatment (e.g., secondary and
sterilization methods and tertiary packaging of
controls) and for the components.
transport of sterile
CCS must address
components not needed.
protection of
containers at
introduction point
and must include
additional
environmental
monitoring for the
NTT operation.
Processing Processing rate Processing rate Processing rate correlated to Processing rate correlated to
Rate correlated to rate of correlated to the rate rate of batch cycle with rate of batch cycle for
component introduction. of component hydrogen peroxide for component introduction.
introduction. component introduction.
Can employ more than Higher processing speed than
one tunnel to supply line. Slower processing speed than hydrogen peroxide.
E-Beam.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 151

--- PDF Page 166 (doc p152) ---
Consideration In-Line and On-Site Ready to Use Ready to Use (RTU) with Ready to Use (RTU) with
Treatment (RTU) with No- External External
Touch Transfer Biodecontamination — Biodecontamination —
Hydrogen Peroxide E-Beam
Validation Qualification and Simpler validation In-line biodecontamination In-line biodecontamination
validation required for (e.g., no on-site requires qualification. requires qualification.
processing. qualification of
Easy to validate process, Easy to validate process, ability
washer and tunnel,
Well-understood ability to demonstrate a clear to demonstrate a clear 6-log
VPHP, or E-Beam).
processes. 6-log reduction in resistant reduction in resistant
microorganisms. microorganism
Easy to validate process,
ability to demonstrate a
clear 6-log reduction in
resistant microorganisms.
Particulate Risk Potential for glass-to- No glass-to-glass No glass-to-glass contact. No glass-to-glass contact.
glass contact depending contact.
upon conveyance
mechanism.
Residuals Risk None None Risk of oxidizing residuals (24). Risk of free radicals or ozone
residuals.
Cost of Lower cost of primary Primary packaging Less expensive primary Less expensive primary
Components packaging compared to more expensive, as packaging than NTT, as packaging than NTT as single-
RTU. vendor has single-bag RTU may be bag RTU may be sufficient but
additional processing sufficient but are more is more expensive than fully
steps. expensive than fully on-site on-site processed components.
processed components.
Initial capital costs may be high.
152 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.