
--- PDF Page 132 ---
The selection of an appropriate elastomer is primarily driven by:
• Shape and size suitable to provide the necessary CCI (e.g., egress or ingress of product or
contaminants) for the selected container while also suitable for the process (e.g., lyophile stoppers)
• Material of construction or coating (or absence of coatings) so the elastomer is chemically
compatible with the product over its entire shelf life (i.e., stability), with minimal extractables or
leachables
• Low particle burden (upon supply, after processing including sterilization, and/or resistance to
coring when penetrated by a syringe needle for multi-use vials or cartridges)
• Suitable breakaway force and glide force for reproducible and smooth plunger actuation (syringes
and cartridges only) to ensure trouble-free patient administration and, for multi-use containers,
delivered dose accuracy
Key styles of elastomer are depicted in Figure 7.2-1 and include:
A: Serum stoppers (for SVPs)
B: Infusion stoppers (for LVPs)
C: Lyophilization stoppers
D: Cartridge stoppers (also called pistons)
E: Cartridge disc seals (also called CombiSeals)
F: Syringe stoppers (also called pistons or plungers)
Figure 7.2-1 Illustration of Significant Elastomer Types
118 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 133 ---
Figure 7.2-1 illustrates some of the major differences in the various elastomers, such as:
• Stopper A and stopper B are a serum stopper and infusion stopper, respectively, for SVPs and
LVPs.
• Stopper C is a 2-legged lyophilization stopper with ribs to permit partial insertion and two legs
which permit a pathway for sublimation during the freeze-drying process.
• Stopper D is a cartridge stopper for which the sealing surface is along the sides as there is no flange.
• Stopper E is a disc seal, which consists of an elastomer and a mechanical seal that are applied as a
single system to some cartridge types.
• Stopper F is a syringe stopper with a threaded portion on the upper surface to receive a threaded
plunger or for mounting in an autoinjector (Section 7.3.2 provides additional details on the various
design features and their uses).
Advanced container types may also have corresponding advanced closures that are matched to the specific
container (e.g., multi-chamber septa for in situ mixing, multi-chamber septa or plungers for the separation of
liquids and powders, press-fit or snap cap closures for low temperature applications) (see Section 6.0 for
more information about container types).
Press-fit closures are a special closure system where the elastomer is integrated into a polymer cap. The
polymer cap has tabs that snap around the vial neck to seal the container. To complete the sealing, a defined
force must be applied to the closure system to ensure all tabs snap fully around the neck. Generally, this
closure claims the feature “integrity by design,” because only one process parameter needs to be achieved to
ensure good sealing. They are available as both serum and lyophile stoppers. Lyophile press-fit closures
have two seating positions, a high position to maintain a channel for sublimation in the lyophilizer and a
fully sealed position for final container-closure. When the stoppering is accomplished by lyophilizer-shelf
compression, the mechanical seal portion of the press-fit closure is also sealed. Figure 7.2-2 depicts a press-
fit closure and a cut-away of the closure to better illustrate the different elements to the final seal.
Figure 7.2-2 Illustration of a Press-Fit Fully Closed and a Cut-Away of the Interior of the
Closure
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 119

--- PDF Page 134 ---
Cartridge disc seals are a specialty closure for the delivery end of the cartridge; they include an elastomeric
disc that is integrated with a mechanical aluminum seal (see Section 7.5 for additional details on cartridge
disc seals).
Successful closing-station design will depend on advanced knowledge of the elements described in Table
7.2-1.
Table 7.2-1 Attributes Impacting Closing Design
Attribute Impact(s) to Closing Station Design
Closure Will define sorting-system bowl and track dimensions and design.
Dimensions and
Will influence issues like “twinning,” where one elastomer is entwined or stuck
Overall Shape
to another elastomer which, in turn, may require different features of the
sorting-system bowl or differing levels of vibration to manipulate them and
orient them correctly.
Materials of Will influence the surface of the sorting-system components to reduce friction
Construction and and promote ease of movement during sorting and orientation.
Coatings, if any
Will influence the mechanism of insertion and the insertion force, as the
materials and coatings affect friction against the neck or walls of the container.
Product If inert headspace is required, will affect the design of the closing station to
Requirements provide inert gas during closing.
If headspace will be minimized, vacuum may need to be provided at closing to
ensure a minimum bubble between the product and the elastomer.
If products on the line will include both the traditional liquids and lyophilized
products, a closure station may need to be able to adjust for partial insertion of
lyophile stoppers.
Batch/Campaign Size of the batch/campaign will influence the number of times replenishment of
Details the sorting system will be required, which will influence decisions such as
whether a bulk hopper should be provided for feeding the sorting system.
Filling speed will influence the size of the sorting-system bowl to provide the
best balance between continuous operation and replenishment.
Method of Different methods of introduction to the line and different sources of supply
Introduction to (e.g., RTU vs. processed in-house) will influence the necessary connections to
the Filling Line the filling line (see Section 9.0 and Section 10.0).
7.3 Closure Insertion Considerations and their Effect on the Design of
Closing Systems
The selection of the container–closure system will influence the design of the closing system. The use of
more than one closure type on a line may require flexibility in the closing-system design and use. In all
120 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 135 ---
cases, the objective is to ensure an integral seal on the container to protect its contents throughout its shelf
life.
7.3.1 Elastomer Insertion in Vials and Bottles
The stoppering of vials, whether using serum stoppers or lyophilization stoppers, essentially employ the
same technique. After orienting the stopper in the stopper track with the finial or flange (the flat top of the
stopper that protrudes over the lip or landing seal of the vial or bottle) facing up, and the shank (the portion
of the stopper that inserts and seals to the neck of the vial or bottle) facing down, the stopper is placed in the
mouth of the container (see items A, B, and C of Figure 7.2-1). This can be performed by vacuum transport,
mechanical transport, or friction transfer, with the stopper being inserted through the force of the container
passing beneath the delivery point at the end of the stopper track. Commonly, the elastomer is then
depressed within the neck of the container (using such external pressure as a wheel or by vacuum) to ensure
that a tight seal is formed between the underside of the flange and the sealing surface of the lip of the
container (also known as a land seal). The stopper insertion technology (mechanical or vacuum) is
commonly selected based on such attributes as line speed, design of closure, and headspace. It is at the point
of stopper insertion that evacuation commonly occurs to replace the headspace within the container with an
inert gas, when this is a product specification.
Automated re-stoppering capability can be added to filling systems in order to ensure that correctly filled
containers are not discarded due to missing stoppers while they are still under Grade A controls. This is
particularly useful for high value products or for those with limited availability. Raised stopper detection is a
common sensor or vision-system integrated into filling lines to ensure that the stopper has been correctly
inserted and there is no gap between the stopper flange and the vial landing seal. This inspection will ensure
that the stopper has not popped out of place during subsequent transport to the mechanical sealing station
(e.g., permitting potential microbial ingress, loss of inert headspace). This detector is usually present prior to
the capping station when the capping station is not a Grade A environment (i.e., when the capper is under a
Grade A air supply but not within the isolator, or within a Grade A air supply RABS in a Grade C
background) to check for missing or displaced stoppers on all containers prior to entering the sealing
process, and will force the rejection of any unit that is improperly sealed. Vision systems are considered
state-of-the-art due to their ability to detect and reject a wide range of positional variations. Sensors are
often less sensitive to the three-dimensional changes in stopper position.
For lyophilization stoppers, the shank is specially designed with “legs” with ribs that enables the stopper
shank to be partially, yet securely, inserted into the neck of the container. This allows for sublimation of the
contents within the lyophilizer through the open spaces between the legs (see item C of Figure 7.2-1). At
the conclusion of the lyophilization cycle a vacuum is drawn on the containers, inert gas is flooded into the
containers, and the shelves of the lyophilizer are used to fully seat the stoppers on all of the units in the load
at once.
7.3.2 Elastomer Insertion in Prefilled Syringes and Cartridges
The stoppers (or plungers) for prefilled syringes and cartridges have requirements similar to a traditional
vial stopper (e.g., protection of the product, prevention of leakage) but also have added functionality. In a
vial, the primary mechanism of product delivery is to pierce the elastomer with a syringe needle and draw
up the product into a separate syringe for delivery to the patient. However, in prefilled syringes or
cartridges, the stopper serves to deliver the product by applying force from a plunger rod or autoinjector on
the stopper to expel the product through the opposite end of the container. As a consequence, the design of
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 121

--- PDF Page 136 ---
the elastomers for these container types are different, often being uniform in diameter, but with multiple ribs
around the circumference of the stopper that provide superior protection from leaking, while permitting the
stopper to glide smoothly along the sides of the container when depressed during actuation. Syringe
plungers, in particular, are often designed with a cone shape on the side that faces the product, to help
promote full expulsion of the product out of the containers, which typically have a corresponding conical
inner tip geometry. The upper surface may have a threaded depression or retention-ring molded into the
elastomer for the insertion of a plunger shaft or for mounting within an autoinjector (see item F of Figure
7.2-1). For these elastomers, orientation of the elastomer during the sorting, feeding, and insertion process to
ensure that the surface with the plunger retention rings is facing upwards is essential.
Insertion of elastomers in prefilled syringes and cartridges is performed using three primary methods (see
Figure 7.3.2-1):
• Vented or unvented mechanical insertion
• Vacuum insertion (e.g., vacuum bell)
• Vacuum-assisted vented insertion (short or long tube)
Figure 7.3.2-1 Methods of Elastomer Insertion
For the vented insertion technique, the stopper is initially compressed as it is placed within a tube with an
annular vent (i.e., a space around the insertion tube and the wall of the syringe). The tube is inserted in the
barrel of the syringe or cartridge, and the air displaced by the insertion escapes through the annular opening,
as a type of vent. A central pin with a specialized tip that fits the depression in the top of the elastomer is
used to hold the elastomer in place while the tube is withdrawn from the syringe. As the tube is withdrawn,
the stopper expands to fill the entire cross-section of the barrel. The central pin ensures that the stoppers are
consistently inserted to the same depth, using the finger flange of the syringe as a reference point. The
specialized tip of the pin is designed for each plunger type and cavity; ensuring proper deformation of the
stopper during insertion and minimizing stopper height variability during insertion. The annular vent
ensures that there is only a minimal bubble of either air or inert gas between the elastomer and the surface of
the product. This approach leaves some residual headspace, which is helpful for swirling at the time of
122 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 137 ---
visual inspection. A headspace that is too large can present problems with shipment, product administration,
and/or product stability. (Mechanical insertion is used for bulk cartridges that are not pre-capped. The
stopper is compressed and inserted but without a vent. Otherwise, the techniques are very similar.)
In contrast, in a typical vacuum insertion process, a vacuum bell, equipped with a central placement pin with
a specialized tip, is placed over the opening of the container. The placement pin, with the stopper positioned
on the tip, is lowered into the container, while vacuum pressure is maintained throughout. This method
effectively removes the bubble between the product and the stopper while accurately placing the stopper.
This method requires less precompression of the elastomer before insertion, which is important for coated
stoppers or silicone-free stopper systems. (The compression of a vented insertion may damage the coating,
but the vacuum insertion will protect the coated stopper.) The placement of the stopper is less precise with
vacuum insertion than with vented placement, (which makes use of a reference point as described above),
although the removal of the bubble can be more complete yielding a more consistent air gap. Vacuum
insertion techniques are also effective for viscous products where there is a low risk of boiling the fluid due
to the application of the vacuum.
Vacuum-assisted, vented placement is a combination of the first two techniques. A vacuum bell is used over
the opening to the container, but the central placement pin with the specialized tip has an annular vent tube,
as with vented insertion. This approach permits a lower vacuum-level to be used during placement which
can be beneficial for products that cannot withstand deep vacuum as they might boil under the vacuum
pressure. This technique can also provide superior bubble removal than vacuum methods with the more
precise elastomer placement of vented insertion methods. Short- and long-tube options are available for this
approach depending on the fill level and/or distance the plunger must travel from the top of the container
down to the surface of the product during placement. Short tubes are better than long tubes for the vacuum-
assisted vented insertion of elastomers where the ribs are easily wrinkled during insertion (although the
vacuum insertion is the best technique to protect stoppers). Short tubes do not enter beyond the mouth of the
syringe.
Silicone and fluoropolymers (e.g., Teflon®) are common coatings associated with elastomers. Silicone may
be prohibited based on the type of product, as it is recognized to induce aggregation of proteins in some
products. These coatings are used to reduce friction on the walls of the barrel during administration,
resulting in a lower breaking force, smoother operation for the end user, and accurate dosing for multi-use
containers. The reduced friction from siliconized stoppers (or siliconized containers) can also result in
elastomers that are easily displaced, if not adequately inserted (see Section 7.3.1 regarding raised stopper
detection). Silicone-free elastomers are commonly inserted using vacuum insertion or short-tube vacuum-
assisted vented methods because these techniques provide no additional compression to the stopper.
Preventing compression is important since the coating on some silicone-free stoppers can tend to wrinkle
when compressed, creating cosmetic defects and a risk of leaks.
Table 7.3.2-1 compares the various vent, vacuum, and vacuum-assisted vented insertion techniques,
providing a head-to-head comparison of their capabilities and features.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 123

--- PDF Page 138 ---
Table 7.3.2-1 Comparison of Vent and Vacuum Insertion Techniques
Feature Vented Insertion Vacuum Insertion Vacuum-Assisted Vented Vacuum-Assisted
Insertion Short Vented Insertion Long
Application General Use Used for delicate stoppers Used for siliconized and Used typically for
Technique (not used such as coated stoppers and coated stoppers where siliconized stoppers where
for coated stoppers stoppers that have a wrinkling shallow stopper insertion deep stopper insertion
as they cannot be tendency; also used for depth and large fill is required. depth with small fill is
compressed). product with high viscosity Coated stoppers can be required. Coated stoppers
that withstand deep vacuum. applied as there is no cannot be applied as the
significant stopper compression of the stopper
compression with this method. is too high.
Cost Comparatively less Most expensive. More expensive than vent More expensive than vent
expensive. tube but less expensive than tube but less expensive
vacuum bell. than vacuum bell.
Speed Enables fastest line Often a slower line speed due Of the vacuum techniques, One of the slowest line
speeds of the to the required time to pull this has the fastest line speed speeds for the vacuum
techniques. the vacuum; however, small (although slower than vent techniques as generally
headspace or viscous tube alone); large fill, shallow small fill, deep stopper-
products may enable faster stopper-insertion depth insertion depth requires
speeds, although insertion reduces time to pull vacuum. long evacuation time.
speed is also stopper-
dependent.
Vacuum Level N/A Deep vacuum possible. Moderate vacuum possible as Higher vacuum possible;
(Product stoppers may begin to move stopper movement before
Dependent) before evacuation is complete evacuation is complete is
if the vacuum level is too deep; not a significant problem
short vent tube length makes due to length of vent tube
this a risk (small friction (more friction surface
surface between stopper and between stopper and vent
vent tube). tube).
124 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 139 ---
Feature Vented Insertion Vacuum Insertion Vacuum-Assisted Vented Vacuum-Assisted
Insertion Short Vented Insertion Long
Air Bubble Less effective at air Effective at air bubble Similar effectiveness to the Can be highly effective at
Removal bubble removal. removal (especially with vacuum bell. air bubble removal
viscous products). depending on vacuum level
applied and depending on
the column height that
needs to be evacuated.
Viscous Less common, but Vacuum is a good technique Vacuum is a good technique Vacuum is a good
possible for viscous for viscous products as for viscous products as technique for viscous
products. product does not boil under product does not boil under products as product does
vacuum, and deep vacuum vacuum. not boil under vacuum.
levels are possible.
Small Fill Effective with small Comparatively less effective Not designed for small fill Technique was designed for
Volume (Deep fill volumes. with small fill volumes due to volumes due to the short tube, small fill volumes (with deep
Insertion the size of the headspace to which does not enter the insertion depth) but may be
be removed (affects speed). mouth of the container. slower due to the size of
Depth)
the headspace to be
removed.
Large Fill Effective with large Effective with large fill Effective with large fill Effective with large fill
Volume fill volumes. volumes. volumes (technique was volumes.
(Shallow designed for large fill volumes
and shallow insertion depth).
Insertion
Depth)
Silicone-Free Not effective with Effective for silicone-free May be possible to use with Not effective with silicone-
silicone-free insertion. silicone-free insertion if the free insertion.
insertion. stopper is not subject to
wrinkling.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 125

--- PDF Page 140 ---
Feature Vented Insertion Vacuum Insertion Vacuum-Assisted Vented Vacuum-Assisted
Insertion Short Vented Insertion Long
Consistency of Highly consistent for Vacuum alone not highly More consistent for elastomer Long vent tube permits
Elastomer elastomer consistent for elastomer placement than vacuum alone, accurate elastomer
Placement placement. placement. but short tube will be more placement.
variable with a deeper
placement requirement.
Prevention of Higher risk of Low risk of wrinkling or Low risk of wrinkling or Higher risk of wrinkling or
Wrinkling or wrinkling or distortion with vacuum alone. distortion of elastomers, distortion of elastomers due
Distortion distortion of similar to vacuum-bell to compression.
elastomers due to application.
compression.
126 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 141 ---
Mechanical insertion may be used for the insertion of stoppers into cartridges from the bottom prior to
filling, as shown in Figure 7.3.2-2.
Figure 7.3.2-2 Mechanical Insertion from the Bottom of a Cartridge Prior to Filling
In this case, the cartridge is then filled from the top. Whether from the bottom or top, stopper insertion has
the same risks and required controls as those compared and contrasted in Table 7.3.2-1.
7.3.3 Common Defects in Elastomer Placement Operations
There are a number of defects that routinely occur with elastomer placement, among them:
• Incomplete seating (vials) or inconsistent seating position (syringe/cartridge)
• Disruption or smearing of silicone or fluoropolymer coating on elastomer
• Wrinkling/distortion of ribs on syringe/cartridge elastomers during placement
• Liquid in ribs of elastomer for syringes/cartridges, or product under the stopper flange on vials and
bottles
• Damage to plunger (e.g., bending, distortion of ribs)
• Insufficient control of headspace (air or inert gas)
Many of these defects can be reduced through proper selection and design of the elastomer placement
system. However, careful adherence to consistent, validated setup parameters of the insertion system is
necessary to maintain quality control. Quality control is also important during the incoming inspection of
elastomers to ensure that dimensional tolerances and quality of coatings is maintained.
As a final note, elastomers are subject to an array of testing for extractables and leachables (during initial
qualification), as well as chemical and particulate contaminants (with each batch). Container-closure
integrity is commonly tested on every batch, with careful adherence to the validated parameters for closing
the containers (both with elastomer and mechanical seal) (see Section 7.7). Visual inspection of sterile
products includes inspection of the elastomer for abnormal appearance or improper insertion. As a
consequence, elastomer placement is an important part of the ongoing quality of the container-closure
system and for the overall integrity of the sterile product.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 127

--- PDF Page 142 ---
7.4 Mechanical Seal Application and System Design
Mechanical seals are inherent components in many container–closure systems. As with the primary
packaging, the choice of mechanical seal will influence the design of the aseptic filling system. The use of
more than one mechanical closure type on a line may require flexibility in the closing system design and use
but, as with primary containers and closures, the objective is to ensure an integral seal on the container to
protect its contents throughout its shelf life.
7.4.1 Mechanical Seal Application
There are specialty closures, such as press-fit caps or cartridge disc seals, that integrate both the elastomer
and the mechanical seal in a single closure and, often, a single closing step. However, there are other
processes where the mechanical seal is separate from the elastomer and is applied in a dedicated process
step.
Mechanical seals for vials and bottles, often called overseals or crimp seals consist of a crimpable “skirt”
with either a button, or dust cover (flip seal) over the top of the stopper. These mechanical seals are
commonly produced of aluminum or aluminum with a polymer component (see Figure 7.4.1-1).
Mechanical seals are specified to be slightly wider and longer than the combined dimensions of the flange or
finial of the stopper plus the lip of the container. With these dimensions, they can be placed over top of the
stopper, and the skirt of the seal can be folded under the lip of the container to secure them and supply
sufficient downward pressure on the elastomer and glass to seal. A similar mechanical seal is commonly
applied to cartridges.
Figure 7.4.1-1 Example of a Flip-Off Crimp Seal Before Crimping
Mechanical seals come in several common designs:
• Flip-off – Has a removable button (often polymer) that can be detached to expose the stopper
underneath during administration while leaving the aluminum skirt in place, which continues to
secure the stopper on the container; this is the most common crimp seal for vials that are intended
for syringe administration
• Flip-up/tear-off -- Has a button that, when flipped up, is used to help tear off the aluminum skirt so
the stopper can be removed; not used for parenteral applications but may be used for ophthalmic
solutions
• Flip-off/tear-off – Offers the combination of features of the first two mechanical seal types,
allowing access to the stopper only to remove the aluminum skirt; this is not used for parenteral
applications, but may be used for sterile fluids that are used in testing settings
• Center-tear seal – Usually all aluminum, these seals are most like the flip-off seal but, in this case,
the center tab of aluminum is integrated with the aluminum skirt and can be lifted and removed for
access to the center of the stopper flange while leaving the skirt in place; although intended for
syringe administration, the risk of glove tears with the aluminum tab reduces the frequency that this
design is used
128 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 143 ---
• Complete-tear crimp seal -- Like the center-tear seal, these are all aluminum, however, when the
center tab is lifted, it can be used to remove the entire crimp seal from the container; like the flip-
up/tear-off seal, this is not used for parenteral applications
Mechanical seals are expected to be applied under Grade A air supply (at minimum) that is contiguous with
the filling line. Some systems include the mechanical seal application within the Grade A cleanroom or
isolator adjacent to the filling station. Whether within the cleanroom, isolator, or supplied with Grade A air
supply the intent is to ensure the protection of fully stoppered vials where the mechanical seal has not yet
been crimped. The mechanical seals are not required to be sterile, although in some applications they may
be rendered sterile. The process of forming the aluminum around the lip of the container may generate
significant particulate (as does the rapid spinning of the sealing machine). Therefore, the sealing equipment
for vials is often separated from the rest of the filling line by having a physical barrier (often with a
mousehole) in between the stoppering and seal placement sections of a filling machine within a RABS or
isolator.
Successful sealing station design will depend upon advanced knowledge of those elements described in
Table 7.4.1-1.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 129

--- PDF Page 144 ---
Table 7.4.1-1 Attributes Impacting Sealing System Design
Attribute Impact(s) to Closing Station Design
Seal Dimensions and Will define sorting-system bowl and track dimensions and design.
Overall Shape (and
Will influence issues where one seal is inside another (i.e., twinning) which, in turn, may require different features of
Features)
the sorting-system bowl or differing levels of vibration for manipulating them.
Will influence detection-system capability, such as missing flip-seal detection, or missing elastomeric disc-
seal/missing stopper detection.
Batch/Campaign Details Size of the batch/campaign will influence the number of times that replenishment of the sorting system will be
required, which will influence decisions such as whether a bulk hopper should be provided for feeding the sorting
system.
Filling speed will determine the required speed for the sealing system; commonly, sealing systems operate at a higher
speed than the filling system does to prevent any interruption in the continuous operation of the filler.
Filling speed will also influence the size of the sorting-system bowl to provide the best balance between continuous
operation and replenishment.
Method of Introduction Location of the sealing system will dictate whether the seals require sterility (i.e., sealing system located inside of an
to the Filling Line isolator) and, in turn, the preparation of the components will dictate such elements as methods of introduction and
replenishment quantities (see Sections 9.0 and 10.0).
The sealing station is considered to contribute to the CCI, which is a CQA; therefore, the equipment must be qualified, calibrated, and maintained in
accordance with strict standards. Routine testing during setup should be performed to ensure that completed seals deliver integral units that are shown
to be defect-free (e.g., no missing caps, no wrinkles in crimped skirt, no loose seals). Visual inspection of finished pharmaceuticals will also inspect
the mechanical seals to check for, and cull, any sealing defects.
130 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 145 ---
7.4.2 Mechanical Seals Applied to Nested Containers
Nested containers may be de-nested for the application of mechanical seals. This is the traditional approach
for closing nested containers.
Special systems are available where the mechanical sealing is conducted while the containers are within the
nest. These systems can be used with press-fit caps or integrated stopper–seal combinations, which are also
in a type of nest or plate that matches the configuration of the vial or syringe nest below. For these systems,
the nest must remain separate from the tub to permit sufficient space between the tops of the containers, and
a special sealing head descends to close all of the containers at once. The risk with this type of closure of a
full nest of containers at one time is ensuring that each individual container has had sufficient force to fulfill
the closing specifications, thereby assuring CCI.
Innovations continue to be made with both containers and closures, therefore, additional features and
capabilities may also become available (see Section 6.0).
7.5 Cartridge Disc Seal Application and System Design Considerations
Cartridge disc seals (also called lined seals) consist of a flat elastomeric disc that is integrated with an
aluminum seal (see item E of Figure 7.2-1). These combination closures are applied in a single step.
As the elastomer is applied at the same time as the seal, these combination closures need to be fully
sterilized before application, and the location of the sealing equipment will also need to be within the aseptic
boundary; it should be close to the point of fill in order to reduce the duration of exposure of the open
container to the environment.
Different crimping processes are used, depending on the system procured; however, all systems have a high
risk of particulate near the critical filling station due to the particle-generation at the crimping station. As a
result, some specific precautions should be considered:
• Airflow should be designed to ensure that no air from the crimping station will move toward the
filling station.
• Crimping technology should be designed to minimize the generation of particles (e.g., minimizing
the shear of blades over the metal seal, using seals that minimize particle-generation during
crimping).
7.6 Container and Closure Defects
PDA’s Technical Report No. 76: Identification and Classification of Visible Nonconformities in Elastomeric
Components and Aluminum Seals for Parenteral Packaging and Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023):
Identification and Classification of Nonconformities in Molded and Tubular Glass Containers for
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing: Covering Ampoules, Bottles, Cartridges, Syringes and Vials provide more
detailed information on the most common quality defects for container–closures and for glass (11, 12).
Defects or damage that occur on the line to either component can result in failed package integrity as
discussed in Section 7.7.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 131

--- PDF Page 146 ---
7.7 Requirements for Effective Container–Closure Integrity and Validation
The goal of CCI validation is to ensure that integrity can first be established in packaging development
studies and, subsequently, can be tested and confirmed with the actual manufacturing equipment and
intended process parameters to fully demonstrate process control, thereby providing integrity assurance.
When performing CCI assessments, the selection of manufacturing conditions should include worst-case
factors impacting CCI characteristics. Additionally, variability in the manufacture of each of the primary
components must be considered and represented in such assessments.
The following are common considerations that may impact component characteristics, and resultant closure
integrity, that should be evaluated during development studies for each supplier (as applicable to the
selected container–closure system):
• Component fit for integrity—Stacked dimensional tolerances
• Inherent-component CCI—Ensures a container system can provide the appropriate level of
tightness for the intended application, for instance, maintaining a modified headspace or vacuum
throughout the shelf life
• Performance with intended capping force or residual seal force
• Raised stopper threshold
• Multi-puncture closures and limited microbial ingress and product leakage between doses
• Plunger-insertion depth and critical bubble-size to support maintenance of sterility during shipment
and transportation
• Utilization with semiautomatic dosing pens that require minimal priming
• Headspace maintenance for lyophilized and inert-gas overlay product
• Cold-storage performance and maintenance of integrity under cold-storage conditions below the
material properties (i.e., glass transition temperature) for elastomers
• Freeze–thaw/thermal-cycling performance, for example:
̶ Freeze–thaw impact on fragile containers (e.g., bags)
̶ Impact to integrity of mechanical closures (e.g., threaded caps, snap caps) upon thermal-
cycling
• Carbon dioxide (CO ) ingress, if transported or stored with dry ice
2
• Maintenance of closure over time and transport, including relaxation over time under the proposed
storage conditions, and impact of transport (e.g., shock and vibration, pressure change in headspace
due to altitude/temperature)
Once development work has been completed, the following are general considerations for inclusion in CCI
evaluations:
• Multiple primary component-batch combinations – To account for batch-to-batch component
variability, validation samples should consider multiple (e.g., three) unique component-batch
combinations from each supplier where each combination of components consists of a unique
pairing (e.g., stopper batch “A” with vial batch “A,” stopper batch “B” with vial batch “A,” stopper
batch “B” with vial batch “B”).
• Alternate component suppliers/sources – If multiple suppliers/sources are used for a single
component, where an “identical” version of that component exists, CCI testing using components
from each supplier/source should be considered. This approach is commonly applicable to
components using identical dimensional specifications and material types. In these cases, the vendor
must first affirm that they have qualified their fabrication processes. The supplier’s qualification of
132 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 147 ---
components is a complex and separate exercise because, depending on the technology chosen, the
supplier must be shown to qualify different fabrication lines on which they might produce the same
component, for example:
̶ Glass forming equipment
̶ Needle insertion equipment
̶ Open mills, mixers, molds, and presses for polymers
̶ Crimp seals aluminum forming and assembly with either polymers or flip-off tops
• Preparation – The impact of preparation processes that precede the filling operation (e.g., cleaning,
sterilization) needs to be evaluated. These may be at the vendors, in the case of RTU components, at
the filling site, or both, in the case of ready-to-sterilize (RTS) components.
• Closing process – The aseptic filling line intended for routine production of the final package
configuration should be used to generate the validation test samples. Process parameters impacting
closure integrity should be identified prior to initiating CCI activities, with the intended production
parameters used to generate validation test samples. Where a parameter is variable or has a range,
the range should be supported by validation testing. For example, for vials, the capper testing
should consider performing CCI testing at high, medium, and low application-force settings when
variable forces may be applied during production setup and operation.
• Manufacturing conditions – Test samples should represent the complete sequence of the final
commercial process, including component cleaning and sterilization. In addition, terminally
sterilized products would require test samples to be processed through the entire terminal-
sterilization operation before testing.
• Storage conditions and shelf life – CCI validation should consider the intended storage conditions
of filled product containers, which are typically supported by development activities. All
manufacturing conditions, including storage intervals where filled containers are held for a
predefined period prior to final sealing operations, should be incorporated into the CCI validation
study.
• Packaging and secondary assembly – CCI and the impact of closure characteristics should be
considered for additional processing steps following primary container-sealing and can include
technical assessment or direct testing. Typically, the impact from the labeling and packaging of
vials does not require additional CCI testing; however, the secondary assembly of plunger rod or
safety devices and their incorporation into the final device delivery system can present risks
requiring additional CCI evaluation.
• Shipping and transport – Evidence that a container–closure system maintains integrity throughout
shipping and distribution is expected. This can be achieved by either testing a container–closure
system that has undergone actual or simulated shipping, or by providing robust evidence within a
validation assessment that builds on the knowledge from development and CCI-validation activities
and focuses on failure modes specific to shipping and transport. If shipping-and-transport CCI-
testing is executed, it is typically a separate study from the filling-line CCI validation.
• Vial–stopper and syringes – These do not typically benefit from additional CCI testing following
shipping and transport if worst-case conditions have already been characterized in development and
are demonstrated to be comparable or worse than the conditions experienced during shipment, for
example:
̶ Worst-case pressures via tests (e.g., helium leak, dye ingress, vacuum decay)
̶ Plunger-movement characterization studies for syringes
̶ Maintenance of headspace on cold storage
̶ Resistance of CO ingress from dry-ice exposure
2
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 133