
--- PDF Page 56 ---
Figure 2.2-3 Rotary Piston Pump Filler Fluid Pathway
2.2.1 Rotary Piston Pump Design Configurations
For inline CIP/SIP, a special design is necessary that allows the pump to be cleaned around the full
circumference of the piston and cylinder. Therefore, two additional connections are required: one in the
lower position and one in the upper position of the pump (see Figure 2.2.1-1). In addition, the pump is
required to move to a cleaning and sterilization position to ensure that all surfaces are opened to the greatest
extent for exposure to both cleaning fluids and steam, allowing more space between piston and cylinder.
Due to the challenges in accommodating all the connections, the CIP/SIP of RPP is much more challenging
than TP. However, although RPP is more technically complex, the focus on reducing aseptic assembly
operations has made CIP/SIP more common with RPP.
42 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 57 ---
Figure 2.2.1-1 Rotary Piston Pump with Clean-in-Place/Sterilize-in-Place Capability
In contrast to the PP, the RPP has no drift in delivered dose over time and fills the same amount of volume
at the beginning and at the end of the aseptic filling operation. This means that a statistical IPC is technically
appropriate (see Sections 5.1- 5.1.4).
2.2.2 Rotary Piston Pump Setup
The tight mechanical tolerances of the piston and cylinder often require that the two parts of each pump be
scribed with serial numbers (by the OEM), which will ensure that the matching parts are always assembled
together to avoid binding, seizing, or having a large tolerance range that can result in changes in dosing
accuracy, dripping at the needles, or leaking. There may be exceptions for some materials of construction,
such as ceramic, that enable the piston and cylinders to be interchangeable. Product characteristics should be
considered carefully when selecting technology, as the tight mechanical tolerances cannot withstand the
formation of crystals during operation that may result in blocking of the piston and cylinder. In these cases,
ceramic pumps may be called for, or larger tolerances may suffice, if there is no dripping concern with the
specific product.
The pump stroke is adjusted depending on the fill volume but, for priming, it is advantageous to use the
complete stroke to exhaust the air out of the system. There are different methods to prime the pump to
remove air from the system and ensure reaching target fills without air gaps at the beginning of the batch.
The approach to priming should be considered depending on the application, product characteristics, and
execution of the pump.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 43

--- PDF Page 58 ---
2.2.3 Rotary Piston Pump System Positioning
To prevent too much pressure on the product, thereby preventing product release from between the piston and cylinder, the intermediate vessel must
be ventilated and should be maintained at a consistent fill-level to maintain constant head pressure. This is especially important for low-viscosity
products. For higher-viscosity products, the intermediate vessel is commonly used with overpressure and might not be ventilated.
2.2.4 Rotary Piston Pump Advantages and Disadvantages
Table 2.2.4-1 identifies the advantages and disadvantages of RPP systems.
Table 2.2.4-1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Rotary Piston Pump Systems
Characteristic Advantages Disadvantages
Viscosity Compatible with high-viscosity products. May not be appropriate for shear-sensitive products due to
the product lubrication of the pump.
Durability Durable, long equipment life when handled properly. None
Different materials of construction may experience different
handling risks (e.g., ceramic susceptible to sudden changes in
temperature, stainless steel susceptible to deformation, glass
subject to fracture).
Single Use None Usually not used for SU because of price; however, some
manufacturers do offer SUS RPP.
Changeover CIP/SIP capable in most designs. When not purchased with CIP/SIP, aseptic installation
requires extensive training and is not an approach that easily
fulfills EU GMP Annex 1 objectives (3).
Sterilization SIP is an advantage for SA. Extra connections are required for CIP/SIP for all models.
Some models may require additional valving for CIP/SIP,
which adds to the complexity. Whether the additional valves
are present or not, it will be required to demonstrate steam
penetration to all surfaces.
44 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 59 ---
Characteristic Advantages Disadvantages
Shear Level None Significant shear force is exerted on the product due to the
compression of the fluid within the cylinder and piston
movement.
Dosing 10-fold filling range for each pump size is typical. Several pump sizes may be required if wide filling-volume
Range ranges are required, which may restrict campaign flexibility.
Operability Dosing is stable across the batch, even for campaign Air entrainment in product (e.g., foam, air bubbles, air
manufacture (which may permit statistical weight-check entrained from mixing or recirculation) can be detrimental to
control). dosing control. Priming is essential for proper dosing control.
Optimized filling curves can control splashing and foaming Separate drives are a more complex design, which is more
very effectively while still filling quickly. expensive. Common drives (simpler, less expensive design)
are possible but will require physical disconnection of any
Separate drives are possible for each pump, which makes
individual pump in case of failure (e.g., leakage, dose control
individual fine-tuning and operation simpler (including the
failure) and does not enable product savings during priming,
disconnection of any individual pump mid-run).
re-dosing, and emptying.
2.2.5 Rotary Piston Pump Sterility Assurance: Microbial and Total Particles
The RPP, one of the oldest filling technologies for aseptic filling, is a system where the product has some exposure to the filling environment (even
though that area is small at the point where the piston inserts in the cylinder). Therefore, the system must be inside the containment (i.e., isolator or
RABS) at all times to maintain sterility, unlike TP or PP where some elements may be installed outside of the environment. This positioning is helpful
when handling potent or toxic products, as all vulnerable fluid pathway components are within the containment, thereby protecting the operators and
the external environment from product exposure.
Due to the complexity and expense of the system, RPP is rarely employed as a SUS. Consequently, to avoid product residues being carried over
between batches, the RPP must be thoroughly cleaned before use, followed by sterilization and aseptic installation (when not subject to CIP/SIP).
RPP systems are capable of CIP/SIP, thereby avoiding aseptic installation. Maintenance of aseptic conditions requires a validated cleaning,
sterilization, and setup process as required in EU GMP Annex 1; therefore, new systems should be designed with CIP/SIP in mind (3, 6).
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 45

--- PDF Page 60 ---
Since it is a seal-free system and product-lubricated, there is limited friction of the piston and pump to form
particles. However, care must be taken during priming, when the pump is first empty and then becomes
lubricated with product, so that excessive friction does not occur. Shear-sensitive products may experience
localized shear due to the product lubrication of the piston and pump and should be evaluated for
compatibility with the technology. Due to the tight mechanical tolerance of the piston and cylinder, it is
essential to maintain the serialized pairings to prevent friction (unless otherwise specified by the supplier). If
the product itself is abrasive (e.g., suspensions, products that tend to crystallize), a ceramic pump can be
used instead of a stainless-steel pump. If damage is suspected of any pump, evaluation by the supplier is
recommended to ensure that the mechanical tolerances have been maintained and the damage will not
continue. Damage to the pumps could result in a loss of accuracy, leaks or drips in severe cases, and/or the
formation of particulate.
Attention should be given to the airflow above and around the pumps. The mechanical assembly for the
drive and pump stroke should be designed to prevent particulate from becoming entrained in the air that
flows over the piston and cylinder to avoid it from entering the product stream.
2.2.6 Rotary Piston Pump Efficiency and Impact on Risk
The RPP is a high-precision dosing system for which the accuracy remains stable throughout the filling
process. Even though the system is highly accurate, a periodic IPC is recommended to detect any underfills
due to possible air bubbles within the tubing over time (see Sections 5.1-5.1.4). As a consequence, an
appropriate rationale should be developed for the timing and frequency of the IPC that reflects the attributes
of the product being filled and real-world data, when available.
2.2.7 Rotary Piston Pump Costs: Initial and Lifecycle
An RPP filler, together with CIP/SIP, is the most expensive dosing system. The CIP/SIP components drive
much of the increase in cost. CIP/SIP-capable pumps have additional connections for the flow of the
cleaning and sterilization media, with or without valves on each pump, depending upon the system design.
There is commonly an additional mechanical drive to bring the pump into the CIP/SIP position.
When multiple fill volumes are required, additional pump sizes are commonly necessary, which can add to
the system cost. For firms that intend to dedicate equipment to a single product, additional pumps will be
required for each product, not just the tubing. Spare pumps are typically maintained to avoid downtime from
pump damage.
Lifecycle costs are negligible as the pumps have a long lifespan, provided they are protected from damage
(e.g., dropping, assembly and setup accidents, mismatch of piston and cylinder, scratching due to abrasive
products).
Periodic revalidation of SIP will require access to difficult-to-reach locations for temperature-mapping and
bioindicator placement, making the revalidation time consuming to complete.
TCO calculations would need to include setup, operation, and CIP/SIP as appropriate to the specific system
design. Examples of considerations for the TCO calculations may include, but are not limited to, time,
utilities, cleaning validation, maintenance, process know-how, training of operators, downtime due to
CIP/SIP cycles, and extended times in cases where parallel processing is not possible (such as not being able
to run the biodecontamination cycles simultaneously with the CIP/SIP).
46 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 61 ---
2.2.8 Rotary Piston Pump System Complexity: Setup, Handling, and Changeover
The RPP is a two- or three-drive system—hub and rotation (two drives) with CIP/SIP positioning (common
third drive)—which increases the complexity compared to TP and PP single-drive systems. Setup associated
with CIP/SIP for the RPP is more complex due to the number of connections required to ensure flow
through all portions of the cylinder chamber. Additional points on setup, operation, and changeover are
described in Sections 2.2.2-2.2.7.
2.2.9 Rotary Piston Pump Maintenance and Aging
The additional valves that are needed as part of the CIP/SIP system will require that the valve seats be
replaced periodically, along with the gaskets at the CIP/SIP connection points. Lubrication of gear boxes for
drivers will be required. The arm(s) that depress(es) and withdraw(s) the pistons will also require
lubrication. The pumps have a long life, but they will eventually require replacement. Servo motors should
be tested routinely to ensure proper operation and to avoid catastrophic failures that disrupt operations;
replacement should be anticipated when servo motors have reached their prescribed run-time limits.
There are three main types of materials used for the RPPs: stainless steel with chromium surface treatment,
ceramic and glass. If the product is reactive to stainless steel, ceramic or glass pumps can be used.
Independent of the type of material of the pumps, if any defect is observed on the surface of the piston, it
must be thoroughly analyzed to determine if the entire pump assembly should be taken out of service for
repair or replacement.
The replacement strategy for servo motors should be provided by the OEM, with appropriate spares kept on
hand to avoid unnecessary downtime.
2.2.10 Rotary Piston Pump Single-Use Versus Reusable Strategy
RPP is not typically operated as a SUS due to system complexity and cost. Instead, pistons and cylinders
may be dedicated to given products, when required.
2.2.11 Rotary Piston Pump Clean-In-Place/Sterilize-In-Place Feasibility and Pitfalls
CIP/SIP is feasible for an RPP that is prepared with two additional connections and the ability to flush the
piston (see Figure 2.2.1-1). For the two additional connections, additional valves may be required, making
the CIP/SIP system more complex. The advantage of the CIP/SIP is a multiuse dosing system over a wide
range of product viscosities and less handling inside the containment barrier when the system is equipped
with CIP/SIP capability, in compliance with EU regulatory guidance (3, 6).
2.2.12 Rotary Piston Pump Benefits and Risks
Table 2.2.12-1 highlights the common benefits and risks analysis that is pertinent to the use of RPP
systems.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 47

--- PDF Page 62 ---
Table 2.2.12-1 Benefits and Risks of Rotary Piston Pumps
Benefits Risks
Volumetric nature of the pump creates a Wide ranges of fill volumes will require additional
reproducible filling accuracy. pump sizes.
Very flexible system for a wide range of product For products that are metal sensitive or that may
attributes. crystalize, ceramic or glass pumps may be required.
Low maintenance Training for assembly, setup, and operation is
essential.
Cleaning and sterilization validation is necessary
and may be more complex than for other systems.
2.3 Aseptic Filling Technologies: Time Pressure
TP filling systems get their name because a slight overpressure is applied to the bulk or intermediate
product, vessel and a pinch valve is opened and closed for a specified time to control the flow of the product
to the filling needle. The “pressure” that is applied to the bulk vessel makes use of air, inert gas, or gravity.
There are high-pressure systems where product flows through an orifice placed along the fluid pathway to
achieve the intended accuracy. There are also low-pressure systems that operate without an orifice plate and
are designed for a gentler product flow (e.g., lower shear force, lower foaming, slower). The selection of the
system is best achieved through knowledge of the product attributes and the desired filling speed.
The TP dosing system has an independent control (typically a high-speed programmable logic controller
(PLC)), that calculates the actual time required for filling from the current pressure and temperature.
Without this independent control, a pure time control would lead to deviations in the filling accuracy when
the pressure or temperature changes. Temperature fluctuation influences are greater with low-pressure
systems.
2.3.1 Time Pressure Design Configuration, Setup, and Positioning
Figure 2.3.1-1 depicts a TP filling system from the intermediate vessel to the filling needle. The TP filler
may be equipped with an intermediate vessel and manifold if desired. Not shown is the proportional
pressure control valve and optional orifice plate. Note that the pressure vessel and pinch valve may be
located outside of the aseptic barrier, but the risk of leaks at the pinch valves may make placement within
the aseptic barrier advantageous.
48 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 63 ---
Figure 2.3.1-1 Diagram of a Time Pressure Filling System
2.3.2 Time Pressure Advantages and Disadvantages
Table 2.3.2-1 identifies the advantages and disadvantages of TP filling systems.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 49

--- PDF Page 64 ---
Table 2.3.2-1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Time Pressure Filling Systems
Characteristic Advantages Disadvantages
Viscosity None Not good for high-viscosity products.
Durability Product not in direct contact with moving Hose transiting the pinch valve is subject to wear and must be changed.
parts, only moving parts are the pinch
valves.
Single Use None Usually not adopted for SU because bulk vessels and fluid pathway must be
pressure-rated.
Changeover CIP/SIP capable in most designs. Only Only a small filling range is possible with each orifice/filling needle combination.
tubing, orifice, and filling needle to be Change parts are required for greater flexibility.
changed when changing filling recipe.
Sterilization System is well suited for CIP/SIP. None
Shear Level Very gentle, low shear technology. Compatibility of the product with the selected orifice and applied pressure should
be confirmed due to the potential for shear at the orifice when one is used.
Dosing Wide dosing volumes, achievable just by Design should take into account any requirements for large-volume fills (which
Range changing orifice, tubing, and needle. will take more time to fill).
Operability None Tubing at the pinch valve deforms over time, which can modify flow
characteristics, potentially impacting dosing accuracy for long fills.
Filling accuracy depends upon pressure and temperature variation; therefore,
temperature compensation is typically necessary.
Suck back capability is limited and may not be sufficient, limiting dosing accuracy
for some product types. A modified form of suck back for TP is enabled by rapid
closure of the pinch valve, which may have adverse impacts to the tubing over
time.
50 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 65 ---
2.3.3 Time Pressure Sterility Assurance: Microbial and Total Particles
TP filling systems are typically designed for CIP/SIP. The system is fully closed, therefore, there is no risk
of extraneous microbial or particulate contamination; however, exercising the pinch valve during filling may
generate particles in the tubing. As a consequence, knowing the wear profile of the tubing is important to
ensure the replacement of the tubing before particulate-generation can occur. Regular visual inspection is
required and should be based on a risk assessment.
Small breaks in the hose, especially at the point of the pinch valve, may not be immediately identified with
TP technology, although this risk is less than PP systems because there is less mechanical stress and fewer
tubing connections overall. If a 100% IPC system is not in place for dose control, small breaks may go
undetected for a period of time until the next statistical IPC. As a consequence, leakage could result in
contamination of this “closed system.” This may be problematic with potent or toxic products and may
require reconsideration of the installation position to locate the mechanical components within the
containment barrier.
2.3.4 Time Pressure Efficiency and Impact on Risk
The TP filling system is a high-precision dosing system that depends on the flow behavior. The flow is
influenced by temperature and pressure inside the intermediate vessel, which is the reason for the high-
speed PLC controller. Changes in temperature, such as during long fill operations or during interruptions in
filling, should be avoided. Even though the system is highly accurate, a periodic IPC is recommended to
detect underfills due to possible air bubbles within the tubing over time (which can be exacerbated by the
mandatory use of over pressure to control filling) (see Sections 5.1-5.1.4). Therefore, an appropriate
rationale should be developed for the timing and frequency of the IPC that reflects the attributes of the
product being filled and real-world data, when available.
TP systems are routinely CIP/SIP-capable, as a result there is a limited risk of contamination impacting the
filling operation during the setup of the system. Containment is also simplified with TP filler for highly
potent products if the pinch valves are placed within the isolator (which is necessary due to the
comparatively higher potential of leaks and breakage). Hose breakage with TP fillers is a greater risk than
with other filling systems due to the stressors placed on the hoses within the pinch valves, though the
stressors on the tubing are less than with PPs. Detection systems for leaks can be placed within the isolator
to alert if a breach in tubing occurs. Should a breach be detected, a specific station can be switched off.
2.3.5 Time Pressure Costs: Initial and Lifecycle
The initial cost of a TP dosing system is similar to a PP or RPP for the system itself (excluding CIP/SIP that
may or may not be present). The initial capital cost of a CIP/SIP is high, but comparable to the lifecycle
costs associated with the SUS, such as recurring expense of the disposables with the PP. TCO calculations
would need to include setup, operation, and CIP/SIP as appropriate to the system design. Examples of
considerations for the TCO calculations may include, but are not limited to, time, utilities, cleaning
validation, maintenance, process know-how, training of operators, downtime due to CIP/SIP cycles, and
extended times in cases where parallel processing is not possible (such as not being able to run the
biodecontamination cycle simultaneously with the CIP/SIP).
If multiple fill-volumes are required, additional filling-size parts consisting of orifice, tubing, and a filling
needle are necessary.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 51

--- PDF Page 66 ---
Lifecycle costs are negligible because the drives have a long lifespan. If dedicated equipment is necessary,
for example, at a contract manufacturing organization, changing the intermediate vessel and piping may be
difficult, but would be required in addition to the format-size parts (e.g., orifice, tubing, needles).
2.3.6 Time Pressure System Complexity: Setup, Handling, and Changeover
The system design and fluid pathway are simple and straightforward with the TP; however, a fast PLC must
calculate the temperature and pressure in real time as provided by sensors. The temperature compensation
requires a curve for filling each product at different product temperatures. This product-dependent fill-curve
must be established during product evaluation so that the system is able to fill with high accuracy.
Setup is simple, such format parts as the orifice, tubing, and needle must be changed, but they are typically
assembled prior to CIP/SIP.
2.3.7 Time Pressure Maintenance and Aging
The pinch valves represent the only moving part of the dosing system requiring routine maintenance. A
replacement strategy of pinch-valve motors should be provided by the OEM to avoid unnecessary
downtimes or potential loss of batches. Sensors for temperature and pressure must be calibrated.
The system has limited wear-parts, other than the tubing. Sensors for temperature and pressure may require
replacement over time. Because the system is subjected to overpressure, the gaskets and pressure relief
valve will require periodic replacement.
2.3.8 Time Pressure Single-Use Versus Reusable Strategy
Usually, a TP dosing system is not suitable as a SUS due to the expense of the pressure-rated intermediate
vessel and fluid path. As a consequence, most systems are reusable and will require cleaning as well as
sterilization validation.
2.3.9 Time Pressure Clean-In-Place/Sterilize-In-Place Feasibility and Pitfalls
The TP dosing system is well suited for CIP/SIP, which is the typical design standard. There is limited
changeover required between different filling volumes and products. When performing CIP/SIP, there is a
small risk that the orifice will become obstructed, especially after the silicone tubing has been replaced (e.g.,
with a cut piece of silicone). Typically, prior to the start of the CIP/SIP, a leak test will be performed, but
this test will not confirm that the orifice is not obstructed. Therefore, the CIP/SIP process should be
monitored to ensure no obstruction, as the sensor for conductivity and temperature are located at the
combined exit flow from the needles.
2.3.10 Time Pressure Benefits and Risks
Table 2.3.10-1 highlights the common benefits and risks analysis that is pertinent to the use of TP filling
systems.
52 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 67 ---
Table 2.3.10-1 Benefits and Risks of Time Pressure Filling Systems
Benefits Risks
System is easily integrated with CIP/SIP (more Product characteristics must be known to establish
readily than with the other filling technologies). temperature/pressure filling curve.
High dosing accuracy. Training for assembly is necessary.
Low maintenance (limited moving parts). Cleaning validation is necessary, and often CIP/SIP
is an additional expenditure.
Wide range of fill volumes with limited change Rapid temperature or rapid pressure changes to
parts. the product may affect accuracy (high-speed PLC
control is used to monitor the changes and
Limited consumables waste in comparison to SUS, dynamically adjust the fill). For products requiring
such as with PP. active cooling, exposed sections of the fluid
pathway that are not actively cooled may
influence filling accuracy.
2.4 Aseptic Filling Technologies: Rolling Diaphragm Pump
The rolling diaphragm pump (DP) is a positive displacement pump, which generally incorporates a piston-
driven pump unit that includes a piston, a fluid chamber, and a body (see Figure 2.4-1). The pump unit is
used, in combination with timed pinch valves, to direct fluid travel through the pump chamber and the
tubing. In the case of the rolling diaphragm pump, a rolling diaphragm is used to separate the piston drive
unit from the fluid chamber. This is to eliminate small but undesirable particulate contamination generated
by piston and cylinder friction. In addition, the diaphragm totally separates the mechanical action of the
piston and cylinder from the fluid pathway, making it a closed system.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 53