
--- PDF Page 148 ---
Primary containers of other types that experience different stressors during shipping may require additional
evaluation.
For primary containers assembled in devices, shock and vibration can pose risks to integrity of the primary-
container interface, which can require additional evaluation. When testing is executed, it is typically a
separate study from the filling-line CCI validation.
134 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 149 ---
Part 3: Operational Considerations
Including Interventions, Component
Handling, Filtration, Fluid Pathway,
and Discards
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 135

--- PDF Page 150 ---
8.0 Microbiological Risks for System Operation
Contamination control is the primary objective in aseptic filling. In Section 1.0, it was highlighted that the
goal of producing a sterile product must remain the target in all design decisions and trade-offs. Successful
operation of an aseptic filling system cannot be achieved without considering and mitigating
microbiological risks and operating with good aseptic technique. As a consequence, during design when
looking ahead to the operation of any filling line, consideration should be given to the types of interventions
that will be required to accomplish the fill. Interventions should be minimized or eliminated by proper
design and effective risk assessments of the entire filling system including personnel and material flows, and
changeover complexity. The aseptic system design should be adapted to ensure effective microbiological
control during all phases of the operation for both inherent and corrective interventions that are required
after the risk assessment and mitigation are successfully concluded.
8.1 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated
with Line Setup
Line setup (LSU) is an important part of the filling process because of the extent of operator interaction and
potential to introduce contamination. Line setup can only occur after line clearance from the prior campaign
or batch is complete. Parts to be sterilized out-of-place will have been removed at the conclusion of the
campaign or batch. Those parts are subject to cleaning, pre-assembly (if any), and off-line sterilization in
appropriate wraps and bags and are then staged for setup. The next step is preparation of the stationary parts
of the filling line for setup.
Note: Since campaigns may also include setup during the campaign (between batches) this will be
addressed in Section 8.1.2 as it has some additional considerations.
For isolators, preparation includes surface cleaning (and often manual disinfection) of the barrier and non-
contact surfaces of the filling and closing machine prior to installation of the sterilized parts under
unidirectional airflow within the barrier. This will be followed by closing the barrier and an automated 6-log
sporicidal biodecontamination process (e.g., VPHP) that will be applied to establish Grade A conditions.
Importantly, Grade A is established after the sterilized parts are installed and this approach is in variance to
RABS.
For RABS, Grade A conditions need to be established via a combination of cleaning and sporicidal 6-log
high-level disinfection before sterilized parts are installed. In RABS, following this preparation stage the
filling line will be ready for starting the aseptic line setup ahead of aseptic filling operations.
The detailed steps for setup in both isolators and RABS are described below (see Section 8.1.1), however
some definitions are required to ensure common understanding of the detailed steps. The parts to be
installed during the setup stage can be divided into three groups:
136 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 151 ---
• Non-product contact parts include format parts such as feed screws, star wheels, container
transport mechanisms that make no direct contact with sterile products to be filled.
• Indirect product contact parts include parts such as vibratory feeders and feed bowls which touch
the sterile primary packaging components and therefore represent a risk of indirectly transferring
contamination to the sterile product.
• Product contact parts include parts such as fluid pathway, filling needles and other surfaces which
are in direct contact with the sterile product and any direct contact gas overlay parts.
Some non-product contact parts may be removed, cleaned, returned to the line and disinfected in place with
the rest of the stationary parts of the equipment and the barrier rather than being sterilized off-line.
Both direct and indirect product contact parts have the potential to compromise product sterility, quality, and
patient safety so precautions should always be taken to protect any part in these two groups from particle
and microbial contamination. Therefore, when preparing these parts off-line prior to setup, care must be
taken in their washing and sterilization. The parts must be dried and wrapped or bagged after cleaning
before sterilization. The wraps must remain intact until the time of their installation as it is a vital part of
their protection as they are transferred from the preparations area to the filling line.
8.1.1 Detailed Steps of Line Setup in RABS and Isolators
Depending on the barrier technology for aseptic processing, RABS or Isolators, the parts will be subject to
different steps. All steps for line setup should be risk assessed in order to identify the risk mitigations and
control measures that will best ensure the sterility of the critical components and should be included within
the CCS. All setup activities (both open and closed door) should follow the general requirements for the
performance of aseptic interventions (see Section 8.2).
The aseptic line setup in a RABS includes the following sequence of steps:
• Open-door line setup (Grade B background):
̶ Cleaning and disinfection of non-product contact parts, stationary filling machine parts, and
barrier, to establish Grade A conditions
̶ EM initiated for Grade A conditions
̶ Installation of sterilized indirect product contact parts on the disinfected machine base
̶ Installation of the sterilized direct product contact parts
To the extent possible, consideration should be given to protecting the direct product contact parts by
transferring and installing them using closed transfer technologies (e.g., RTP) and closed-door interventions
rather than open-door. At a minimum, protective sheaths may be used for critical parts such as needles,
which can be left in place until the barrier door is closed.
The aseptic line setup in an isolator includes the following sequence of steps:
• Open-door line setup (Grade C background) with isolator HVAC active:
̶ Cleaning and disinfection of non-product contact parts, stationary filling machine parts, and
barrier prior to establishing Grade A conditions
̶ Installation of sterilized indirect product contact parts on the disinfected machine base
leaving protective wraps in place over critical surfaces for as long as possible (even
considering removal only after the door is closed)
̶ Closure of the barrier door
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 137

--- PDF Page 152 ---
• Closed-door line setup:
̶ Biodecontamination of the filling line (e.g., VPHP) to establish Grade A conditions
̶ EM initiated for Grade A conditions
̶ Installation of the sterilized direct product contact parts
Although the background classification for isolators is commonly Grade C, enhanced gowning is typically
employed for those employees conducting the open-door setup. Including but not limited to goggles or face
shield, hoods, sterile sleeves and sterile gloves.
To the extent possible, consideration should be given to protecting the indirect product contact parts by
preventing their exposure to the background environment during open-door setup by making use of closed
transfer systems or by retaining protective covers as long as possible. For this reason, the removal of final
covers for these parts may occur immediately before door closure, immediately after door closure, or even
after biodecontamination. The approach to the removal of these covers will also affect how the
biodecontamination cycle is validated (e.g., timing of cover removal if applicable, permissible bioburden on
parts before VPHP exposure of indirect product contact parts to VPHP, aeration time for residuals with or
without cover) and should be included as a standard procedure to be followed within APS (13).
Regulators have emphasized the importance of understanding the environmental conditions within the
isolator and the cleanroom during open door activities. As a consequence, EM may be initiated during the
open-door phases of setup. In addition, air flow visualization studies are commonly performed during the
initial qualification of the isolator to ensure that there is no entrained air from the surrounding environment
entering the isolator during the activities of setup.
Fully closed (during operation) isolators are permitted to be installed within Grade D backgrounds rather
than Grade C. The risks associated with indirect product contact parts and the coordination of the removal of
their covers becomes even more critical when considering the associated risks with a Grade D background
environment.
8.1.2 Additional Considerations for Line Setup within a Campaign
Within a campaign, limited line setup may occur between batches (i.e., to change container type, to establish
a new fluid pathway, etc.) (see Section 4.1 for additional details on campaign requirements).
Care must be taken to ensure that Grade A conditions are maintained and that the interventions are limited
to the essential activities, in order to preserve the aseptic environment. Risk assessments should be
performed for all intended activities, and they should be included within the CCS to ensure that the
appropriate controls are implemented.
Some general principles for line setup between batches within a campaign include:
• All setup activities should follow the general requirements for the performance of aseptic
interventions (see Section 8.2).
• All setup activities must be included in an appropriately designed APS.
• Where possible, any parts that are to be exchanged should be brought within the barrier using closed
transfer mechanisms (e.g., RTP) or should be present within the barrier from the beginning of the
campaign (e.g., second fluid pathway).
• When using RABS, setup should be performed using closed door interventions.
• When using RABS and open door interventions are unavoidable, consideration should be given to
what disinfection or biodecontamination is appropriate prior to resumption of aseptic operations.
138 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 153 ---
• When extensive setup is required, consideration should be given to terminating the campaign;
recent advances in technology including rapid biodecontamination within isolators, for example,
make it possible to turn around a line within a shorter period of time.
8.1.3 Other Considerations for Line Setup
When making use of Single Use Systems (SUS), and they are part of the load for the biodecontamination
cycle, care should be taken to ensure that the packaging is impermeable to the biodecontamination agent
(e.g., VPHP) to prevent absorption that might be harmful to products (14).
See PDA PtC No.12: Restricted Access Barrier Systems for additional information with regard to the design
and operation of RABS (4). In particular, a UDAF should be present above doors to protect the environment
during any open-door activity such as line setup.
CFD for airflow design within the barrier (both RABS and isolators) and surrounding environment, and
airflow visualization for the intervention activities, are essential to demonstrate that airflow turbulence is
minimized.
8.2 General Considerations Regarding Aseptic Interventions
• Quality risk management tools should be employed to define the risk level for each planned
intervention, including the intervention detection, mitigations, and controls (e.g., EM, personnel
monitoring, sterility samples). Key elements to assess include:
̶ Personnel (number and positioning of)
̶ Duration of the intervention
̶ Complexity of the required actions during the intervention
̶ Proximity and handling or manipulation of sterile parts
̶ Risks due to potential occluded surfaces
• All aseptic interventions should be defined in a SOP that defines:
̶ Whether the intervention is via glove port, remote manipulator, open door, or other
mechanism (open doors are to be avoided whenever possible)
̶ Glove checks (for tears, pinholes) and glove sanitization that may be required pre- and
post-intervention
̶ Procedures to be followed for performance of the intervention to ensure that air flow
disruptions are minimized, including if witnessing of the intervention performance is
required
̶ Tools to be used to protect product-contact components, both direct and indirect, and the
required disinfection (pre- and post-intervention) or disposal of those tools
̶ Any required line-clearance activities based on identified risks due to the intervention
procedure and zone of exposure
̶ Disinfection or cleaning and sterilization required post-intervention
̶ Documentation requirements for the intervention
̶ Any requirement to segregate materials or an appropriate decision-making framework for
that decision, for example, quarantine status for a portion of the batch or renumbering of a
portion of the batch until review and approvals are gained
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 139

--- PDF Page 154 ---
• At the conclusion of the fill, EM samples are collected for direct and indirect product-contact parts
which should represent any interventions performed; tools used during interventions should also be
considered as sampling sites. All sampling should follow a risk-based approach.
• SOPs should be demonstrated in an airflow visualization study (AVS) to prove that turbulence is
avoided, and that air does not move from an area of lower classification to higher classification
when following the correct procedures during such activities as open-door setup in an isolator
• Each intervention should be qualified for use and included in an appropriately designed aseptic
process simulation (APS)
• Personnel should be trained in the intervention SOP and qualified to perform the intervention
Additional detail on setup, specifically, and interventions, more generally, may be found in industry
guidance on aseptic practices (3, 15).
8.3 Microbiological Considerations for Filter Changes
The sterilizing filter represents a sterile boundary for the fluid pathway. Filter changes should be avoided,
when possible, and handled with care when unavoidable. To avoid filter changes, firms will sometimes
install more than one filtration manifold in a parallel arrangement, so that switching from one fluid
path/filter to another can be accomplished without intervention. Alternatively, installing more than one filter
in a series can permit the removal and replacement of the upstream filter with less risk to the downstream
sterile barrier (see Section 11.0 for additional discussion on filter configurations).
When filter changes are unavoidable, the system design will influence the requirements for the filter-change
activity. Two examples of system designs that represent the extremes of the design considerations include:
• Aseptic filling lines with the filter outside of the Grade A environment within a stainless-steel (SS)
housing
• Aseptic filling lines that employ presterilized components (e.g., filters, tubing, gaskets, clamps,
flush bags) that are aseptically assembled in a Grade A environment
For filling systems that are SIP, when the filter is in a SS housing outside of the Grade A environment,
changing the filter-set requires that the sterile fluid path be opened and exposed to a lower-grade
environment (e.g., Grade C for isolators and Grade B for RABS filling lines). Opening and exposing the
fluid path to a lower-grade environment can lead to microbiological contamination of the product pathway.
Therefore, when configured in this manner, a filter change will necessitate that filling be stopped and the
batch be split into two identified portions (e.g., before and after the filter replacement) with separate batch
numbers. After removing the original filter, the fluid pathway must be cleaned in place. The new filter is
then installed, sterilized in place, and subjected to pre-use integrity testing and flushing before filling can be
resumed. To mitigate any risk of microbial contamination of the product, a CIP/SIP process is required (see
Section 11.0 for filter placement within the fluid pathway and additional information on PUPSIT).
Configurations that offer improved SA to filters located outside the Grade A environment include gamma-
irradiated filters that are connected via intrinsic sterile-connection devices or filters that are introduced
through a canister port.
For filling lines employing presterilized components that are aseptically assembled in a Grade A
environment, the product transfer is completed by an intrinsic sterile connector or an aseptic connection. In
this case, the aseptic connection can be uncoupled and the transfer port closed. Within the Grade A
environment, the entire filter-set can be replaced and reinstalled with a replacement presterilized filter-set
passed in through a RTP or by using a spare stored in the environment. After reassembly, pre-use integrity
140 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 155 ---
testing, and flushing is completed, the transfer connection of the sterilized filter-set with the transfer port is
remade, and filling can resume. The overall risk of microbiological contamination is associated with the
aseptic connection inside the Grade A environment. Consequently, the use of the appropriate aseptic
techniques and the qualification of the procedure within the AVS and inclusion within the design of an
appropriate APS are of paramount importance. The general considerations regarding aseptic interventions
outlined in Section 8.2 apply to this activity.
One final point to consider on the replacement of filters is that vent-filters on sterile intermediate-vessels are
also considered part of the sterile fluid pathway. Should a vent-filter become blocked and require
replacement, the same considerations apply as those for replacing the product filter. The ability to replace
the filter will depend on whether the vessel and the vent-filter are inside or outside the Grade A
environment. If outside, a key consideration is whether the vessel can be cleaned and resterilized after
replacement. If inside the Grade A area, a key consideration is whether the intervention has been
appropriately qualified.
8.4 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated
with Filling Needle Adjustment, Repair, and Replacement
If a liquid filling needle is damaged, there are three options from which to choose:
• Turn off the needle
• Repair or adjust the needle
• Replace the needle
The first option does not require aseptic manipulation, as it can typically be accomplished through the
control system and so does not pose any microbiological risk. Regarding repairing or replacing the needle,
the general considerations for performing interventions identified in Section 8.2 would apply. The filling
needle is one of the most critical locations for an intervention due to its position immediately above the open
patient-dose. When designing the intervention for replacing the needle, whether any portion of the sterile
fluid pathway will also be changed at the same time should be considered. A preassembled sterile fluid
pathway may be less risky to replace than one component of the pathway alone. In some cases, replacing a
single component may risk leaks or drips from improper connections, or it may cause greater environmental
exposure to the fluid path, whereas a preassembled pathway may reduce those risks.
In the case of powder filling that makes use of powder dosing-needles, turning off or repairing needles is
typically not possible, and full replacement would be required. For liquid needles, repair/replacement is one
of the highest risk interventions and should not be undertaken lightly.
8.5 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Related to
Broken or Blocked Primary-Packaging Materials
The general considerations for aseptic interventions outlined in Section 8.2 should be followed for the
removal of blocked or broken primary-packaging materials. Such interventions are considered corrective
interventions that should be included in the AVS and included within an appropriate APS study design. The
AVS would be designed to demonstrate that the corrective intervention minimizes airflow disruption and
does not have the potential to add contamination. The intervention should be considered for inclusion in the
APS design at a frequency representative of the rate of occurrence in routine production.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 141

--- PDF Page 156 ---
The intervention should only be performed while using sterilized tools such as forceps. The tools should be
placed at any location along the filling line where this intervention is likely to occur.
The intervention should be reduced to the actions necessary to keep the line running, resulting in shorter
duration interventions that are generally of lower risk. For example, minimizing actions commonly means
that only when debris from a broken container can possibly cause contamination or malfunction of the line
should that debris be fully removed. Similarly, actions below the working height should be avoided. For
example, should materials fall to the machine base plate, they would commonly remain there until the
conclusion of the filling operation unless they posed a risk of malfunction. An intervention risk assessment
should describe each required intervention and its associated risks and define the required controls. The
intervention and controls should be included in the CCS.
8.6 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated
with Supply of Components
Automated transfer of components to the aseptic filling line is preferred to reduce microbiological risk. An
automated system is repeatable, can be biodecontaminated, and can be validated. Depending on the primary-
packaging materials used, different automated solutions may be required (e.g., e-beam, depyrogenation
tunnel, RTP transfer, no-touch transfer). All interventions in a Grade A environment linked to the automated
transfer of materials should be designed and performed taking into account the general rules for aseptic
manipulations (see Section 8.2). The supply of components should be included in a representative manner
within both the AVS and APS. Transfer technologies are further discussed in Sections 9.0 and 10.0.
Manual transfer of components is only possible in cleanroom conditions where the transfer occurs from a
Grade B environment to the Grade A environment. As the components transition through the cleanroom
classifications, successive layers of sterilized wrapping are removed. Special attention is required to avoid
contamination of the outer surfaces of the inner bag at each transition. The second-to-last bag should be
removed, using aseptic techniques under unidirectional airflow, when transferring the materials from Grade
B to Grade A. The layers of removed wrapping materials should be prevented from contacting surfaces
within the Grade A space. The final bag should only be removed within the Grade A environment.
When using a mousehole, RTP, or other equipment doors for transfers, dynamic airflow pattern studies in
the AVS should prove that the transfer of materials to the inside of the barrier does not result in turbulence
inside the barrier or result in airborne contamination transfer. In the case of a mousehole or door (such as
those that may be opened to restock elastomers), it is important to demonstrate that there is no ingress of air
from Grade B into Grade A. In both cases, the addition of components from a bag to a hopper should be
executed considering the general rules for aseptic manipulations (see Section 8.2). The transfer and addition
of components should be demonstrated in a representative manner and frequency within an appropriately
designed APS.
8.7 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated
with Sorting Systems for Components
Sorting systems are each independently machined (custom made), so there can be small geometric
differences between each sorting system. Characterizing and qualifying each stoppering-set is recommended
to define optimal settings, as this will reduce the requirement for fine-tuning during both the LSU and the
aseptic filling operation.
142 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 157 ---
Sorting systems should be designed to be handled and assembled by touching only the external surfaces
(e.g., outside of the feeder bowl) avoiding any manipulation in the portion that is in contact with
components. Sorting systems should be controlled (e.g., using kitting procedures or through the use of ID
numbers) to ensure that all required parts are used together consistently. Checks should be performed at the
start of a batch or campaign to optimize the setup and adjustment prior to the start of fill. Any fine-tuning
after setup should focus on optimization of machine parameters that do not require an aseptic intervention.
Any aseptic interventions required should apply the general considerations regarding aseptic interventions
(see Section 8.2). The intervention actions associated with initial setup and fine-tuning should be
demonstrated through both AVS and APS.
Sorting systems are indirect product-contact parts; consequently, they should be sterilized before use. When
transporting and installing the sorting systems, especially the large and often-awkward feed bowls,
protective covers are recommended to avoid recontamination after sterilization during LSU (see Section
8.1). In the case of isolators, several approaches have been acceptable to regulators and have been justified
through risk assessment and validation. For some facilities, the outermost protective bag (of the sterile
sorting bowl) will be removed prior to biodecontamination, but a protective cap will stay in place over the
opening of the stopper bowl to maintain the sterility of the interior surfaces until the isolator is
biodecontaminated. After the end of aeration an intervention will be performed using a glove, tool, external
manipulator, or robot to remove and discard the protective cap. For other facilities, the cap is removed just
before or just after the door is closed, but before the biodecontamination is initiated so that the internal
surfaces of the sorting bowl are also fully exposed to the biodecontamination. The approach to be taken
should be established through risk assessment and included in the CCS (12). The PDA Points to Consider
for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators may be referenced for additional
approaches and details about the risks (16).
Biodecontamination effectiveness can be affected by any residues that remain on surfaces after cleaning
(and sterilization). For sorting systems which are used with siliconized components, special care should be
taken to remove any residual silicone oil from surfaces during cleaning before sterilization as it may inhibit
effective biodecontamination.
8.8 Microbiological Considerations for Mechanical Interventions
Mechanical interventions to repair or replace parts fall into one of four categories:
1. Sterilized or disinfected mechanical components within the cleanroom environment for which
failures have been anticipated
2. Disinfected mechanical components within the cleanroom environment for which failures have not
been anticipated
3. Mechanical components that are not disinfected due to being occluded (and, therefore, not
disinfected during preparation of the line)
4. Equipment located in enclosed mechanical cabinets, also known as technical areas or gray zones
The microbiological risk of each of these four categories is directly related to the ability to perform the
intervention in an aseptic manner, while minimizing airflow disruptions and without risk of compromising
the aseptic condition of the equipment, personnel gowning, or the environment. While Categories 2 and 3
are far less frequent, and perhaps entirely unanticipated and rare, they should not be executed without risk
assessment (including risk assessment of the means for execution of the intervention), and approval of the
risk by the quality unit. If risk is high or not acceptable, then steps should be performed to reduce the risk or
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 143

--- PDF Page 158 ---
to eliminate the intervention. If the activity cannot be eliminated or the risk reduced to an acceptable level,
then the activity should not be allowed to be performed. Category 4 (also subject to risk assessment) should
rarely, if ever, be permitted from the cleanroom without discontinuing the batch. Some of the specific risks
associated with all four categories are described below.
The first category, sterilized or disinfected mechanical components, involves interventions that were
anticipated, risk-assessed, and followed the standard practices for interventions, including the performance
of the intervention under both AVS and APS. These are standard corrective interventions that must be
documented within the batch record and executed by personnel who have been qualified in the performance
of that or similar interventions (see Section 8.2 for standard intervention practices).
The second category, disinfected mechanical components, can generally be manipulated during aseptic
operations. If the specific intervention was not included in a procedure and challenged during AVS and APS
a risk-based decision should be made by operations and the quality unit to allow the intervention, stop the
aseptic process, and/or to address it as a deviation, which may result in additional investigation, actions, and
the potential loss of the portion of the batch that follows the required intervention. For this reason, it is
important to have procedures that plan for and address unexpected interventions. Planning for unexpected
interventions must include appropriate Quality Assurance involvement in risk assessment and decision-
making at the time the mechanical failure occurs. Considerations for improved detection may include
additional supervision or oversight and sampling (e.g., risk-based EM samples collected after the conclusion
of the fill to represent the surfaces associated with the intervention, sterility samples). Also included in the
plans for the unexpected intervention are stringent requirements to isolate and quarantine portions of the
batch that are associated with or that follow the performance of the intervention.
For equipment in the third category, where a surface is potentially occluded during surface
biodecontamination (e.g., a nut or a bolt in a difficult-to-reach area) but there is a known risk of needing
access to the surface during interventions in the filling process, the risk should be assessed and the approach
for accessing this area should be considered as part of any potential interventions. Some firms may disinfect
this area with a sporicidal disinfectant prior to LSU (during open-door phases of the setup) in order to
reduce the risk of exposing this occluded surface during any potential interventions. The exposure of this
surface, however, and the manual disinfection should be considered as part of the original qualification of
the line, and all intended actions should be included in the appropriate AVS and APS. The ability to perform
this activity in a manner that is appropriate to prevent microbiological risk should be considered on a case-
by-case basis and pre-approved by the quality unit if it is determined that the intervention should proceed.
For the fourth category, opening of technical areas of the filling line that are not biodecontaminated or
disinfected is not allowed during aseptic processing with one exception. A technical area that is accessed
from a service area that is isolated from the cleanroom that the filling line is installed in can be allowed
during aseptic processing. Should a repair or replacement require access to an area that is only accessible
from the cleanroom, the fill needs to be suspended, and a line clearance should be conducted in the affected
zones. Technical measures should be taken to restrict the scope of the impact to the cleanroom and isolator
or RABS. Even with these technical measures, such access will require disinfection of the portion of the
equipment, isolator, or cleanroom impacted by the opening. Depending on the extent of the exposure to the
nondisinfected zone and the possible pressure differentials experienced after the work is complete, the
cleanroom may require more than one successive cleaning and disinfection event. Equipment will also need
to be recleaned and resterilized prior to restarting. For many products, such an interruption could cause
product hold times to be exceeded or would represent such a high sterility-assurance risk that the filling
144 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 159 ---
operation is discontinued, and the remaining product is rejected, filled via a re-setup of the line, or
reprocessed (if permissible and justified by site SOPs and by product license).
8.9 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Related to
Environmental Monitoring
EM includes viable particulate-monitoring (e.g., settle plates, volumetric air, swab, and contact plates for
surface, gloves, and gowns) and total particulate-monitoring (e.g., particles greater than or equal to 0.5 µm
and 5 µm). Risk-based EM should be undertaken for the full duration of critical processing, including LSU
(17). Manually manipulated EM techniques or activities taking place in Grade A and B spaces prior to or
during the aseptic process are interventions and should follow recommendations associated with
intervention design and qualification. New techniques such as biofluorescent particle counting offer a non-
invasive method to measure airborne viable particles and should be considered as an alternative to
conventional monitoring when seeking a less invasive method.
Total particulate EM sampling should be continuous throughout the entire operation. The EM
microbiological sampling plan is both event-driven and time-driven, meaning the EM sampling plan is
designed to measure across the full duration of the aseptic operation. Samples, like settle plates and
volumetric air samples, are taken for specific intervals throughout the operation (time-driven), whereas other
microbiological samples, like contact plates and swabs, are taken to represent the monitoring of specific
events (event-driven). Examples of event-driven monitoring include samples collected during setup, aseptic
interventions, exit of personnel after shift, end of the batch, and/or line-changeover during a campaign. The
sampling sites and critical control points should be justified and included in the CCS.
Personnel represent the greatest risk to microbiological control during aseptic processing. EM is conducted
by people; therefore, it follows that people are the greatest risk to both the environment during the sampling
activities and to the integrity of EM samples. In addition, the introduction of growth-promoting media into
the aseptic environment for the purpose of sampling represents a risk that growth-promoting residues are left
behind if sampling sites are not appropriately cleaned after sampling.
Therefore, the design of the viable monitoring program should ensure controls for the full lifecycle of the
EM samples (plates and swabs) to ensure the validity of the results, including:
• Media supplier management
• Receipt
• Quality control of incoming media (including identity, general condition and appearance, growth
promotion, sterility check, and expiration dating)
• Handling and storage prior to use
• Use in aseptic operations:
̶ Transport into cleanrooms (and removal of outer wrapping/layers)
̶ Sampling aseptic techniques and minimized sample-handling within the cleanroom
̶ Closing of plates and swabs to maintain integrity after sampling
̶ Cleaning and disinfection after sampling (of gloves and surfaces)
• Reconciliation, labeling, and chain of custody
• Transportation to incubators (including any taping, bagging, or wrapping to protect samples)
• Incubation, reading (with confirmation of results), and subculture (if any)
• Identification and specification
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 145

--- PDF Page 160 ---
• Handling of any discrepancies
Risk assessment tools should be used to define the controls to be put in place for the end-to-end chain of
custody for all phases of the plate- or swab-handling process, with specific focus of reducing the following
contamination risks during the process:
• Handling and labeling of media prior to sampling
• Sample collection by EM sampling personnel
• Handling, labeling, and transportation following sample collection
• Laboratory handling for incubation and reading post-monitoring
Detailed procedures, training, and qualification of personnel are essential to ensure that these technique-
driven handling procedures (especially during the exposure of the samples in the cleanroom) are well
practiced and performed effectively by each person assigned to a role in handling EM samples.
SOPs should be established to define the processes to be followed for atypical events including desiccated
plates, cracked plates, dropped plates, nonviable particulate matter on plates, and viable growth (which
should be atypical in Grade A and B). These SOPs should include documentation containing example
pictures of the impacted plates and details on how to handle atypical plates. A deviation, out-of-limits, or
equivalent laboratory investigation should be raised to initiate the examination of any abnormal result. The
impacted plates should be retained until completion of the investigation (18).
146 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 161 ---
9.0 Component and Filling Supply Handling Considerations
PDA has published several technical reports that deal with the handling of components and supplies for
aseptic filling (e.g., steam sterilization, depyrogenation, defects in glass, defects in elastomeric closures), as
well as addressing common defects (11, 12, 15, 19-21). None of these, however, presents an integrated
standard for aseptic filling as it relates to filling technology. Section 9.0 defines the various methods for
preparing and handling components and filling supplies. Section 10.0 discusses the mechanisms for getting
materials to the point of the aseptic fill while minimizing risks.
9.1 Considerations for Component Handling and Impact on System Design
The most important considerations for handling the components and supplies for aseptic filling include:
• Utilizing methods of introduction that will minimize the inherent interventions for the line
• Protecting the filling operation from viable and total particulate and other forms of contamination
• Minimizing disruption of the unidirectional airflow
Key considerations for the selection of the components to be used on the line include:
• Type of primary containers (e.g., vials, ampoules, cartridges, syringes, bags) and their associated
materials of construction (e.g., glass, cyclic olefin copolymer, plastic) required for the product
• Pretreatment needed for the selected components (e.g., siliconization)
• Packaging, sterilization, and pretreatment methods that facilitate the handling of components (e.g.,
reduce risks of twinning/sticking/clumping/nesting of stoppers or caps, reduce risks of entanglement
of plungers)
With these considerations in mind, the points to be considered for the selection of handling mechanism are
outlined in Section 9.1.1.
9.1.1 Ready-To-Sterilize or Ready-to-Use Versus In-Line or On-Site Pretreatment
When making the essential decision of selecting either RTU containers—those that have been sterilized,
depyrogenated, or pretreated (e.g., siliconized), or selecting in-line or on-site treatment of containers—the
key considerations include the batch size, available processing time, and overall complexity required for
introduction of the components. For RTU components, the integrity of the components in their supplier
packaging must be maintained during the handling and transit from the supplier to the point of use. For in-
line or on-site treated containers, there are often engineering controls that ensure the integrity as these
components are conveyed or introduced to the line directly.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 147

--- PDF Page 162 ---
9.1.1.1 Large Batch Production
In the case of large batch production in glass, the primary containers are commonly supplied untreated, as
the economics of handling large quantities of sterile or RTS components can be prohibitive. The glass
handling is simplified when managed before both cleaning and sterilization or depyrogenation. In such
cases, applying in-house pretreatment that includes a glass washer and depyrogenation tunnel (or oven) is
necessary in order for the components to enter into the Grade A environment (20, 21). The exact break-even
cost where on-site pretreatment is less expensive than RTU or RTS components is dependent upon the
number of units planned as well as the style of containers, and the required packaging needed to
accommodate handling the RTU or RTS components. Wide-spread adoption of RTU and RTS components
by industry has reduced supply costs for the most common sizes and styles. The economic analysis should
consider fully absorbed labor, facility costs, equipment life cycle, energy, and reject costs for the on-site
treatment. Therefore, the break-even point may need to be considered for every project.
9.1.1.2 Specialty Components with Complex Pretreatment, Assembly, or Orientation
Complexities arise with the processing of specialized components, such as syringe barrels. Complex
interactions such as on-line siliconization of the barrel to provide the necessary lubrication for the plunger,
gluing of staked needles, assembly of luer tips, or assembly with the needle shield can complicate
processing (22). In addition, the orientation requirements for syringe barrels during filling make it far more
convenient to provide these components within a tub (or nest) that orients and supports the syringes during
the filling process. Rather than trying to control these processes in-line, RTU components have become the
industry norm for these primary containers, regardless of batch size.
Another advantage of nested containers is the reduction of container contact with adjacent containers during
conveyance, reducing glass-to-glass contact, and consequently defects (e.g. scuffing, cracks, chips). Nesting
may be in use for other container types, not just syringes, for the same reason. As with syringes, the use of
nesting commonly mandates a RTU format so that the nesting container, and the primary container it
houses, can be prepared and sterilized together. When introducing nested containers to the filling line, the
airflow cascade and pressure cascade around the large opening required to permit the nested containers to
enter which is much larger than a single-container mousehole for a single vial, will need to be demonstrated
during air flow visualization (i.e., smoke studies) and qualified. There could be various possible solutions.
Two common approaches include placing a container nest at the beginning and end of the process to block
the opening and make the smallest possible opening around the nest or incorporating an automated baffle
which opens just as a tub enters or exits the barrier.
When making use of any opening with a sliding baffle or door, care should be taken to ensure that the entire
surface can be cleaned and decontaminated. Furthermore, with either design, airflow studies should examine
the pressure cascade and turbulence during the transition.
Additional technology is usually required to remove the lids and coversheets (commonly Tyvek®) from the
nest to expose the open containers to the filling line (commonly called delidding). This operation generates
particles; thus, it is positioned upstream and separate from the filler. Various technologies are used for the
removal of the lids and coversheets including but not limited to robotics. The selected mechanism should be
evaluated for suitability to the operation, and EM should be employed near the delidding operation to
monitor particulate during routine operation.
Often, fewer container types are available for nested formats; therefore, long lead-times may be encountered
if a new configuration is to be designed and qualified with a vendor. While vials, cartridges, and syringes
148 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 163 ---
may all be filled on the same line, selecting a handling mechanism of one-by-one or nesting is common.
Creating a filling line that is capable of crossing over between single units and nested units, especially when
handling different container types, can be achieved with proper design, but it is a significantly more
complex design, fabrication, and operation.
Section 12.0 and Section 5.0 discuss considerations associated with the rejection of containers while
working in a nested format when undertaking activities such as weight-checks or when handling nests of
containers at visual inspection stations after filling.
9.1.1.3 Small Batch Production
RTU glass vials may be well-suited for small batch-size production, as the handling of the pretreated
components is quite simple. A smaller batch size also shifts the economics of washing and preparing
components to favor the additional expense associated with RTU or RTS components. However, for more
complex containers that consist of multiple components (e.g., barrel, needle, needle-shield for syringes) with
multiple materials of construction, the assembly and manufacture of the components leads to the necessity
of pretreatment (e.g., gamma sterilization), which drives the use case even for small batch sizes. As stated
previously, it is best to evaluate the economics on a case-by-case basis (see Section 9.1.1.1).
9.1.1.4 Considerations for Ready-to-Sterilize
RTS primary containers (prewashed) are introduced before the depyrogenation step; therefore, it is
necessary to have a loading section to transfer the primary containers into the tunnel or oven. The loading
section must be designed to protect the glassware from any particle contamination during this stage, similar
to preventing any particle contamination from the end of washing in-line and the entrance into the tunnel.
Sterilization or depyrogenation of glassware in ovens currently is being discontinued throughout the
industry due to the contamination risks caused by manual operations, the use of stainless-steel boxes (which
themselves require washing), and additional controls needed to introduce containers to the line.
9.1.1.5 Cyclic Olefin Copolymer and Plastics
For COC and other plastics, RTU containers are the most common choice. These materials of construction
are commonly subjected to a sterilization mechanism, such as gamma irradiation or ethylene oxide (EtO)
sterilization, which is difficult to integrate directly into filling lines. Consequently, these sterilization
services are typically performed by external suppliers, in part due to the economics of implementing these
sterilization methods with the appropriate controls at the scale required. The industry continues to innovate
with sterilization technologies for COC and plastics (e.g., gamma irradiation, X-ray). As additional
technologies emerge that are cost-effective and compact, it may be that on-line treatment of polymers will
become a more standard practice. For COC components, an additional complication of their supply is that
they tend to scratch very easily. Because nested processing lowers the risk of damaging the component, this
must be considered in any on-line pretreatment.
9.1.1.6 Transfer of RTU Primary Containers
In the case of RTU primary containers, which are sterile or depyrogenated (regardless of the container
material of construction), a mechanism must be in place to aseptically transfer the containers directly into
the Grade A infeed-filling section. Some of the mechanisms of transfer include (see Section 10.0):
• No-touch transfer (NTT) as an automatic or semiautomatic system for inner-bag and outer-bag
removal while introducing the tub or tray into the barrier (23)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 149

--- PDF Page 164 ---
• Conveyor or other transfer equipment (e.g., transfer isolator) that includes an automatic external
biodecontamination system (e.g., hydrogen peroxide, e-beam, ultraviolet light, pulsed light)
• Sterile-container transfer through beta-port bag, container, or transfer isolator provided by the
supplier
With plastic containers (e.g., droptainers, polypropylene syringes), the interface has an additional need for
unscrambling and orienting the components at the filling section.
It is important to ensure that the chosen supplier can provide the RTU components in the selected transfer
modality during the filling system design stage. Significant delays have occurred to filling system
implementation when suppliers are not capable of providing the correct packaging or the appropriately
dimensioned transfer device.
9.1.1.7 Advantages and Disadvantages of the Various Approaches
The advantages and disadvantages of on-site treatment vs. RTU primary containers are highlighted in Table
9.1.1.7-1.
150 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 165 ---
Table 9.1.1.7-1 Considerations for In-Line Treated Versus Ready to Used Transfer Unit Containers
Consideration In-Line and On-Site Ready to Use Ready to Use (RTU) with Ready to Use (RTU) with
Treatment (RTU) with No- External External
Touch Transfer Biodecontamination — Biodecontamination —
Hydrogen Peroxide E-Beam
Contamination On-site management of Reduced Simplified due to in-line Simplified due to in-line
Control sterilization results in all contamination risk management of management of
Strategy parameters being known with automatic biodecontamination. biodecontamination.
to the team drafting the handling.
CCS, however controls
Inspection required
must exist for processing
for supplier of
conditions, cleaning
primary packaging
agents, and equipment.
for SA controls and
Supplier surveillance for quality of the
pre-treatment (e.g., secondary and
sterilization methods and tertiary packaging of
controls) and for the components.
transport of sterile
CCS must address
components not needed.
protection of
containers at
introduction point
and must include
additional
environmental
monitoring for the
NTT operation.
Processing Processing rate Processing rate Processing rate correlated to Processing rate correlated to
Rate correlated to rate of correlated to the rate rate of batch cycle with rate of batch cycle for
component introduction. of component hydrogen peroxide for component introduction.
introduction. component introduction.
Can employ more than Higher processing speed than
one tunnel to supply line. Slower processing speed than hydrogen peroxide.
E-Beam.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 151

--- PDF Page 166 ---
Consideration In-Line and On-Site Ready to Use Ready to Use (RTU) with Ready to Use (RTU) with
Treatment (RTU) with No- External External
Touch Transfer Biodecontamination — Biodecontamination —
Hydrogen Peroxide E-Beam
Validation Qualification and Simpler validation In-line biodecontamination In-line biodecontamination
validation required for (e.g., no on-site requires qualification. requires qualification.
processing. qualification of
Easy to validate process, Easy to validate process, ability
washer and tunnel,
Well-understood ability to demonstrate a clear to demonstrate a clear 6-log
VPHP, or E-Beam).
processes. 6-log reduction in resistant reduction in resistant
microorganisms. microorganism
Easy to validate process,
ability to demonstrate a
clear 6-log reduction in
resistant microorganisms.
Particulate Risk Potential for glass-to- No glass-to-glass No glass-to-glass contact. No glass-to-glass contact.
glass contact depending contact.
upon conveyance
mechanism.
Residuals Risk None None Risk of oxidizing residuals (24). Risk of free radicals or ozone
residuals.
Cost of Lower cost of primary Primary packaging Less expensive primary Less expensive primary
Components packaging compared to more expensive, as packaging than NTT, as packaging than NTT as single-
RTU. vendor has single-bag RTU may be bag RTU may be sufficient but
additional processing sufficient but are more is more expensive than fully
steps. expensive than fully on-site on-site processed components.
processed components.
Initial capital costs may be high.
152 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.