
--- PDF Page 15 ---
Introduction
The PDA Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1: Aseptic Filling, Engineering, and Operation is designed
to communicate the Parenteral Drug Association’s thoughts on the topic and encourage further dialog
among industry, health authorities, and suppliers of technology and materials, taking into consideration the
changes and needs of the modern, global, sterile, healthcare product manufacturing industry. It does not
represent an industry standard or regulatory guidance. This document addresses topics relating to major
technologies for sterile filling and extends to the point of container closure, with the aim of discussing key
considerations, risks and benefits of each technology.
Sterile products should be subject to terminal sterilization whenever possible. However, many drug products
cannot withstand the rigors of terminal sterilization. Therefore, sterility must be achieved prior to containers
being filled. Aseptic filling equipment is an essential tool in the successful filling of sterile products. Fillers
are required to safeguard the sterility of the product, ensure delivery of uniform doses to each container,
assure homogeneity (product dependent), and complete the fill with a closing process that prevents product
and headspace loss and maintains sterility. A properly designed and closed container also prevents the
ingress of microbial contaminants and/or harmful gases and generally protects the contents of the container
in the intended storage conditions throughout its shelf life.
Many factors must be considered in the selection and use of an aseptic filling system, including the type and
attributes of the product, the selected container–closure system, and the need or desire for single-use (SU)
components in the filling operation itself. Considerations, such as the product pathway, integration with the
sterilizing filter (as applicable), mechanisms for the introduction of components, access for interventions,
and risk of exposure to the operator during these critical tasks must also be taken into account. Once
selected, the filling system installation must be carefully analyzed to ensure that it is optimally integrated
with the facility and utilities. All of these design attributes and considerations must prioritize microbial
control and ensure sterility assurance in order to reliably and consistently deliver a sterile product to the
patient.
The design must also reflect the firm’s strategies for supporting activities, such as weight check,
homogeneity, and other filling-related critical quality attributes as well as strategies for the identification and
discard of units that fail to meet established criteria. After the selection, design, procurement, and
installation of the filling system, the lifecycle elements of routine operations, maintenance and calibration
will take precedence; therefore, these components must be adequately considered in the planning stages and
incorporated into the design phase.
The number and variety of considerations in selecting a filling system design make it appropriate to employ
a cross-functional team that includes equipment and facility engineers, operations, quality, microbiology,
and validation personnel. Product and package scientists should also be consulted due to their specialty
knowledge of the attributes of the product and primary packaging. When forming the team, it is also
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 1

--- PDF Page 16 ---
essential to ensure that personnel are sensitized to future business needs so that adequate flexibility can be
built into the design.
This document is divided into four main parts pertaining to the design and operation of an aseptic filling
system:
• Part 1 – Technology Selection and Design addresses the major filling technologies for liquid
filling and the criteria that might influence their selection
• Part 2 – Technical Engineering Considerations addresses the desired attributes of the filling
operation which might influence technology selection for the aseptic filling of liquids, suspensions,
and powders
• Part 3 – Operational Considerations addresses the various aspects of microbial control and
interventions during routine operations that should be included in technology selection for the
aseptic filling of liquids, suspensions, and powders
• Part 4 – Powder Filling Technology Selection and Design addresses the elements of Parts 1, 2
and 3 which pertain to the filling of powders and addresses the major technologies for powder
filling and the criteria that might influence their selection
A successful aseptic filling design and operation must consider all of the aspects identified within each
applicable part in order to reliably deliver a sterile product. Therefore, it is the role of the project engineer to
appropriately integrate all of the stated requirements, as appropriate to their product and facility.
Scope
This guide provides an overview of the elements that should be considered in the selection of an appropriate
filler technology and for the successful integration of the filling system into the broader aseptic operation.
Precautions with regard to sterility assurance (SA) are paramount for both liquid and powder filling systems.
Innovation in filling technology continues throughout the industry in an effort to improve filling precision,
increase throughput, reduce the need for interventions, and improve SA. This document will serve as a
comprehensive resource for the considerations and components to be included in any design project.
This document focuses on the mechanics of the filling systems and the surrounding processes (e.g., setup of
fluid pathway and filtration, supply of components, weight checks) and their influence on SA. Robotics and
the automation associated with gloveless isolators presents a significant opportunity for improvements in
protecting the critical zone. To that end, the considerations for the implementation of robotics have been
included in Sections 4.0 and 4.10. However, this document is not intended to be a comprehensive reference
for the implementation of robotics or gloveless isolators.
The aseptic filling process and the immediate requirements to accomplish that step is the focus of this guide.
Regulators and industry consider that container-closure integrity (CCI) is not assured until the containers are
fully closed, including the application of a mechanical seal (e.g., crimp seal) for those containers that use
them. Therefore, within this document, the discussion may include the integration of a capper into the filling
line, though this stage of the closing process is not a primary focus. In addition, lyophilized products are
referenced at various points, but this should not be considered a thorough treatment of lyophilized products
or the aseptic handling of the loading and unloading processes. A key differentiator in the processing of
lyophilized products from non-lyophilized products is that, in the former, the stopper is not fully seated until
after completion of the lyophilization cycle, whereupon the then-fully stoppered units are unloaded from the
lyophilizer and mechanically sealed. Likewise, while ampoules and IV bags are also not the central focus of
this document, the elements discussed for the filling technology broadly apply to both ampoules and IV
2 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 17 ---
bags, though the closure of the ampoules and the special handling considerations for ampoules and IV bags
have not been discussed.
Within this document, the challenges and approaches for filling products of varying viscosities are
addressed. Both filling technologies and filling needles that are suitable for higher viscosity products are
presented, as are considerations for managing air entrainment in viscous materials. Although the principles
that are addressed within the body of this document can be applied to viscous products, the need to employ
any or all of these design solutions (or specific handling of solutions such as warming) will be dependent
upon product testing. This document does not endeavor to present a comprehensive guide to the filling of
sterile ointments or gels.
Although the design attributes described here apply to filling systems and fluid pathways that are used for
the filling of terminally sterilized, microbiologically controlled (low bioburden), and aseptically filled
products, the design attributes are not intended to comprehensively address the approach for products other
than those which are filled aseptically. Terminally sterilized products commonly employ a different
contamination control strategy for bioburden control compared to continuous SA. Specifically, terminally
sterilized products may entail less stringent requirements in some areas (1). This document does not address
the use of blow-fill-seal or form-fill-seal technologies in which the container is formed on-line as part of the
filling process. Additional details on blow-fill-seal filling may be found in PDA Technical Report No. 77:
The Manufacture of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products Using Blow-Fill Seal Technology (2).
Instead, this document applies only to conventional aseptic filling, which requires a more rigorous set of
controls for all process stages, from the component supply to the filled and closed container. Similarly,
aseptically filled products that are highly potent may require additional or different considerations during
(and after) their filling processes to prevent risk to operators or the environment. Where appropriate these
elements have been addressed, although this document is not a comprehensive guidance for the handling of
such potent materials.
The project for the implementation of a new filling system should follow good engineering practice. As the
system will be subject to validation, good validation practices should also be followed. The design will
commonly start with a User Requirements Specification (URS) which is then responded to with a
Functional Requirements Specification (FRS) and System Design Specification (SDS). Both hardware and
software elements must be fully defined through these documents and the associated drawings and
schematics so that qualification and validation (e.g., Design Qualification, Traceability Matrix, Factory
Acceptance Testing, Commissioning, Installation Qualification, Operational Qualification, Performance
Qualification, and Process Validation) can be executed and documented. As this document is focused on the
attributes of the design, selection and operation of the filling system, it does not address these related topics
of good engineering practice and good validation practice exhaustively.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 3

--- PDF Page 18 ---
Glossary
Definitions have been provided to help clarify Fill Curve
the concepts discussed in this document. While
The characteristic parameters that define the
some definitions used vary among companies,
synchronized stroke of the filling needle and the
geographic location, etc., the definitions
controlled flow, velocity, acceleration, and
described below are consistently used within this
deceleration of the product throughout the filling
document. Where a definition is based on
of a single container.
another published source, the source is cited.
Filling Line
The filling line is a combination of the filling
Biodecontamination
machine and barrier technology which may be
The process of reducing microbial used with bulk or ready-to-use (RTU)
contamination to a pre-determined acceptable containers. The filling line is inclusive of
level, effectively eliminating or neutralizing connected systems (e.g., washer, depyrogenation
harmful microorganisms on surfaces or within a tunnel, e-beam system, no touch transfer (NTT),
space. When used in this document, the term is capping station, robotics).
generally applied to the high-level disinfection
Filling System
that can be accomplished through automated
disinfection with disinfectants such as vapor The drug product pathway, dosing system, and
phase hydrogen peroxide (VPHP) or similar dosing in-process control (IPC); may also be
agents. referred to as the filler. The filling system is
inclusive of its utilities such as CIP and SIP.
Corrective Intervention
First Air
An intervention that is performed to correct or
adjust an aseptic process during its execution. Refers to filtered air in the critical zone that has
These may not occur at a set frequency in the not been interrupted by items with the potential
routine aseptic process. Examples include such to add contamination to the air prior to
as clearing component jams, stopping leaks, contacting exposed product and product contact
adjusting sensors, and replacing equipment surfaces.
components (3).
Grade A Air Supply
Direct Product Contact Part
Air which is passed through a filter qualified as
Direct product contact parts are those that the capable of producing Grade A total particle
product passes through, such as filling needles quality air, but where there is no requirement to
or pumps (3). perform continuous total particle monitoring or
4 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 19 ---
meet Grade A viable monitoring limits and the connection is accomplished, exposing sterile-to-
area itself is not classified. Specifically used for sterile surfaces to form the connection) or fusion
the protection of fully stoppered vials where the sealing (e.g., sterile tube welders.
cap has not yet been crimped (3).
Isolator
Gray Space
An enclosure capable of being subject to
A mechanical (technical) area that supports reproducible interior biodecontamination, with
cleanroom operations. The gray space an internal work zone meeting Grade A
environment or personnel operating within that conditions that provides uncompromised,
area are not permitted to be in direct contact continuous isolation of its interior from the
with the cleanroom as it is commonly controlled external environment (e.g. surrounding
but not classified, or sometimes even less clean. cleanroom air and personnel). Operators may
use integrated gloves or half suits to perform
Headspace
manipulations and use rapid transfer ports
The volume between the surface of product and (RTPs) and other integrated transfer ports to
the underside of the closure. The headspace convey materials within the isolator. Gloveless
composition (i.e., percent of oxygen) may isolators which are fully automated (i.e., robotic)
require control in order to maximize product are becoming more prevalent. There are two
shelf life through minimization of oxidizing major types of isolators:
agent.
Closed Isolator
Indirect Product Contact Part
Closed isolator systems exclude external
Indirect product contact parts are equipment contamination of the isolator’s interior by
parts that do not contact the product, but may accomplishing material transfer via aseptic
come into contact with other sterilised surfaces, connection to auxiliary equipment, rather
the sterility of which is critical to the overall than through the use of openings to the
product sterility (e.g., sterilised items such as surrounding environment. Closed systems
stopper bowls and guides, and sterilised remain sealed throughout operations.
components) (3).
Open Isolator
Inherent Intervention
Open isolator systems are designed to allow
An intervention that is an integral part of the for the continuous or semi-continuous
aseptic process and is required for either set-up, ingress and/or egress of materials during
routine operation and/or monitoring (e.g., operations through one or more openings.
aseptic assembly, container replenishment, Openings are engineered (e.g. using
environmental sampling). Inherent interventions continuous overpressure) to exclude the
are required by procedure or work instruction for entry of external contaminants into the
the execution of the aseptic process (3). isolator (3).
Intrinsic Sterile Connection Device Mousehole
A device that is designed to prevent A small opening through a barrier that permits
contamination during the connection process; the passage of individual containers or nests into
these can be mechanical (e.g., rotational or the next barrier or classified room. Mouseholes
interlocking snap connectors with polymer are designed to be as small as possible to prevent
sheets on each end that are removed after the disruptions in differential pressures and/or
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 5

--- PDF Page 20 ---
unidirectional airflow, while also preventing the commonly has no automated
entrainment of particulate from one area to biodecontamination system (4).
another.
Note: Closed RABS are commonly used for
Nonproduct Contact Parts handling highly potent products, where
product protection and occupational safety
These are parts, such as the format parts for
come together.
conveyance systems, that are not in contact with
the product or product-contacting materials. Open RABS (oRABS)
They will require sterilization,
A RABS for which the barrier permits air
biodecontamination, or disinfection when they
exchange with the surrounding environment.
are in the critical zone.
Passive Open RABS uses the room HVAC
Occlusion Bed Distance for supply. Active Open RABS uses a
dedicated unidirectional air-flow unit
Distance between the rollers and the backplate in
(UDAF) system for air supply but exchanges
a peristaltic pump.
the exhaust with the room (4).
Restricted Access Barrier System (RABS)
Note: Although Open RABS cannot be
System that provides an enclosed, but not fully automatically biodecontaminated, there are
sealed, environment meeting defined air quality some installations where the cleanroom, and
conditions (for aseptic processing Grade A), and all the equipment it contains, including the
using a rigid-wall enclosure and integrated Open RABS, is biodecontaminated. But this
gloves to separate its interior from the is a special case.
surrounding cleanroom environment. The inner
Servo Motor
surfaces of the RABS are disinfected and
decontaminated with a sporicidal agent. A rotary or linear actuator that allows for precise
Operators use gloves, half suits, RTPs and other control of angular or linear position, velocity,
integrated transfer ports to perform and acceleration. The system includes a motor
manipulations or convey materials to the interior coupled with a position feedback sensor.
of the RABS. Depending on the design, doors
Shift Register
are rarely opened, and only under strictly
predefined conditions (3). An instruction that allows the shifting of bits
through a single register or group of registers
Closed RABS (cRABS)
within programable logic controller (PLC) code
A RABS for which the barrier prevents air as it is executed. The intent for shift registers is
exchange with the surrounding environment frequently tracking, such as the tracking that
[when closed]. Closed RABS uses a would occur if a rejected unit at a weight-check
dedicated unidirectional air flow unit station must be tracked as it travels down the
(UDAF) system for air supply [with a closed conveyor to the reject station. The shift register
exhaust system that is separate from the enables accurate tracking to ensure that the
room]. A closed RABS is still considered an correct unit is ultimately rejected.
open system (when compared to a closed
isolator) as it typically has mouseholes, and
6 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 21 ---
Abbreviations
AF Auger Filling OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer
APS Aseptic Process Simulation oRABS Open Restricted Access Barrier
System
AVS Airflow Visualization Study
PLC Programmable Logic Controller
CCI Container Closure Integrity
PP Peristaltic Pump
CIP Clean-in-Place
RABS Restricted Access Barrier System
COC Cyclic Olefin Copolymer
RPP Rotary Piston Pump
Note: COP (cyclic olefin polymer), like COC, is
also a transparent thermoplastic used for the RTP Rapid Transfer Port
manufacture of vials and syringes; to avoid
RTS Ready-to-Sterilize
confusion with the acronym for Clean-Out-of-
Place, COC has been used exclusively to represent RTU Ready to Use
the family of cyclic olefins in this text.
RPM Revolutions per Minute
cRABS Closed Restricted Access Barrier SA Sterility Assurance
System
SIP Sterilize-in-Place
DP Diaphragm Pump
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
HEPA High Efficiency Particulate Air
SU Single Use
ID Inner Diameter
SUS Single-Use System
IPC In-Process Control
SVP Small Volume Parenteral
LSU Line Setup
TCO Total Cost of Ownership
LVP Large Volume Parenteral
TP Time Pressure
mPa-s milliPascal-second
VPPF Vacuum Pressure Powder Filling
OD Outer Diameter
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 7