
--- PDF Page 68 ---
Figure 2.4-1 External and Cut-Away Views of a Rolling Diaphragm Pump
2.4.1 Rolling Diaphragm Pump Design Configuration
The use of a rolling diaphragm provides a number of advantages when used in a positive displacement
pump. The rolling diaphragm provides a leak-proof seal for the fluid within the pump, separating the fluid
pathway from the mechanical components. It also ensures gentle handling of the fluid to be delivered by
minimizing the shearing of molecules within the pump head that may otherwise occur using a product-
contact piston drive unit to drive the liquid.
The pump includes a pneumatic port, providing an outlet for a vacuum connection that controls withdrawal
of the piston drive unit, leading to high dosing accuracy. This vacuum source accomplishes the additional
function of placing proper differential pressure across the diaphragm to hold it firmly in position. This
feature makes the mechanical pump actuation system extremely repeatable by not using a push-pull linkage.
Figure 2.4.1-1 depicts the cut-away image of a DP stroke from suction to discharge. The DP suction and
discharge are controlled by pinch valves (unlike the RPP, which makes use of the configuration of the piston
to alternately block and expose the respective ports).
54 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 69 ---
Figure 2.4.1-1 Progression Images of a Rolling Diaphragm Pump Stroke
2.4.2 Rolling Diaphragm Pump Setup and System Positioning
With the DP system, product can be fed directly from a pressurized supply vessel via manifold to the rolling
diaphragm pumps. Alternatively, the pressurized supply vessel may feed an intermediate vessel or bag that
uses gravity feed to supply the product to the manifold and then to the rolling DPs. Figure 2.4.2-1 depicts a
possible configuration for the DP fluid pathway. Notably, the pumps are depicted within the aseptic barrier,
but installation outside of the barrier is possible and may be preferable.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 55

--- PDF Page 70 ---
Figure 2.4.2-1 Fluid Pathway for Rolling Diaphragm Pump Systems
2.4.3 Rolling Diaphragm Pump Advantages and Disadvantages
Table 2.4.3-1 identifies the advantages and disadvantages of rolling DPs.
56 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 71 ---
Table 2.4.3-1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Rolling Diaphragm Pumps
Characteristic Advantages Disadvantages
Viscosity None Not good for high-viscosity products unless product is stable
at high temperatures.
Durability Durable, long equipment life when handled properly. Product Tubing transiting the pinch valves is subject to wear and must
not in direct contact with moving parts; only moving parts are be changed regularly.
piston in the pump body and pinch valves outside tubing at
Diaphragms may be cleaned and reused but will require
intake/discharge ports.
change-out periodically due to wear.
Single Use Possible with some vendors. None
Changeover CIP/SIP-capable in some designs. When not purchased with CIP/SIP, offline cleaning,
autoclaving, and aseptic installation requires training and
validation.
Sterilization SIP is an advantage for sterility. Variation of standard design is required for CIP/SIP models.
As an alternative for reusable or disposable configurations,
the entire fluid path from product vessel to filling needle can
be preassembled and sterilized with a single aseptic
connection (via traditional or intrinsic sterile connection
devices).
Shear Level Very gentle, low-shear technology. None
Dosing Range Typically, 10-fold filling range for each pump. Dosing range limited to size of pump selected. Wide dosing
ranges may require changeover of pumps between batches.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 57

--- PDF Page 72 ---
Characteristic Advantages Disadvantages
Operability Filling accuracy is highly insensitive to product temperature, When pumps are installed on the filling line, the machine
but if temperature changes occur during filling, a minor must not be run without the vacuum system operating or
change may be noted. diaphragm damage will occur.
Separate drives for each pump enable individual control.
Feedback control is possible for fill weight adjustments. (This
makes 100% IPC feasible, but it is not commonly required as
this is a volumetric dosing system, which is very stable for
dosing.)
58 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 73 ---
2.4.4 Rolling Diaphragm Pump Sterility Assurance: Microbial and Total Particles
Due to the rolling diaphragm separating the fluid chamber from the piston drive, product is contained within
a leak-proof chamber without risk of particle contamination from friction wear of the piston or microbial
contamination from extraneous sources. Several methods are available to ensure SA following use. Rolling
DPs are designed to be easily cleanable and are easy to assemble prior to sterilization. CIP/SIP designs, as
well as presterilized, aseptically installed options are available, as are SU presterilized designs.
Small breaks in the diaphragm or tubing could result in a breach of the “closed” sterile fluid pathway,
although the system will remain under negative pressure (vacuum), which minimizes the risk of microbial
and particulate ingress. In order to detect any potential leak, best practice is to add a moisture-sensor on the
vacuum line to detect such a breach so that it can be addressed immediately. Even with the sensor in place,
should the closed system be breached, this condition may be problematic for highly potent or toxic products,
which require containment. As a consequence, the installation position of the pump should be reconsidered
to locate the mechanical components within the containment barrier. Since the diaphragm is a wear-part, this
risk of a breach reinforces the importance of monitoring the number of use-cycles for the diaphragm and
replacing it before the point of failure.
2.4.5 Rolling Diaphragm Pump Efficiency and Impact on Risk
The rolling DP is a high-precision dosing system with stable accuracy throughout the filling process. Even
with high accuracy, an IPC is recommended when using rolling DPs to detect any underfills. However, as a
volumetric dosing system, 100% IPC is not commonly employed; instead, a statistical IPC is performed (see
Sections 5.1-5.1.4).
Once properly trained in assembly and installation of rolling DPs, the associated risk is low, as no direct
contact with the product or product-contacts parts occurs during production. However, aseptic assembly
requires training and represents the highest risk when using the pump. To significantly reduce this risk,
CIP/SIP or SU execution should be implemented.
2.4.6 Rolling Diaphragm Costs: Initial and Lifecycle
Initial costs are comparable to initial investment costs for other systems for dedicated fill volumes. When
multiple fill-volumes are required, additional pump sizes are commonly necessary, which can add to system
cost. Lifecycle costs can be negligible because the pumps have a long lifespan, provided they are well
maintained and protected from damage. Diaphragms can be cleaned or replaced between batches, based on
user requirements defined in site SOPs.
Rolling DPs equipped with CIP/SIP have added costs. The CIP/SIP infrastructure systems drive much of the
increase in costs; however, CIP/SIP-capable pumps have additional configurations and connections for the
cleaning and sterilization media-flow as well as proper media-draining.
If SUS that use disposable rolling DPs are implemented, the costs for SU are high and can be compared to
initial and ongoing costs of a CIP/SIP system operation and maintenance. This is often driven by total costs
of ownership calculations. TCO calculations for a CIP/SIP-capable system would need to include setup,
operation, and CIP/SIP as appropriate to the system design. Examples of considerations for the TCO
calculations may include, but are not limited to, time, utilities, cleaning validation, maintenance, process
know-how, training of operators, downtime due to CIP/SIP cycles, and extended times in cases where
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 59

--- PDF Page 74 ---
parallel processing is not possible (such as not being able to run the biodecontamination cycle
simultaneously with the CIP/SIP).
2.4.7 Rolling Diaphragm Pump System Complexity: Setup, Handling, and Changeover
DP is a two-drive system for piston actuation and actuation of the pinch valve. The system design and fluid
pathway are simple and straightforward; however, it requires proper training for pump assembly and aseptic
installation (when not CIP/SIP-capable). When assembled and not connected to vacuum supply (e.g., during
transport to the line, during setup), any inadvertent movement of the piston without vacuum could result in
diaphragm displacement (i.e., wrinkling) that can alter piston movement and affect dosing accuracy.
For CIP/SIP-configured rolling DPs, installation is different, but not significantly more complex. Rather, the
primary difference is that pumps, which are normally installed vertically, are required to be installed
horizontally to ensure proper draining after CIP/SIP.
2.4.8 Rolling Diaphragm Pump Maintenance and Aging
Rolling DPs are precisely machined to critical tolerances and must be handled gently to prevent damage and
ensure accurate fills. Reusable rolling DPs are constructed of stainless steel; if any defect is observed on the
pump, it must be thoroughly inspected to determine if a repair or replacement action is required to the entire
pump assembly. With proper cleaning and care, the pump system has a long life. The drives and/or motors
for the pump systems should be replaced according to their prescribed run-time limits. (The exception being
SU configurations, which are intended for disposal after one use.)
Diaphragms can be cleaned and reused or replaced after each batch, depending on user requirements.
Vacuum seal and diaphragms are wear-parts that can be expected to be replaced regularly.
A replacement strategy for servo motors should be provided by the OEM to avoid unnecessary downtimes
or potential loss of batches.
2.4.9 Rolling Diaphragm Pump Single-Use Versus Reusable Strategy
The SU application of rolling DPs is gaining adoption and is available from some OEMs. All elements of
the fluid path (from aseptic connector to the product vessel through intermediate product bag, manifold,
pump, tubing, and filling needle) are preassembled, disposable, and easy to set up and change over, but they
need to be considered as consumable costs associated with the system. These costs are then additional and
ongoing, as compared to RPP or TP fillers that might have more fixed piping, and therefore a comparatively
higher capital cost.
Reusable systems bring added risks to the process as offline cleaning and sterilization introduces added
complexity since the validation for pumps and needles requires additional time, costs, and paperwork.
Aseptic connections made for parts that come into direct contact with product should be sterilized in place,
if possible; therefore, a rolling DP configured for CIP/SIP (or SU-presterilized) is recommended for future
system designs (3, 6). Comparison of the expense between fully disposable rolling-DP system consumables
and a conventional filling system with fixed piping that is CIP/SIP-capable must take into account not only
the initial installation and validation costs, but also the ongoing cost of utilities, manpower, time of
changeover, maintenance of the validated state, and calibration, as well as their associated consumables.
TCO calculations for both applications need to be evaluated according to user protocols prior to selecting a
configuration.
60 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 75 ---
2.4.10 Rolling Diaphragm Pump Clean-In-Place/Sterilize-In-Place Feasibility and Pitfalls
CIP/SIP is well-suited for rolling DPs, with an established design standard for tubing attachment
(compression fitting vs. barbed fitting) and a horizontal setup for proper draining of the cleaning media. Due
to the altered orientation of the CIP/SIP pump within the filler, proper care should be taken to design with
cleanroom or isolator airflow in mind. The advantage with the CIP/SIP configuration is less handling and
reduced aseptic installation complexity (3, 6).
2.4.11 Rolling Diaphragm Pump Benefits and Risks
Table 2.4.11-1 highlights the common benefits and risks analysis that is pertinent to the use of rolling DP
systems.
Table 2.4.11-1 Rolling Diaphragm Pump System Benefits and Risks
Benefits Risks
Available in three configurations for maximum When assembled and not hooked to a vacuum
flexibility: supply, there is a risk of diaphragm wrinkling if the
piston is actuated that can have negative effects
1. Reusable with offline cleaning, assembly,
on filling accuracy.
sterilization, and aseptic installation
2. Reusable with CIP/SIP
3. Presterilized, SU fluid path from aseptic
connection to bulk product vessel through to filling
needles
Closed system can be used outside aseptic barrier. Consideration should be given to product
viscosity.
Low maintenance Large range of filling volumes possible, but will
require additional pump sizes.
High dosing accuracy Training for assembly, setup, and operation
necessary, especially in non-CIP/SIP-capable
Multiple product-contact materials available for systems where aseptic assembly is required.
products with metal sensitivity.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 61

--- PDF Page 76 ---
3.0 Filling Needle Designs
Filling needles can be customized to specific applications. The intent of the various designs is to provide
greater control over the filling (e.g., to prevent splashing, prevent foaming, control dripping, aid in filling
highly viscous products). The major needle designs are described in Table 3.0-1 and are depicted in the
images that follow the table. Innovations in needle design continue to be made and variations are possible.
When selecting a filling needle design, consider that the:
• Filling needle should be easy to install in the right position with a tight connection to prevent
movement (and the potential for splashing); installation into the needle holder is often required to be
performed either with automation or with sterilized implements (e.g., forceps). Regardless of the
approach to installation the design should facilitate installation without risk of contamination.
• Needle holders should be designed to affix needles in a manner that stabilizes needles with a tight
fit and prevents risk of damage such as bending during operation.
• Needle holders, and any fixtures between the source of first air and critical operations, should be as
minimal as possible, not be a source of particle generation, facilitate easy cleaning, sterilization
and/or decontamination, and be designed to minimize turbulence.
• Flexible tubing used at the filling needle connection, directly above critical operations must be
minimized due to the risk that flexible materials could release particles over time due to motion
during the filling process.
• Flexible tubing should be selected to permit any necessary equipment motion; the unsupported
length should be minimized to prevent sagging, bending, pinching, or any restriction of flow.
Needles should be selected to be compatible with the filling curve (e.g., synchronized needle motion and
fluid start, acceleration, stop, liquid retraction when available). The filling curve is selected for the specific
formulation with consideration of the distance from the surface of the liquid (taking into account the
meniscus that forms based on the diameter of the vial and the surface tension of the specific formulation).
When an appropriate filling curve has been identified, there should be no (limited or reduced) splashing,
foaming or dripping of the product, which can cause some types of filling rejects.
62 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.