
--- PDF Page 148 (doc p134) ---
Primary containers of other types that experience different stressors during shipping may require additional
evaluation.
For primary containers assembled in devices, shock and vibration can pose risks to integrity of the primary-
container interface, which can require additional evaluation. When testing is executed, it is typically a
separate study from the filling-line CCI validation.
134 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 149 (doc p135) ---
Part 3: Operational Considerations
Including Interventions, Component
Handling, Filtration, Fluid Pathway,
and Discards
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 135

--- PDF Page 150 (doc p136) ---
8.0 Microbiological Risks for System Operation
Contamination control is the primary objective in aseptic filling. In Section 1.0, it was highlighted that the
goal of producing a sterile product must remain the target in all design decisions and trade-offs. Successful
operation of an aseptic filling system cannot be achieved without considering and mitigating
microbiological risks and operating with good aseptic technique. As a consequence, during design when
looking ahead to the operation of any filling line, consideration should be given to the types of interventions
that will be required to accomplish the fill. Interventions should be minimized or eliminated by proper
design and effective risk assessments of the entire filling system including personnel and material flows, and
changeover complexity. The aseptic system design should be adapted to ensure effective microbiological
control during all phases of the operation for both inherent and corrective interventions that are required
after the risk assessment and mitigation are successfully concluded.
8.1 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated
with Line Setup
Line setup (LSU) is an important part of the filling process because of the extent of operator interaction and
potential to introduce contamination. Line setup can only occur after line clearance from the prior campaign
or batch is complete. Parts to be sterilized out-of-place will have been removed at the conclusion of the
campaign or batch. Those parts are subject to cleaning, pre-assembly (if any), and off-line sterilization in
appropriate wraps and bags and are then staged for setup. The next step is preparation of the stationary parts
of the filling line for setup.
Note: Since campaigns may also include setup during the campaign (between batches) this will be
addressed in Section 8.1.2 as it has some additional considerations.
For isolators, preparation includes surface cleaning (and often manual disinfection) of the barrier and non-
contact surfaces of the filling and closing machine prior to installation of the sterilized parts under
unidirectional airflow within the barrier. This will be followed by closing the barrier and an automated 6-log
sporicidal biodecontamination process (e.g., VPHP) that will be applied to establish Grade A conditions.
Importantly, Grade A is established after the sterilized parts are installed and this approach is in variance to
RABS.
For RABS, Grade A conditions need to be established via a combination of cleaning and sporicidal 6-log
high-level disinfection before sterilized parts are installed. In RABS, following this preparation stage the
filling line will be ready for starting the aseptic line setup ahead of aseptic filling operations.
The detailed steps for setup in both isolators and RABS are described below (see Section 8.1.1), however
some definitions are required to ensure common understanding of the detailed steps. The parts to be
installed during the setup stage can be divided into three groups:
136 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 151 (doc p137) ---
• Non-product contact parts include format parts such as feed screws, star wheels, container
transport mechanisms that make no direct contact with sterile products to be filled.
• Indirect product contact parts include parts such as vibratory feeders and feed bowls which touch
the sterile primary packaging components and therefore represent a risk of indirectly transferring
contamination to the sterile product.
• Product contact parts include parts such as fluid pathway, filling needles and other surfaces which
are in direct contact with the sterile product and any direct contact gas overlay parts.
Some non-product contact parts may be removed, cleaned, returned to the line and disinfected in place with
the rest of the stationary parts of the equipment and the barrier rather than being sterilized off-line.
Both direct and indirect product contact parts have the potential to compromise product sterility, quality, and
patient safety so precautions should always be taken to protect any part in these two groups from particle
and microbial contamination. Therefore, when preparing these parts off-line prior to setup, care must be
taken in their washing and sterilization. The parts must be dried and wrapped or bagged after cleaning
before sterilization. The wraps must remain intact until the time of their installation as it is a vital part of
their protection as they are transferred from the preparations area to the filling line.
8.1.1 Detailed Steps of Line Setup in RABS and Isolators
Depending on the barrier technology for aseptic processing, RABS or Isolators, the parts will be subject to
different steps. All steps for line setup should be risk assessed in order to identify the risk mitigations and
control measures that will best ensure the sterility of the critical components and should be included within
the CCS. All setup activities (both open and closed door) should follow the general requirements for the
performance of aseptic interventions (see Section 8.2).
The aseptic line setup in a RABS includes the following sequence of steps:
• Open-door line setup (Grade B background):
̶ Cleaning and disinfection of non-product contact parts, stationary filling machine parts, and
barrier, to establish Grade A conditions
̶ EM initiated for Grade A conditions
̶ Installation of sterilized indirect product contact parts on the disinfected machine base
̶ Installation of the sterilized direct product contact parts
To the extent possible, consideration should be given to protecting the direct product contact parts by
transferring and installing them using closed transfer technologies (e.g., RTP) and closed-door interventions
rather than open-door. At a minimum, protective sheaths may be used for critical parts such as needles,
which can be left in place until the barrier door is closed.
The aseptic line setup in an isolator includes the following sequence of steps:
• Open-door line setup (Grade C background) with isolator HVAC active:
̶ Cleaning and disinfection of non-product contact parts, stationary filling machine parts, and
barrier prior to establishing Grade A conditions
̶ Installation of sterilized indirect product contact parts on the disinfected machine base
leaving protective wraps in place over critical surfaces for as long as possible (even
considering removal only after the door is closed)
̶ Closure of the barrier door
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 137

--- PDF Page 152 (doc p138) ---
• Closed-door line setup:
̶ Biodecontamination of the filling line (e.g., VPHP) to establish Grade A conditions
̶ EM initiated for Grade A conditions
̶ Installation of the sterilized direct product contact parts
Although the background classification for isolators is commonly Grade C, enhanced gowning is typically
employed for those employees conducting the open-door setup. Including but not limited to goggles or face
shield, hoods, sterile sleeves and sterile gloves.
To the extent possible, consideration should be given to protecting the indirect product contact parts by
preventing their exposure to the background environment during open-door setup by making use of closed
transfer systems or by retaining protective covers as long as possible. For this reason, the removal of final
covers for these parts may occur immediately before door closure, immediately after door closure, or even
after biodecontamination. The approach to the removal of these covers will also affect how the
biodecontamination cycle is validated (e.g., timing of cover removal if applicable, permissible bioburden on
parts before VPHP exposure of indirect product contact parts to VPHP, aeration time for residuals with or
without cover) and should be included as a standard procedure to be followed within APS (13).
Regulators have emphasized the importance of understanding the environmental conditions within the
isolator and the cleanroom during open door activities. As a consequence, EM may be initiated during the
open-door phases of setup. In addition, air flow visualization studies are commonly performed during the
initial qualification of the isolator to ensure that there is no entrained air from the surrounding environment
entering the isolator during the activities of setup.
Fully closed (during operation) isolators are permitted to be installed within Grade D backgrounds rather
than Grade C. The risks associated with indirect product contact parts and the coordination of the removal of
their covers becomes even more critical when considering the associated risks with a Grade D background
environment.
8.1.2 Additional Considerations for Line Setup within a Campaign
Within a campaign, limited line setup may occur between batches (i.e., to change container type, to establish
a new fluid pathway, etc.) (see Section 4.1 for additional details on campaign requirements).
Care must be taken to ensure that Grade A conditions are maintained and that the interventions are limited
to the essential activities, in order to preserve the aseptic environment. Risk assessments should be
performed for all intended activities, and they should be included within the CCS to ensure that the
appropriate controls are implemented.
Some general principles for line setup between batches within a campaign include:
• All setup activities should follow the general requirements for the performance of aseptic
interventions (see Section 8.2).
• All setup activities must be included in an appropriately designed APS.
• Where possible, any parts that are to be exchanged should be brought within the barrier using closed
transfer mechanisms (e.g., RTP) or should be present within the barrier from the beginning of the
campaign (e.g., second fluid pathway).
• When using RABS, setup should be performed using closed door interventions.
• When using RABS and open door interventions are unavoidable, consideration should be given to
what disinfection or biodecontamination is appropriate prior to resumption of aseptic operations.
138 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 153 (doc p139) ---
• When extensive setup is required, consideration should be given to terminating the campaign;
recent advances in technology including rapid biodecontamination within isolators, for example,
make it possible to turn around a line within a shorter period of time.
8.1.3 Other Considerations for Line Setup
When making use of Single Use Systems (SUS), and they are part of the load for the biodecontamination
cycle, care should be taken to ensure that the packaging is impermeable to the biodecontamination agent
(e.g., VPHP) to prevent absorption that might be harmful to products (14).
See PDA PtC No.12: Restricted Access Barrier Systems for additional information with regard to the design
and operation of RABS (4). In particular, a UDAF should be present above doors to protect the environment
during any open-door activity such as line setup.
CFD for airflow design within the barrier (both RABS and isolators) and surrounding environment, and
airflow visualization for the intervention activities, are essential to demonstrate that airflow turbulence is
minimized.
8.2 General Considerations Regarding Aseptic Interventions
• Quality risk management tools should be employed to define the risk level for each planned
intervention, including the intervention detection, mitigations, and controls (e.g., EM, personnel
monitoring, sterility samples). Key elements to assess include:
̶ Personnel (number and positioning of)
̶ Duration of the intervention
̶ Complexity of the required actions during the intervention
̶ Proximity and handling or manipulation of sterile parts
̶ Risks due to potential occluded surfaces
• All aseptic interventions should be defined in a SOP that defines:
̶ Whether the intervention is via glove port, remote manipulator, open door, or other
mechanism (open doors are to be avoided whenever possible)
̶ Glove checks (for tears, pinholes) and glove sanitization that may be required pre- and
post-intervention
̶ Procedures to be followed for performance of the intervention to ensure that air flow
disruptions are minimized, including if witnessing of the intervention performance is
required
̶ Tools to be used to protect product-contact components, both direct and indirect, and the
required disinfection (pre- and post-intervention) or disposal of those tools
̶ Any required line-clearance activities based on identified risks due to the intervention
procedure and zone of exposure
̶ Disinfection or cleaning and sterilization required post-intervention
̶ Documentation requirements for the intervention
̶ Any requirement to segregate materials or an appropriate decision-making framework for
that decision, for example, quarantine status for a portion of the batch or renumbering of a
portion of the batch until review and approvals are gained
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 139

--- PDF Page 154 (doc p140) ---
• At the conclusion of the fill, EM samples are collected for direct and indirect product-contact parts
which should represent any interventions performed; tools used during interventions should also be
considered as sampling sites. All sampling should follow a risk-based approach.
• SOPs should be demonstrated in an airflow visualization study (AVS) to prove that turbulence is
avoided, and that air does not move from an area of lower classification to higher classification
when following the correct procedures during such activities as open-door setup in an isolator
• Each intervention should be qualified for use and included in an appropriately designed aseptic
process simulation (APS)
• Personnel should be trained in the intervention SOP and qualified to perform the intervention
Additional detail on setup, specifically, and interventions, more generally, may be found in industry
guidance on aseptic practices (3, 15).
8.3 Microbiological Considerations for Filter Changes
The sterilizing filter represents a sterile boundary for the fluid pathway. Filter changes should be avoided,
when possible, and handled with care when unavoidable. To avoid filter changes, firms will sometimes
install more than one filtration manifold in a parallel arrangement, so that switching from one fluid
path/filter to another can be accomplished without intervention. Alternatively, installing more than one filter
in a series can permit the removal and replacement of the upstream filter with less risk to the downstream
sterile barrier (see Section 11.0 for additional discussion on filter configurations).
When filter changes are unavoidable, the system design will influence the requirements for the filter-change
activity. Two examples of system designs that represent the extremes of the design considerations include:
• Aseptic filling lines with the filter outside of the Grade A environment within a stainless-steel (SS)
housing
• Aseptic filling lines that employ presterilized components (e.g., filters, tubing, gaskets, clamps,
flush bags) that are aseptically assembled in a Grade A environment
For filling systems that are SIP, when the filter is in a SS housing outside of the Grade A environment,
changing the filter-set requires that the sterile fluid path be opened and exposed to a lower-grade
environment (e.g., Grade C for isolators and Grade B for RABS filling lines). Opening and exposing the
fluid path to a lower-grade environment can lead to microbiological contamination of the product pathway.
Therefore, when configured in this manner, a filter change will necessitate that filling be stopped and the
batch be split into two identified portions (e.g., before and after the filter replacement) with separate batch
numbers. After removing the original filter, the fluid pathway must be cleaned in place. The new filter is
then installed, sterilized in place, and subjected to pre-use integrity testing and flushing before filling can be
resumed. To mitigate any risk of microbial contamination of the product, a CIP/SIP process is required (see
Section 11.0 for filter placement within the fluid pathway and additional information on PUPSIT).
Configurations that offer improved SA to filters located outside the Grade A environment include gamma-
irradiated filters that are connected via intrinsic sterile-connection devices or filters that are introduced
through a canister port.
For filling lines employing presterilized components that are aseptically assembled in a Grade A
environment, the product transfer is completed by an intrinsic sterile connector or an aseptic connection. In
this case, the aseptic connection can be uncoupled and the transfer port closed. Within the Grade A
environment, the entire filter-set can be replaced and reinstalled with a replacement presterilized filter-set
passed in through a RTP or by using a spare stored in the environment. After reassembly, pre-use integrity
140 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.