
--- PDF Page 122 (doc p108) ---
5.2.2 Method 2: Volumetric Filling Process
In a volumetric filling process, the volume of product filled into the container is not controlled
gravimetrically by scales, but instead relies on container geometry, plunger position (for cartridges), and
residual air-bubble (air gap) size to determine sufficient filling. In the cartridge-filling example below
(Figure 5.2.2-1), a laser and sensor are used to detect the filling endpoint. As filling occurs, the laser light is
deflected by the empty neck of the cartridge and does not reach the sensor. As the container is filled and the
neck fills with product, the laser light is transmitted through the neck of the container, signaling the control
system to stop dosing.
Figure 5.2.2-1 Volumetric Dosing Triggered by Laser Sensor
5.2.2.1 Volumetric Filling Dose-Control Considerations
For a volumetric filling process to deliver repeatable doses to the containers, the container geometry must be
well understood. This includes both the length and the ID of the container and, for cartridges, the precise
placement and installed height of the plunger. In addition, the setup of the laser and sensor must be precise,
as must be the presentation height of the container to the laser. In practice, each laser-sensor fill station will
have an individual adjustment for delay, allowing milliseconds of additional fill after the sensor detects the
laser. Operators on the line must be well trained to fill the container with an appropriate residual air bubble,
guaranteeing an adequate dose is in the container. Volumetric filling is most appropriate for containers that
do not have maximum-fill weight limits (e.g., a multi-use cartridge or a vial in which the patient uses a
syringe to determine the dose delivered).
5.2.2.2 Adjustment of Dosing
Stability differs across the various filling–pumping systems (see Section 2.0). Consequently, there are also
differences in philosophy on whether filling machines should automatically correct doses based on feedback
from the filler. For stable systems, such as RPPs or rolling DPs for liquid filling, the doses delivered at the
end of the batch will show no drift relative to the doses delivered at the beginning of the batch. For this
reason, many stable fillers will require manual adjustment of the dose to prevent autocorrecting of the dose
based on common-cause variability, thereby preventing overcorrection and the potential oscillation of filling
weights.
For PP filling, stress on the pump tubing can cause a reduction of dose given the same number of rotations
from the beginning of the batch to the end of the batch. To compensate for this reduction in pumping
108 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 123 (doc p109) ---
efficiency, many fillers use automatic dose-correction to compensate. The algorithm used in that automatic
dose-correction can be simple or sophisticated depending on the filling-machine supplier. Most are
designed, however, to not overcorrect for small changes and use a time-averaged dose to make corrections
more stable.
For TP filling, automatic dose-correction is standard, due to the need to perform constant calculations to
adjust pinch-valve timing owing to the everchanging intermediate vessel or manifold pressures as they
empty and fill.
5.3 External and Internal Influences on Dose Control Systems
On filling machines, the weighing cells are constantly being confronted with external and environmental
factors that will ultimately negatively influence the ability of the weighing cells to provide accurate
readings. This drives many manufacturers to cross-check the IPC readings during production using
destructive methods (i.e., sampling). Therefore, in the design phase, it is crucial to ensure that good design is
implemented, and risk-based methodology is used to define the steps of weighing and check-weighing.
Typically, these factors can be categorized into three groups: (1) Statistical weighing sources of variability,
(2) Constant weighing sources of variability, and (3) Machine- and product-related sources of variability.
1. Statistical weighing sources of variability
̶ Unidirectional airflow above weighing cells in the Grade A environment
̶ Release mechanism, design, and speed thereof to ensure the objects being weighed set on
the weighing cells are freestanding
̶ “Time-settling” (the longer the time allocated for weighing, the more reliable the readings
will be)
̶ Vibrations of the building where the line is placed
̶ Machine vibrations (e.g., vibratory sorting systems) can be reduced if the weighing scales
are decoupled from the machine baseplate, which reduces the influence of vibrations on the
accuracy of the weighing cells; alternatively, a vibration compensation system can be used
(e.g., physical compensation or software compensation)
̶ Static charges on objects (e.g., vials coming out of the dry heat depyrogenation tunnel) can
also affect the weighing performance of the cells
2. Constant weighing sources of variability
̶ Unidirectional airflow offset
̶ Vibrations, if constant
̶ Load-cell offset (from the manufacturer)
3. Machine- and product-related sources of variability
̶ Filling-line setup, nest vs. bulk, multiple filling steps
̶ Filling time allocated to filling individual containers
̶ Filling volume (smaller volumes are more difficult to weigh with the same accuracy as
higher volumes)
̶ Product characteristics (e.g., foamy products)
̶ Built-in taring
̶ In-process calibration
̶ Automated vs. manual setup and in-process calibration
̶ Weighing cell “filters” to identify and cancel out vibrations
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 109

--- PDF Page 124 (doc p110) ---
5.3.1 In-Process Control Production Limits and Weighing Accuracy
Weighing cells during production, if not equipped with a defined recipe and programmable correction-
factor(s) as explained in Figure 5.3.1-1, will deviate from the actual weight of the container (empty and
filled or tare and gross). Therefore, it is not practical to use IPC values as parameters to depict the actual
filling weight in a filled container.
The approach to compensate for weigh-scale measurement uncertainty compared to the actual weight of the
empty and filled containers will vary slightly from end user to end user but, in principle, defining the IPC
parameters will typically require an overall understanding of the deviations caused by the external factors.
Some points to consider include:
• Weighing accuracy always refers to the net weight; there is no separate accuracy considered for
tare-weighing and gross-weighing
• Weighing accuracy of the net weight consists of the sum of the two deviations (see Figure 5.3.1-1):
̶ Statistical weighing error (σ): Normally distributed scatter of the weighing process
(multiple weighings of an identical weight on the same scale)
̶ Constant weighing error: Constant offset of the net value due to the difference between
the target weight and the achieved mean value of the test quantity per digit
Figure 5.3.1-1 In-Process Control Production Limit
A good way to analyze the influence from external factors is to check the actual readings of several fill
weights against their readings of the IPC cell. Assuming only one IPC cell is being checked against one
laboratory balance, using standard-deviation(s) methods, a bell curve can be plotted that would look
something like Figure 5.3.1-2. Because a laboratory balance is not affected by typical external factors on a
filling line such as unidirectional air flow, it will be more accurate, and the bell curve would be narrower.
110 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 125 (doc p111) ---
Figure 5.3.1-2 Actual Weight Versus In-Process Control Balance Reading
Now, if constant offset deviations of the weigh cells to the left and the right of the IPC bell curve are added,
a wider and flatter bell curve will result, as seen in Figure 5.3.1-3.
Figure 5.3.1-3 Actual Weight Versus In-Process Control Balance Reading including Weighing
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 111

--- PDF Page 126 (doc p112) ---
Scale Offset
If one of the weights in this example is taken, and the reading of the laboratory balance and the reading of
the weight of the IPC cell are compared, two different readings would result that may be significantly
different from each other (see Figure 5.3.1-4).
Figure 5.3.1-4 Significant Delta Between Actual Weight and In-Process Control Balance
Reading
If the end user decides to define production limits according to lab-scale results, with the actual weight of
1.001 g, the fill weight would be acceptable since it lies in the bell curve of actual accepted weights. If,
however, the end user interprets the weighing-cell reading of 1.005 g to be out-of-specification, then they
would define this unit as a reject, although in reality, it fulfills the specifications.
A good approach would be to define the IPC limits (accepted minimum and maximum limits) according to
the widest IPC bell curve (which will mean that the “true” weight of the filled container is assured to be
within limits). This would represent an actual distribution if weighed on a laboratory balance of the narrow
bell curve shown in Figure 5.3.1-1.
5.3.2 In-Process Control Production Limits in Relation to Process Capability Index
Some manufacturers will define the robustness of their design in terms of the system’s capability. This is an
outcome based on upper- and lower-specification limits and the dosing accuracy of the pumps built into the
filling machine. Equation 5.3.2-1 describes the inversely proportional relation of the capability index to
relative standard deviation (σ).
112 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 127 (doc p113) ---
Equation 5.3.2-1:
𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑥𝑥̅ −𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿,𝑈𝑈𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿−𝑥𝑥̅)
𝐶𝐶𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 =
3𝜎𝜎
C checked with a test where:
pK
= measured average by the test
σ𝑥𝑥 ̅ = standard deviation calculated by the test
Given limits:
LSL = Lower specification limit
USL = Upper specification limit
A process capability index (C ) value between 1 and 1.33 is typically accepted as the industry standard
pk
(although the exact capability of any system will be dependent upon its design). A C value of 1 to 1.33
pk
translates to a calculation of ± 3 - 4σ on the bell curve. The higher the accuracy (higher σ) that an OEM can
give, the tighter the upper and lower limit specifications that can be defined. Because this is a statistical
calculation, it deals with how many rejects are allowed per number of filled containers due to bad fills. For
example, in the case of C = 1.33, the stable process would be expected to deliver no more than 66 fills,
pk
which are outside of the dose weight limits in every one-million filled units (see Table 5.3.2-1).
Table 5.3.2-1 Process Capability, Parts Per Million Units Outside of the Limits, and Relative
Standard Deviation for Every One-Million Units Filled in a Stable Process
Process Parts Process Parts
Capability Per Sigma Capability Per Sigma
Index Million (σ) Index Million (σ)
(C ) (ppm) (C ) (ppm)
pK pK
0.50 133614 - 1.33 66 4σ
0.67 44431 - 1.40 26 -
0.75 24448 - 1.50 6 -
0.90 6933 - 1.60 1 -
1.00 2699 3σ 1.67 0 5σ
1.30 96 - 2.00 0 6σ
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 113

--- PDF Page 128 (doc p114) ---
6.0 Special Considerations for Advanced Container–Closure
Design and Implementation
Container–closure design is an area of intense research and development within the pharmaceutical and
biopharmaceutical industries. As stated in Section 1.2, container–closure materials of construction and
design will influence the design of the aseptic filling line and will also affect the selection of the closing
system (see Section 7.3). When considering the use of a novel container and/or closure, it is essential to
involve potential component suppliers as early as practicable with the design and selection of the equipment
to ensure suitability and compatibility.
6.1 Container–Closure Design
Some recent examples of advanced container–closure systems in development and in the market include:
• Multi-chamber vials
• Multi-chamber syringes
• Multi-barrel, single-plunger syringes
• Multi-chamber cartridges
• Autodisable (nonreusable) polymer-pouch intramuscular (IM) delivery system
• Nested micro-vials
• Multi-container-type association (e.g., vial connected to infusion bags)
• Crush-proof vials
• Silicone-free syringes
• Needle-through-septum filling of presterilized, fully closed vials
• Press-fit vial closures
The design objectives of the more advanced containers and closures can be varied, but often include:
• Enhanced shelf life
• Improved ruggedness in handling, transportation, storage (e.g., extreme low-temperature storage),
and use
• Enhanced SA at the point of filling or point of administration
• Simplification and improvement of accuracy of patient administration
• Reconstitution close to the time when the injection is to be administered
• Reduction of waste in the extractable volume
• Prevention of reuse or diversion of syringes
• Reduction of components and reduction of waste during manufacturing and/or administration
• Elimination of specific quality-attribute failures (e.g., silicone-induced protein agglomeration)
• Simplification and improved quality of closing operations (e.g., elimination of vibratory feed
systems, reduced risk of particle generation, reduction in closing steps, reduction in non-product
contact parts, all closing operations completed under Grade A immediately after fill)
114 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.