
--- PDF Page 40 ---
Product Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Rolling Diaphragm
Examples (RPP) Pump (DP)
Large- Yes, considerations should For LVPs, pump sizes up to Yes Yes, may require the largest
Volume be given to batch size and approx. 250 mL are pump size and may require
Parenterals number of revolutions per routinely available, multiple strokes.
fill in order to evaluate the otherwise multi-stroke
(LVP)
rate of tubing wear. filling is necessary. In order
to deliver large volumes, in
addition to splitting the
dosing, the possibility of
using multiple pumps (at
single stroke) to fill a single
container may be feasible.
The larger the pump
diameters, the more
awkward handling which
risks contamination or
damage.
Antibody Yes, highly recommended, No, creates too much shear Yes Yes
Drug especially in SU execution; force.
Conjugate some would opt against
having the pump outside
(ADC)
the isolator in this case, to
contain leakage should that
occur.
26 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 41 ---
Product Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Rolling Diaphragm
Examples (RPP) Pump (DP)
Solvent- Not ideal if the Yes, see the additional Yes, use of a housing to Yes, as the volatile
Based concentration of solvent considerations under low- cover the pinch valves may materials do not come in
Products leads to brittleness, viscosity products. Solvent be required for safety contact with the
weakening, swelling, or effects on tubing before reasons to prevent the mechanical parts of the
other negative effects to and after the pump should pinch-valve drive from pump. Additionally, pump
the hoses as this could be evaluated. coming into contact with components are available in
shorten tubing life or lead any flammable vapors. a variety of materials for
to dosing inaccuracies. Solvent effects on tubing, durability under a variety of
especially at the pinch chemical conditions (e.g.,
valve, should be evaluated. acidic, caustic, oxidizing).
Solvent effects on tubing
before and after the pump
should be evaluated.
Vaccines/ Depending on batch size; it Yes Yes Yes
Heparins may not be ideal if running
long campaigns (e.g., flu
vaccines with three-week
long campaigns) due to
frequent hose replacement.
Ophthalmics* Yes, provided the viscosity Yes Yes, provided the viscosity Yes, provided the viscosity
is in the suitable range. is in the suitable range. is in the suitable range.
*Historically, mass flowmeters were implemented for ophthalmic products. See Section 5.1.3 under 100% IPC Controls for discussion of mass
flowmeters.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 27

--- PDF Page 42 ---
2.1 Aseptic Filling Technologies: Peristaltic Pumps
The principle of operation for the PP is the dynamic rotational squeezing of a flexible tube (in most cases, a
silicone tube) placed between a backplate and rollers mounted on a rotor and driven by a servo motor to
create positive displacement in the closed system (tube), thereby moving liquid products from product
infeed side to product dispensing side. The pump tubes are fixed on the suction side to avoid the tubes
travelling within the pump. The filling volume is governed by the number of revolutions executed by the
rotor (degrees). The distance between the rollers and the backplate is called the occlusion-bed distance and
is critical to minimize tubing wear for a given pump-tubing wall thickness.
Note: Linear peristaltic pumps are also available which provide the compressive force on the tubing at right
angles to the direction of flow. These systems can provide excellent accuracy in filling with capabilities to
fill microliter quantities (5). However, these systems are less common, therefore the focus in this section
will be on peristaltic pumps with rotary heads. Many of the same risks and benefits apply to both
technologies.
The rotating motion of the rotor moves the dynamic squeezing point along the tube and moves the product
along, at the same time, creating a vacuum at the inlet and drawing in the product (see Figure 2.1-1). The
product to be filled only comes into contact with the filling tube and the filling needle. The tube represents a
closed system from the inlet of the product to the outlet through the filling needle.
Figure 2.1-1 Illustration of Progressive Rotary Motion of Rotor Along Backplate
When the product is not viscous (typically less than 60 milliPascal-second (mPa-s; equivalent to 1
centipoise), the choice of using a PP is highly appropriate, as the cleaning and sterilization efforts needed are
significantly less than with other technologies such as the RPP. PP systems are highly compatible with SU
fluid pathways.
Figure 2.1-2 provides a schematic of a possible PP fluid pathway. Notably, this image depicts the pumps
within the aseptic boundary; however, it is possible to install the pumps outside of the aseptic boundary,
thereby removing the primary mechanical components from the critical zone. As discussed in Section 2.1.5
there may be reasons that installation within the boundary is preferable for potent or toxic products.
28 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 43 ---
Figure 2.1-2 Peristaltic Pump Fluid Pathway Configuration
2.1.1 Peristaltic Pump Design Configurations
There are two different PP design configurations available: a single-tube PP and a double-tube PP.
Examples from one manufacturer of both roller configurations are depicted in Figure 2.1.1-1. In the roller
set for the single-tube PP, in this particular design, the tube is threaded around the roller unit twice. In the
offset rollers for double-tube PP, two separate tubes of the same diameter are wrapped around the upper and
lower roller sets a single time. In the double tube configuration, the rollers on the top and on the bottom
have an offset to minimize the pulsation of the system, such that the rollers in maximum compression are
offset from the rollers in minimum compression. Different filling systems are equipped with more rollers
than depicted below (up to six per rotor channel). The advantage of additional rollers is better control of
pulsation and therefore additional filling accuracy.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 29

--- PDF Page 44 ---
Figure 2.1.1-1 Roller Configurations for Single-and Double-Tube Peristaltic Pump
In a single-tube PP, one silicone tube must be placed in between the backplate and the rotor (although it may
be wrapped around the rollers twice). Special care has to be taken to ensure that the pulsation of the system
is minimized. Pulsation is usually impacted by the number of rollers and the available space for the tube to
retract. The pulsation can have an impact on the filling accuracy and may generate pulsation at the
sterilizing filter if there is no sterile intermediate vessel between the filter and the PP. In rare applications, if
filling speeds are low and required accuracy is not demanding, an intermediate vessel may not be necessary.
The pump tubes are fixed on the suction side to avoid the tube travelling.
Single-tube pump heads provide the ability to use one complete tube from intermediate vessel to filling
needle without any connection pieces installed within the rotor. This gives three advantages: less handling,
which means potentially less risk of contamination; fewer parts to be delivered by tube suppliers, which
means reduced costs; and less component integrity risk.
While a single tube may be extended from the vessel through the pump to the filling needle, there are other
designs for single-tube pump heads, such as that depicted in Figure 2.1.1-2, where the tubing assembly is
designed to support long campaign lengths. For example, the tubing inside the pump may be of a special
wear-resistant design, and the tubing between the pump and the filling needle may be of a higher rigidity
than the pump tubing to prevent axial pulsation expansion of the tubing at the outlet side of the pump. To
support these features, the design will result in at least one (if not two) connectors in the tubing, as shown in
Figure 2.1.1-2.
30 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 45 ---
Figure 2.1.1-2 Schematic of a Single-Tube Sterile Fluid Pathway with Connectors
2.1.2 Peristaltic Pump Setup
The setup for the fluid pathway for a double-tube PP is shown in Figure 2.1.2-1. The suction tube is split by
a Y-connector into two pump tubes, which are installed between the backplate and the rollers. Both pump
tubes are joined by an identical Y-piece to one filling tube at the outlet and connected to the filling needle.
The tubes may be of differing diameters (e.g., the two pump tubes may be half the volume of the upstream
suction and downstream filling tubes).
Figure 2.1.2-1 Schematic for a Double-Tube Sterile Fluid Pathway
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 31

--- PDF Page 46 ---
Innovations are being made all the time to improve the capability of traditional technologies. For example,
alternative PP designs exist that provide linear flow to reduce shear force and line losses. These designs are
beyond the scope of this document, but keep in mind that any upgrades to technology should be proven and
validated.
When selecting tubing for PP applications it is important to think about the required attributes of three
distinct sections of tubing:
1. Upstream of the pump
2. Within the rollers of the pump
3. Downstream of the pump
The factors to be considered when selecting the tubing for each section include, but are not limited to:
• Functionality within the distinct position of the pumping system (e.g., effective transport without
deformation, required level of flexibility)
• Prevention of reactivity or harm to the product (e.g., adsorption of API or preservatives, shear
forces, leachables)
• Method of sterilization of the tubing (e.g., to avoid changes in texture, adsorption of sterilant,
generation of free radicals)
• Performance over time to prevent distortion (e.g., tubing integrity, wear and the formation of
particulate, permanent changes in dimension)
The selection of tubing for each position must consider the respective pumping operation role, as well as
each of the four attributes listed above. In general, materials of construction upstream of the pump are less
critical for the filling operation. Within the rollers, the tubing must be flexible to permit effective reaction to
the rollers, but without distortion that can result in changes in the volume of transfer over the intended
period of use. Downstream of the pump, the materials of construction should be less flexible as this section
of tubing does not need to interact with the rollers. The lower flexibility will ensure that the tubing does not
distort from the pressure of the transferred liquid. Distortion in the downstream section can result in changes
in the delivered dose or dripping.
The interior diameter of the tubing and connectors throughout the entire fluid pathway should be designed to
ensure that there is no back pressure or significant pressure drop along the fluid path. This includes any
connectors such as the Y-connectors and the filling needle.
Due to the softening of the pump tubing due to tubing wear (Figure 2.1.2-2), the PP system will eventually
show a drift in delivered dose over time, therefore, a correction value needs to be applied. The correction
value (algorithm) is statistically based on the weight-check results of the inline process control scales.
Therefore, using a statistical or 100% IPC check-weighing method when using PP filling systems is highly
recommended (see Sections 5.1-5.1.4). The usable life of PP tubing depends on fill volume, product
characteristics (e.g., solvents, corrosives, abrasives), pump-tubing robustness, filling speed, and start/stop
curves, as well as the general design of the pump. It is recommended to validate the filling time/filled-dose
count of the tubes as, at some point, the wear and tear will generate particles that will contaminate the
product. The PP tubing will certainly wear on the exterior but, in extreme cases, factors such as a high
number of doses or high pump acceleration or deceleration can lead to internal tubing wear, potentially
32 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 47 ---
releasing particles into the product. Figure 2.1.2-3 includes microscopic images of tubing with external and
internal wear.
Figure 2.1.2-2 Diagrams of External Tubing Wear
Figure 2.1.2-3 Microscopic Examination of Worn Tubing
2.1.3 Peristaltic Pump System Positioning
During the design phase of PP systems, the position of the intermediate vessel relative height to the filling
needles should be evaluated in detail so air gaps in the tube are not created. If the pump has to work to pull
product from a vessel positioned lower than the filling needle, air bubbles are a common result. Likewise,
other parameters such as choosing the right tube diameters for the target fills and the length of the tubes
between the PP and the needle should also be considered. This consideration is due to the well-appreciated
fact that a PP, being a closed system, can be placed outside of the isolator or RABS, which would position it
farther away from the filling needles in some cases.
There are different methods to prime the pump to remove air from the system and to ensure the target fill
volume is achieved without air gaps at the beginning of the batch. The approach to priming should be
considered depending on the application, product characteristics, and the execution of the pump (see
Section 12.2 for priming discard).
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 33

--- PDF Page 48 ---
2.1.4 Peristaltic Pump Advantages and Disadvantages
Table 2.1.4-1 identifies the advantages and disadvantages of PPs.
Table 2.1.4-1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Peristaltic Pumps
Characteristic Advantages Disadvantages
Viscosity None Not good for high viscosity products
Durability Product not in direct contact with Tubing wears, so tubing
moving parts; only moving parts are the longevity/particle-generation studies
rotors and rollers in the pump head required
Single Use Designed for SU Tubing may need to be changed or
moved during filling due to tubing wear,
especially on prolonged fills
Changeover Rapid changeover of filling path For high-dose accuracy applications,
rigid tubing between the pump and
Closed system design can limit product
needle can be hard to aseptically install
exposure when working with potent
products
The use of intrinsic sterile connectors
can facilitate leak prevention when
tubing is removed from the vessel
Sterilization Entire train can be disposable and System can be CIP/SIP, but tubes need
sterilized together from intermediate to be dismounted from pump;
bag to filling needle nevertheless, CIP/SIP is rarely used for
PP
Shear Level Very gentle low-shear technology None
Dosing Range Wide dosing volumes achievable just by Very wide dosing ranges may require
changing disposable tubing sets change of pump occlusion-bed change
part
Operability Can institute feedback control/dosing Tubing deforms over time; potentially
to compensate for tubing deformation impacts dosing for long fills
The capability to install outside of the Slower filling-speed required to avoid
containment simplifies operability and splashing if soft tubing is used between
can improve SA by removing pump and filling needle
mechanical systems from the critical
zone
2.1.5 Peristaltic Pump Sterility Assurance: Microbial and Total Particles
A major driver in choosing a suitable dosing system is the risk of contamination that is posed during setup,
handling, and production, as well as clean up or disassembly after the conclusion of the batch. Assuming
34 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 49 ---
there is absolute flexibility regarding the choice of the dosing system, PPs are always especially appreciated
for the simplicity of the setup. Systems have minimal product contact parts (e.g., tubing and needles); this
simplicity makes these systems especially suitable for SU applications. SU applications have the benefit of a
reduced microbial contamination risk as the preassembled components are commonly gamma-irradiated. As
a consequence, there are fewer required connections compared to other technologies. Connecting to the
holding vessel or for recirculation purposes is also quite straightforward, and most of the connections can be
executed outside of the Grade A area (e.g., using an RTP bag or intrinsic sterile connection device), which
makes handling (including maintenance) easier.
Particulate in the sourced components may be identified by extractable and leachable testing as well as
ongoing quality control of received components, but the disadvantage with a PP system is that the constant
compression of the tubing by the rollers against the backplate will lead to further particle-generation as the
tubes are subject to stretching and wear and tear. Therefore, it is crucial to always validate the use time of
the tubes. This use time may need to be established in conjunction with the products being filled, as some
products could potentially impact the speed of degradation (i.e., particle-generation).
The length of tubing used with PP is longer than with some other technologies, which can result in more
product contact with elastomers. In addition, several types of tubing may be in use, as the different sections
of tubing benefit from different stiffness, and there are substantial mechanical forces applied to the tubing
(especially within the rollers). As a consequence, extractables and leachables testing is of particular
importance for the range of materials and exposure conditions (e.g., times, temperature, friction forces).
Small cracks and breaks in the tube may not be immediately identified with PP technology. If a 100% IPC
system is not in place for dose control, small breaks may go undetected for a period of time until the next
statistical IPC (see Sections 5.1-5.1.4 for additional information on IPC strategies). The wear profile of the
tubing within the rotors or the connectors that are employed for the fluid pathway can elevate this risk. As a
consequence, leakage could result in contamination of this “closed system.” In addition to the sterility risk,
leakage will be problematic with potent or toxic products and may require reconsideration of the installation
position to locate the mechanical components within the containment barrier.
There is no vertical movement on top of the machine table plate, therefore, machine-generated particles are
minimized with PP systems. Since PPs can be placed outside of the barrier or isolator, the risk of particle-
generation from the friction on the tubing can be reduced within the critical zone.
2.1.6 Peristaltic Pump Efficiency and Impact on Risk
Once personnel have been properly trained in the installation and proper functioning of PP systems, the
associated risk of contamination to product is relatively low, as no direct contact by personnel with the
product or product-contact parts (tube) occurs. Visibility of the equipment is also superior to some of the
other systems, as a group of PPs can also be set up either vertically or horizontally to enable easy handling
(e.g., improving ergonomics) and to decrease error probability (e.g., incorrect tubing placement, incorrect
mounting of the wrong tube, leakage/damage to tube). The selected mounting position should take into
account gravitational forces between the pump and filling needles and between the intermediate vessel and
pumps to ensure consistency of dosing accuracy for all of the pump heads. Because no aseptic connections
to the pump itself have to be made, the risk is considerably lower than with a manually assembled RPP.
However, when the RPP is CIP/SIP-capable, the technologies are more comparable.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 35

--- PDF Page 50 ---
Containment is also straightforward with highly potent products if the PPs are placed within the isolator,
which is necessary due to the comparatively higher potential of leaks and breakage. Detection systems for
leaks can be implemented to trigger an alert should there be a breach in tubing. However, if a tube breaks,
the standard operating procedure (SOP) for system operation should define whether to continue without that
dosing head or to replace the tube, in addition to addressing quality implications (i.e., deviation) associated
with breach and required isolation of any associated product containers. Replacement of the tube can take
place easily without breaching containment of neighboring product paths.
The pumps run with very high efficiency due to the direct translation of servo drive to pump head (e.g., no
gears as with RPP), and the pump heads show minimal wear and tear over multiple years of use. Therefore,
pump heads do not normally require regular replacement.
2.1.7 Peristaltic Pump Costs: Initial and Lifecycle
Initial costs are comparable to initial investment costs for other systems for dedicated fill volumes. If
multiple fill volumes are required, the PP becomes commercially superior, as the same pump head can cover
a much higher dosing range in comparison to other technologies such as RPP. Lifecycle costs are negligible
as pump heads seldom require replacement. Breakage of the servo motors can occur, but that is an
infrequent failure mode. If single-use systems (SUS) are implemented, which is common with PP, the costs
associated with the disposable components can be high. The total cost of ownership (TCO) calculations
would take consumables into account; therefore, a TCO comparison might be made between the SU
disposables and a reusable RPP system with CIP/SIP capability. Examples of considerations for the TCO
calculations should be appropriate to the system design and may include, but are not limited to time,
utilities, cleaning validation, maintenance, process know-how, training of operators, and downtime due to
CIP/SIP cycles, and extended times in cases where parallel processing is not possible (such as not being able
to run the biodecontamination cycles simultaneously with the CIP/SIP) (see Section 2.1.10 on SUS).
2.1.8 Peristaltic Pump System Complexity: Setup, Handling, and Changeover
System complexity is very low as the pump only consists of a rotor and a housing, which can cover a large
filling range (e.g., 0.01 mL to 50 mL); therefore, the pump does not need to be changed to accommodate the
filling of multiple product volumes. The setup of the pump is the installation of the housing, and the rotor.
Neither requires sterile connections nor sterilization as the pump has no direct product contact;
biodecontamination with hydrogen peroxide or another qualified SOP-driven disinfection procedure as
appropriate for cleanroom use is sufficient. The tubes require proper handling, as they need to be mounted to
the pump system either as a SU gamma-irradiated component or as an in-house autoclaved component.
With a two-tube PP, tube clips are commonly employed, which hold the two pump tubes going into and out
of the pump heads (see Figure 2.1.8-1). The tube clips are attached to the tubes, typically by pressing the
tube into the corresponding slot on the clip. The tube clip is then mounted to the pump by simply clicking it
into position, and the tubing that is internal to the rotary pump head is centered within the rollers. Special
care must be taken so the fixed and loose sides of the clips are not confused; this is typically prevented by
mistake-proofing the setup procedure (e.g., with appropriate photographs, marking of components, flow-
direction indication). Tube clips are format-specific as the size of the slots within the clip are specific to the
tubing outer diameter (OD) in use.
36 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 51 ---
Figure 2.1.8-1 Diagram Showing the Positioning of Tube Clips used with Peristaltic Pump
Because the pump is a closed system, it may be located outside the barrier, which would add further
simplicity to the setup and handling. Changeover would be necessary if the filling volumes exceeded the
limits covered by the pump head. The changeover is the same procedure as the setup, and only the housing
and rotor would need to be changed if there were a large volume change on the line. It should be established
whether an adapter or changeable plate will be required to accommodate the range of filling, and whether
this will also require a different housing or rotor sizes.
There are some pumps that are designed to have small adjustment springs between the backplate and the
rotor, which may be helpful in compensating for the stress effects on the tubes. However, the proper
installation and adjustment of such springs typically requires expert setup knowledge. Therefore, it is
important to understand the specific design of the PP when considering overall system complexity.
Because different batches of tubes may have different geometry (e.g., inner diameter (ID), OD, thickness,
length, elasticity), ensuring during setup that the fill volume is established to match the specific batch of
tubing in use is important. A best practice is 100% IPC. Should a strategy for weight check other than 100%
IPC be employed, maintaining a high monitoring frequency at the beginning of the batch is particularly
critical, and there may be other points of criticality as well, particularly over long production durations when
wear may start to affect performance. An appropriate risk assessment should be performed to justify the
dose control approach if other than 100% IPC (see Sections 5.1-5.1.4 for additional content on weight-
check strategies).
2.1.9 Peristaltic Pump Maintenance and Aging
As described in the preceding sections, the focus for this system must be on the aging and replacement of
tubing.
The pump system itself is essentially maintenance-free, although the original equipment manufacturer’s
recommendations for checking the operation of the roller bearings should be observed.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 37

--- PDF Page 52 ---
The original equipment manufacturer (OEM) should provide a replacement strategy for the servo motors
(although infrequent), to avoid unnecessary downtimes or potential loss of batches.
2.1.10 Peristaltic Pump Single-Use Versus Reusable Strategy
Use of the SU strategy is much more common than the reusable strategy with PP due to the simplicity of the
installation of presterilized components without any need for aseptic connections. The reusable strategy
brings added risks to the process, for example, offline sterilization gives added complexity to the process,
and cleaning for the tubing and filling needles requires validation and monitoring.
Regulatory guidance (e.g., European Commission Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products,
EudraLex-Volume 4-EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human
and Veterinary Use (2022)) clearly states that any aseptic connections made for parts that come into direct
contact with product should be sterilized in place whenever possible (3). It is generally always possible to
sterilize in place if a CIP/SIP system is designed for the filler, so the cost for reuse (and the increased costs
associated with engineering and initial capital) should be weighed against the costs of SU.
For example, when the PPs use SU tubing (and connectors, where necessary), there are consumable costs
associated with the system. These are additional ongoing costs as compared to a RPP or TP filler that might
have more fixed piping, which is a greater initial capital investment. PPs are commonly used in a full SUS
(e.g., disposable SU bags) due to the ease of setup. A comparison of expense between a fully disposable SU
PP system and a conventional filling system with fixed piping that is CIP/SIP capable must take into
account not only the initial installation and validation costs, but also the ongoing cost of utilities, manpower,
time of changeover, maintenance of the validated state, and calibration, as well as the associated
consumables.
2.1.11 Peristaltic Pump Clean-In-Place/Sterilize-In-Place Feasibility and Pitfalls
CIP/SIP may be restricted to cleaning and sterilizing the intermediate vessel, tubes, and dosing needles.
Because of this, the decision to implement a CIP/SIP system on a PP, and the practicality and the benefits
thereof, will usually be considered to see if use of a SUS will not outweigh the CIP/SIP approach in terms of
complexity.
In the case where CIP/SIP is applied, two main considerations apply:
• Initial CIP/SIP of the interior surfaces
• Subsequent biodecontamination of the exterior surfaces prior to the start of operations
For the initial CIP/SIP, the tubes cannot be mounted within the pump, as the pump rotor and rollers would
restrict CIP/SIP media flow (e.g., cleaning fluid, steam). For the biodecontamination, tubes cannot be
mounted within the clips or the pump as it will restrict biodecontamination (e.g., vapor phase access to
surfaces that are in contact with each other). If the tubing biodecontamination is performed prior to SIP, the
SIP will reduce the risk of residual absorbed biodecontamination agent (e.g., vaporized hydrogen peroxide
absorbed in silicone tubing). Alternatively, after biodecontamination, a WFI flush or CIP might be applied
to the tubing followed by SIP. The chosen sequence and process steps should be validated to be appropriate
to ensure the residue-free, sterile condition of the tubing. During SIP the tube to needle, tube to Y-
connectors, and vessel to tube connections must be fixed with a connector to ensure that the tube does not
disconnect from the needle when under pressure for SIP. After SIP, manual assembly must take place,
which again poses risks as a result of aseptic manipulation.
38 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 53 ---
2.1.12 Peristaltic Pump Benefits and Risks
Table 2.1.12-1 highlights the common benefits-and-risks analysis that is pertinent to the use of PP systems.
Table 2.1.12-1 Benefits and Risks of Peristaltic Pump Systems
Benefits Risks
Highly beneficial when combined with SUS High dependency on SUS suppliers
Closed system can be used outside aseptic barrier Wear and tear of the tubes may limit the period of
use for a single set of tubing; tubing failure
conditions may be exacerbated due to specific
product characteristics (e.g., solvents)
Easy assembly and handling May have slower reaction time for sensor-filling
and, therefore, is less suitable than TP for
containers that require sensor-filling
Low maintenance Consideration should be given to product viscosity
Range of filling volumes Tube breakage is a greater risk than with other
systems; leak detection systems are available, but
Reduced technology know-how needed due to the risk of leaks may require installation inside the
reduced complexity and reduced setup aseptic barrier in order to potentially conserve a
portion of the batch upon failure; installation
within the barrier is especially critical for potent or
Limited operating costs for SUS after initial
toxic products
investment other than consumables (e.g., no use of
water for injection (WFI), clean steam, cleaning
validation)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 39

--- PDF Page 54 ---
2.2 Aseptic Filling Technologies: Rotary Piston Pump
The rotary piston pump consists of a cylindrical housing and a piston, as shown in Figure 2.2-1. The
product is the lubricant between the piston and the cylinder; no other source of lubrication is required or
appropriate. The dosing system is seal-free.
Figure 2.2-1 Diagram of the External Components of the Rotary Piston Pump
As depicted in Figure 2.2-2, when the pump piston is fully rotated to the suction side and the piston is in the
bottom position, the product outlet is automatically closed. From the suction position (the pump piston at the
lowest position of the pump cylinder), the pump piston is then raised, creating an under-pressure, through
which the product is drawn into the pump.
The pump piston rotates towards the dosing side and moves from the bottom to the top position, closing the
product inlet automatically. Once at the dosing position (the pump piston at the highest position of the pump
cylinder), the pump piston is immediately lowered again, displacing the product from the pump and pushing
it into the filling tube. The piston then rotates back to the starting suction position, automatically closing the
product outlet, with the piston remaining at the bottom position to start the next cycle.
40 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 55 ---
Figure 2.2-2 Rotary Piston Pump Motion Associated with Product Suction and Dispensing
Figure 2.2-3 depicts a RPP filler fluid path. Because there is no seal between the cylinder and piston, there
is a possibility of product exposure to the environment (especially if over-pressurized or with product that
has low viscosity). This makes the pump unsuitable for installation outside of the isolator or RABS.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 41