
--- PDF Page 219 ---
integrity of the isolator environment, and parts are maintained throughout any transfer steps, aseptic
assembly operations, and mounting steps.
To support the validation, aseptic assembly and setup must be properly designed and described in detail in
SOPs, and all operators must be trained. The assembly procedures are confirmed during both AVS and APS.
Filling system interventions must be qualified and included in an appropriately designed APS. The
continuity of the SA must be considered with the design and implementation of these systems, since there
are different sterilization processes that may be followed for different sections of the equipment (e.g.,
CIP/SIP for bulk-feed portions, off-line sterilization with aseptic assembly for the dosing disc, autoclave
sterilization transport and mounting for super plate technologies).
During the assembly and setup phases, EM must be conducted to monitor the aseptic assembly of the filler.
Regulatory expectations are that aseptic-filling operations are constantly monitored for both viable and total
particulate. Due to the nature of the filling media (powder), during the filling phase, particulate may
interfere with monitoring. As a consequence, the location of monitoring probes should be evaluated to
reduce the incidence of false-positive signals from the product itself. This may require positioning of the
probes at a height above the typical working height that would be used for liquid filling. Firms should
defend and document the location of the probes in their operation. In case the powder being filled has an
inhibitory effect on media, special EM materials must be used.
Microbiological plates must be positioned at the critical points during the filling operation. As powder fillers
tend to be wider than liquid fillers, the ergonomics for microbiological plate placement should be verified as
part of the initial qualification to avoid the risk of contamination during placement. Monitoring positions
should be included as part of the filler design (e.g., during mock-up) to ensure effective ergonomics.
16.2.6 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler Efficiency and Impact on Risk
VPPF speed (containers per minute) is quite fast and can be increased with a filler that employs multiple
dosing lanes and fill heads for larger doses. The use of multiple fill heads will require additional aseptic
interventions during setup.
16.2.7 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler Costs: Initial and Ongoing
If multiple fill-weights are required, VPPF encounters additional costs for different formats and discs.
Lifecycle costs for VPPF consumables include filters and O-rings for the filter and pistons. Other wear parts
are those typical of any filling machine (e.g., bushings, bearings, seals). VPPF uses clean compressed air
and vacuum. These can be supplied via house utilities or through localized generation. These systems will
also potentially have consumables (e.g., filters, desiccant dryers).
The mechanical backplate and/or pneumatic rotary joint that is behind the dosing disc may be a point of
friction during the rotation of the dosing disc. Therefore, over time, this rotational mechanism may need
replacement, generally after multiple millions of cycles.
16.2.8 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler System Complexity: Setup, Handling, and
Changeover
VPPFs are systems with a high complexity during the setup phase. Setup can be lengthy, but by
implementing ergonomic features and installation aids, the setup could potentially be reduced. Assembly
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 205

--- PDF Page 220 ---
activities for the hoppers can be performed in a Grade C area with subsequent sterilization. For the dosing
discs, drum, and needle, the parts are typically sterilized and then aseptically assembled in a downflow
booth to install O-rings and pistons (unless working with a super plate design where assembly precedes
sterilization followed by transport for mounting).
There may be rare cases where a dosing disc chamber plugs or a screen is breached during an operation. The
typical mechanism to handle this would be to reject the containers associated with that chamber (on 100%
weight-check equipment). Changing the dosing disc (due to plugged chambers or breaches) during the
operation is not recommended as this is a significant intervention. Changing the dosing disc would require
the availability of a second, sterilized disc within the cleanroom or isolator, clearance of the line,
performance of the intervention (with all required EM samples), and restandardization of fill weights. Risk
assessments for this operation should be performed and mitigation actions should be considered (e.g.,
reducing the duration of filling for each batch to reduce the chance of a plugged filter, optimizing powder
and airflow characteristics to reduce the likelihood of a plug). Testing during filling system feasibility
should ideally uncover such a risk so that appropriate controls (or filler type) can be implemented before
registration of the process. Some filler designs, where individual dosing stations can be shut off after starting
the run, make the need to perform such an unusual action less likely (e.g., dosing needles).
At the time of changeover, all the product-contact pieces (e.g., hoppers, discs, feed pipes) must be manually
disassembled prior to being cleaned. After cleaning activities, there are two options:
• Sterilize the pieces in an autoclave and then assemble everything in the aseptic area
• Use the super plate concept (i.e., assemble the machine in a Class C environment and then sterilize
it in an autoclave assembled, and later transport to the line for mounting)
If using the latter approach, after the sterilization, the super plate can be directly connected to the system in
the aseptic area without prolonged or intricate manual interventions.
Once the setup is complete, system handling (governed by procedures) is quite easy. Modern systems are
provided with 100% weight checks and with automatic adjustment of the dosing-piston lengths to maintain
weight(s) within specified limits.
16.2.9 Vacuum Pressure Pump Filler Maintenance and Aging through the Product
Lifecycle
Maintenance requirements for VPPF are typical of any mechanical system with moving parts. Bearings,
bushings, and belts may all require replacement. Self-lubrication is a design requirement for product-contact
parts. If there are dust boots around any mechanical cams or shafts, the boots may need to be inspected for
integrity and replaced as necessary. The manufacturer’s recommendations on maintenance intervals and
requirements should be observed.
16.2.10 Vacuum Pressure Pump Filler Strategy: Single-Use Versus Reusable
VPPF is typically cost-prohibitive as a SUS due to the complexity and precision necessary in the dosing
discs. As a consequence, SUS do not exist, and cleaning validation is necessary.
16.2.11 Vacuum Pressure Pump Filler Clean-In-Place/Sterilize-In-Place
CIP/SIP is only possible for the bulk-feed components of the system. The parts that cannot be subjected to
CIP/SIP must be disassembled and cleaned, either manually or in a parts washer (filters are commonly
206 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 221 ---
cleaned in ultrasonic baths), followed by sterilization. Employing CIP/SIP for a portion of the system will
increase the costs and complexity related to the implementation of utilities, steam traps, drains,
thermocouples, additional valving, and validation.
16.2.12 Use of Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler with Potent or Toxic Products
VPPF technology requires cleaning and sterilization off-line. Therefore, it may not be ideal for highly potent
or toxic applications, although it may be acceptable if the equipment and environment can be rinsed in place
(with or without partial disassembly) prior to opening the isolator or RABS. The rinsed parts are then
bagged and removed for full cleaning and sterilization.
The mechanism of dose delivery through air pressure has the possibility of increasing the risk of product
exposure to the filling environment for any excessively dusty product. Dust collection at the point of fill
may reduce this risk. Filling-needle designs that insert the needle into the opening of the container at the
point of delivery can also reduce the risk of product exposure to the environment. If the product is granular
in nature, it is typically less dusty and, in addition, less air pressure is required to deliver the slug, regardless
of the dosing-wheel design.
If there is a very small dose, as is typical of potent products, even with very motile powders, the risk of dust
exposure is lessened.
16.2.13 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler Benefits and Risks
Filler designs are highly varied and, depending on the features included with the specific filler, the
capabilities may vary. Listed in Table 16.2.13-1 are some generalized features and ranges that may be
considered when contrasting the VPFF technology to AF.
Table 16.2.13-1 Benefits and Risks of Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler
Benefits Risks
Large range of fill weights (~2.0 mg to 1000 mg) CIP and SIP only available for bulk-feed system
Large range of possible container types can be Complexity in aseptic assembly unless making use
filled of the super plate concept
Accuracy in dosing-weight depends on fill weight If using super plate technology, Grade A zoning
and powder characteristics; typical ranges may must be available from the unload side of the
include ~2% to 5% autoclave and throughout the filling line, ideally
with minimal transport distances
Production rates of up to 400 pieces per minute Possibility of leaving residual powder in the bulk
with two lanes and two wheels hoppers (reducing % yield)
Available both for RABS and isolator installations May require powder-handling know-how for
products that have challenging characteristics
Low maintenance May not be well-suited to isolators with a limited
opening to introduce and perform aseptic setup
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 207

--- PDF Page 222 ---
16.3 Aseptic Filling Technologies: Auger Powder Filling
AF technology is illustrated in Figure 16.3-1.
Figure 16.3-1 Typical Auger Powder Filler
In an AF system, powder is loaded in an upper feeding hopper, then transferred to a lower hopper equipped
with dosing augers suitable to fill the powder inside the containers. See Section 18.0 for a discussion on the
transfer of product from bulk containers to the filler hopper.
The lower hopper, as well as upper hopper, is designed with a proper mixing system necessary to ensure
homogeneity and the proper powder flow to the auger. The design of the mixing system improves yield
through the consumption of the majority of the bulk product with only small losses. The system needs to be
equipped with a proper venting system within the hopper, which vents locally, to avoid back-pressure (due
to powder attributes such as stickiness or adhesion) and ensure a proper dosing performance. The filling
dosing is governed by the auger diameter (i.e., screw external diameter) and by the number of auger
rotations performed within the same container.
AFs are a strong option for containment applications for highly potent or toxic products due to the use of
mechanical transfer of the powder, rather than compressed air, and the ability to clean and sterilize the
equipment in place.
208 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 223 ---
16.3.1 Auger Powder Filler Setup
AF is high-precision dosing system. Accuracy of dosing is mainly impacted by the physical characteristics
of the powder and the environment. If the powder particle-size varies, agitation in the dosing hopper(s) is an
essential means of ensuring continuous powder flow to the auger. Particle-size distribution, powder moisture
content, humidity, temperature of the environment, and airflow can all affect flow characteristics and
accuracy over time. Dose control is performed by managing the number of rotations of the auger. Statistical
weight check is a must for all filling operations; however, an in-line 100% weighing system is a highly
recommended upgrade. Adjustments to the auger rotation is possible with some filler models to address
trends in weights.
16.3.2 Auger Powder Filler Product Characteristic Compatibility
There are a wide variety of product characteristics that can impact filler design. A combined table of the
common attributes to consider with various filling technologies (both VPPF and AF) is included in Section
17.0.
16.3.3 Auger Powder Filler Filling Container Compatibility
Auger systems can be used with a variety of container types, depending on the selected filler design. Table
16.3.3-1 depicts typical containers and their applicability to the various AF system designs.
Table 16.3.3-1 Filling Container Compatibility with Auger Filler Designs
Auger Filler Vial Cartridge Syringe Ampoule Bag Inhalers
Type
Auger Filler Yes Yes1 Yes1 No Yes2 No Current
with Scroll Known
Feeder Applications
Auger Filler Yes Yes1 Yes1 No Yes2 No Current
with Vibration Known
Feeder Applications
1Will require a dosing mechanism that enters the mouth of the container; neck diameter minimally 5 mm;
more successful with larger openings
2Bag shape is specifically designed at the mouth for the technology
When working with nested components, such as syringes or cartridges (see Section 9.0 and Section 10.0 for
the introduction of components), AF fillers are adapted to either provide robotics (e.g., XY table) to dose
from the fixed filling-mechanism to each position within the nest, or to denest the components, fill them,
and then renest the components. When considering nested components, care should be taken with the
approach for the IPC weight check, as these approaches may restrict the ability to perform 100% net weight
capabilities.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 209

--- PDF Page 224 ---
16.3.4 Auger Powder Filler Sterility Assurance (Microbial and Total Particles)
The AF is mainly a closed system as all components can be subjected to CIP/SIP and the product is not
exposed up to the point of product delivery. At the point of discharge into the container, there is a small (1-2
mm) gap between the filler and the mouth of the container. The gap is necessary to accommodate
differences in container dimensions and to enable weigh cells (with net-weight fillers) to properly register
the tare and gross weight of the container. For some filler designs, the auger may be capable of descending
past the plane of the opening to enter the container, reducing the possibility that powder would escape
during the dosing cycle.
Due to the presence of possible multi-axial screws and mixer, AF systems normally do not allow an aseptic
installation, which is why this system is recommended to include a proper CIP/SIP capability. The entire
procedure must be validated.
Due to the shape and design of the system, the cleaning and sterilization needs to consider the different
shapes and passages, and it must be designed to guarantee proper cleaning, drying, and sterilization of the
whole system. Both the inside and the outside of the auger-dosing tube need to be properly cleaned.
Microbiological plates must be positioned at the critical points during the filling operation. As powder fillers
tend to be wider than liquid fillers, the ergonomics for microbiological plate placement should be verified as
part of the initial qualification to avoid the risk of contamination during placement. Monitoring positions
should be included as part of the filler design (e.g., during mock-up) to ensure effective ergonomics.
16.3.5 Auger Powder Filling Efficiency and Impact on Risk
AF speed (containers per minute) is quite fast and can be increased with a filling system that is equipped
with multiple lanes and augers.
The CIP/SIP unit should be properly designed to consider eventual multiple-dosing points if that is
anticipated for future production. The end user should specify the proper requirements for the intended
CIP/SIP controls in case of a split-fill system, if any.
16.3.6 Auger Powder Filling Costs: Initial and Ongoing
Implementation of AF systems should consider the additional costs associated with the presence of a
CIP/SIP system. CIP/SIP is highly recommended due to the extreme difficulty in aseptic assembly.
If multiple fill-weights are required, AF will incur costs for different format parts and augers.
Lifecycle costs are negligible because the AF has few disposable items (due, in part, to the CIP/SIP, which
makes SU parts unnecessary) or consumable items.
16.3.7 Auger Powder Filler System Complexity: Setup, Handling, and Changeover
AFs are systems with low complexity during the setup phase as the vast majority of the assembly is
completed prior to CIP/SIP of the system. Only the connection with the powder-supply system needs to be
properly designed and managed according to technology specifications (e.g., bin, keg, bag).
Once the setup is completed, the system adjustment, if any, is governed by the machine. Modern systems
are provided with 100% weight checks and with automatic adjustment of the dosing auger rotation to
maintain weight(s) within specified limits.
210 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.