
--- PDF Page 210 ---
Attribute Isolator Closed Restricted Access Open Restricted Access
Barrier System (cRABS) Barrier System (oRABS)
Computational Fluid Useful during design to ensure Useful during design to ensure Useful during design to ensure
Dynamics (CFD) that design delivers protective that design delivers protective that design delivers protective
airflow airflow; especially critical for airflow; especially critical for open-
open-door interventions door interventions
Operational Attributes
Open Barrier During Yes Yes Yes
Setup/Cleaning
Automatic Yes Maybe (depends on design) No, unless the oRABS can be
Biodecontamination After automatically biodecontaminated
Setup with the entire surrounding room
Open Barrier During No No (extremely rare unless Yes (should be rare)
Processing justified; in addition to sterility
assurance concerns there is a
loss of pressure control)
CIP of the Barrier Itself Maybe (depends on design) Maybe (depends on design) No
Cleaning and Disinfection of Yes (especially initially) Yes (especially initially) Yes (especially initially)
Utility Piping
There are three PDA documents that contain more detailed information on the design and operation of isolators and RABS for aseptic filling (4, 16,
31). Other industry guidances on contemporary isolator design and operation features for aseptic containment are available from the International
Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE) and the Pharmaceutical and Healthcare Sciences Society (PHSS) (32, 33).
196 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 211 ---
15.0 Utility Considerations for Aseptic Operations
Numerous utilities other than HVAC, light, and electricity may be required to support an aseptic filling
operation. In general, utilities should not be present in the cleanroom, unless it is unavoidable, and they have
been integrated into the design of the equipment and cleanroom. Consideration should always be given to
the integrity of the containment of any utility that is not sanitary, where leakage would be considered a
contaminant. If utilities are required to be present, care should be taken to minimize the impact of the
utilities on the environment and process. The required utilities may include:
• Clean compressed air
• Vacuum, especially for rolling DPs and vacuum powder fillers
• Exhaust, venting, and/or dust collection
• Other compressed gases (e.g., nitrogen)
• Water for injection or purified water
• CIP solutions (supply and return)
• Clean steam and condensate for SIP
• Heating and cooling transfer fluids (e.g., cooling water)
• Hydraulics
Of these, the direct-product-contact utilities and those that come in contact with direct-product-contact
equipment (e.g., CIP, SIP, nitrogen) are the most critical. The ASME standard BPE-2024 (Revision of
ASME BPE-2022): Bioprocessing Equipment and EU GMP Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal
Products provide design and operational considerations for their piping design and installation, respectively
(3, 29). Some considerations for the installation and supply of utilities are among the elements addressed in
Table 14.3-1, such as:
• Design of piping transiting grades
• Materials of construction
• Surface finish
• Sanitary piping standards
• Geometry, routing, and slope
• Gas-tightness connections required for isolators
The materials of construction and surface finish should be suitable to a cleanroom environment, including
being nonadsorptive, low particulate-shedding, and able to withstand exposure to disinfectants of the
exposed surfaces on a routine basis. Piping should make use of sanitary connections (to reduce crevices) or
welded connections (preferred). Routing should be designed to minimize pressure drops or line
constrictions, by limiting the number of bends, while also entering the Grade A environment in a position
that minimizes disruption to airflow. Slope should be considered to ensure that piping is free-draining.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 197

--- PDF Page 212 ---
15.1 Operational Considerations for Utilities Supplied to Aseptic Filling
Systems
Operational considerations for supplied utilities include:
• Point-of-use filtration
• Capability of cleaning and disinfection of supply lines
• Sampling for routine monitoring
The use of clean compressed air, other compressed gases, exhaust, and dust collection may require sterile
filtration (nominal pore size <0.22 µm). The placement of the filters should be carefully considered to
ensure appropriate access for integrity-testing and replacement. Ideally, these operations should take place
away from the Grade A environment to reduce the risk of contamination in the critical zone. In some cases
(e.g., exhaust and dust collection), placement within a gray space entirely outside of all cleanroom areas will
enable the safe exchange of filters without the risk of product contamination. The mechanisms by which the
ducts and piping lead to the filters, however, must be kept clean and sanitary; this should be included in the
design and assessed regularly.
Similarly, most supplied utilities will require some ability to collect samples at the point of use. The position
of the sampling ports should be carefully designed to provide access without disrupting the Grade A space,
while also ensuring that the samples will represent the quality of the utility as it is delivered to the process.
Water always brings the risk of microbiological proliferation. While it may be a risk-mitigating measure to
have CIP/SIP capability for a filler, to avoid the need for aseptic assembly, the presence of the associated
utilities within the cleanroom remains a significant risk to be managed. Frequent checking to ensure that
points of use are not leaking and are in good repair are warranted. The thermal expansion and contraction of
piping that occurs during cycles or disinfection of these systems should also be considered as it may result in
a loosening of connectors as they expand and contract with the heating and cooling. Therefore, the
verification of tightness of the sanitary connectors should be part of routine system-status checks. Welded
connections should be sought in sensitive zones of the cleanroom to reduce this risk.
198 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.