
--- PDF Page 175 ---
10.0 Material Transfer System Design
Section 9.0 addressed the various methods of preparing and handling materials and components that are
needed to supply the aseptic filling line. Section 10.0 addresses the mechanistic aspects of material transfer.
When considering the mechanisms to introduce sterile or depyrogenated components to a filling system,
they can be divided into two categories of transfer: conveyance or docking. This section addresses both
categories as well as the considerations for decontamination based on the method of introduction.
10.1 Conveyance for Material Transfer
Conveyors are the traditional mechanism of movement through a filling system. Conveyors permit the direct
connection from one piece of equipment to another. An example of this is a tunnel conveyor exit across a
dead plate to the filling-system accumulator-table or filling conveyor. The NTT systems described in
Section 9.0, is an automatic or semiautomatic system for outer-bag and inner-bag removal that introduces a
presterilized tub or tray within the barrier, that would generally fall within the conveyor category since, after
the robotic entry, the tub or tray may be subjected to conventional conveyance or to complete robotic
movement. Conveyance systems are typically used for components.
10.2 Docking for Material Transfer
Docking is the process of connecting a bag, cannister, or other transport element (e.g., transport isolator) to a
RABS or isolator wall. The direct connection of equipment discharge-doors, such as autoclaves, ovens, or
lyophilizers (i.e., equipment with fixed-load positions) through the walls of a RABS or isolator also fall into
this category. Both the direct-equipment connection and the canister-connection commonly require an
isolator or RABS glove with a tool or a robotic system to perform an unloading or discharge intervention,
even if the door opening is automated.
Reducing the number of manual interventions is an important step in reducing the contamination risk for all
these points of entry. Therefore, when designing these docking interfaces, consideration should be given to
the end-to-end mechanisms of transfer for each component or equipment element, especially for critical
material transfers. In particular, as these docking systems often deliver critical-product-contact or indirect-
product-contact materials, consideration should be given to ensuring all materials and equipment in the
vicinity of, and to be removed from, the docking port are protected from contamination. For example, when
using a RTP to deliver stoppers or caps to feed bowls located in front of and below the port, avoiding
disruption of unidirectional airflow can be extremely difficult.
The diversity of transferred components and equipment may drive whether automating all docking and
unloading functions is possible. When it is not possible, glove ports are typically employed to perform the
material transfers. When operations are performed manually using isolator or RABS gloves, it is necessary
to ensure that the glove location and length is suitable for the operations to be carried out. In the case of
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 161

--- PDF Page 176 ---
isolators, the position of the gloves must also permit gloves to be extended (without overlap) to perform
biodecontamination, while not obstructing other isolator elements.
RTP canisters and ported bags are established docking technologies. The contents of the canisters and of the
bags must be sterilized with proper technology. Each container is equipped with a port (the beta port) that is
matched to a mating port on the filling enclosure (the alpha port). These two mating surfaces are designed to
connect in a manner that prevents nonsterile external surfaces from being exposed to the components or to
the filling zone. Despite this mating design, if the mating surfaces are not carefully handled and routinely
disinfected, biodecontaminated, or sterilized, a so-called “ring of concern” exists at the juncture of the
mating surfaces that presents a small possibility of exposure when unloading a transport container.
Transport containers or bags must be filled, pretreated, transported, and then attached; because of this,
transport containers are typically limited in size and weight. The transport container contents (e.g.,
components, tools, small equipment parts) are typically positioned loosely for ease of removal; when the
containers are connected and rotated, the components within the load may shift. There are some docking
mechanisms where the ring alone is the rotating section, but this is less common than the type where the
container rotates. Suppliers of transport containers often have proprietary connection designs for the alpha
and beta ports that may not be compatible with the fixed mounting surfaces of the alpha ports already
installed on the equipment. This highlights the importance of coordinating with component suppliers to
ensure that they can match the alpha-port design of the corresponding equipment.
Transport containers are flexible in terms of size, load, and available positioning of various docking ports on
the filling enclosure, because of this they can be used for a wide variety of load elements, including
components (e.g., glassware, stoppers), consumables (e.g., tubing sets, filtration apparatus), or equipment
(e.g., tools, fill pumps, chutes). When using hydrogen peroxide to biodecontaminate transport containers
that include product-contacting materials (e.g., glassware, stoppers, tubing sets for fluid pathway, filling
needles), care must be taken to ensure that residual hydrogen peroxide does not degrade the product through
oxidation. When using rapid cycles for connected transport containers, the residual hydrogen peroxide levels
within the container must be suitable before opening the container to the filling zone where the product will
be exposed. This may be especially important if the load in the container includes polymers that are
hydrogen-peroxide absorptive. PDA has published Points-to-Consider technical documents on oxidation and
on isolators that provide additional detail on handling indirect-contact parts (16, 24).
10.3 Conveyance Considerations for Glassware
For nested components, the conveyance system either handles the tub or removes the nest (i.e., the insert
within the tub) that contains the glassware and conveys the nest alone. The tubs and nests are molded plastic
components that are generally highly dimensionally reproducible and offer few challenges in consistency of
conveyance. The amount of bow on the sides of the nest is commonly the only dimension that might be
variable.
Individual glass components that are individually and directly conveyed may present greater handling
challenges. For example, variations in glass dimensions may result in containers that are unstable on the
conveyor or fit inconsistently within feed screws, star wheels, walking beams, or combs. Primary containers,
such as vials or cartridges, may topple at transition points on the conveyor or when back-pressure is reduced
due to a break in production, resulting in the need for downed- or fallen-container sensors or rejection
stations. In general, guided conveyance with feed screws, star wheels, combs, pucks, fitted guiderails, or
other placement devices are better at precision placement under fill-needles than components that are solely
162 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 177 ---
fed through back-pressure of a line of components through guard rails on a moving conveyor. This may be
an important consideration for small-neck openings or small barrels where centered targeting becomes
critical to prevent filling needle contact with the top or sides of container (which could result in chips on the
sealing surface of the container or a bent needle) and to prevent overspray on the necks or sides of the barrel
(which could lead to improper sealing of elastomers). Overload sensors may be employed to prevent the risk
of damage due to a needle strike on the sealing surface of the container, but does not mitigate all the risks of
not being appropriately centered.
Many filling systems use a combination of back-pressure in some areas, with guided containers under the
filling-needles and stoppering position(s). The areas where backpressure is used, or where accumulation
devices collect large numbers of filled or unfilled components, may increase the risk of scuffing on the
outside of the container. Such scuffing can result in cosmetic container defects or formation of particulate in
the environment, especially after the depyrogenation of components, which can cause container exteriors to
become excessively “sticky” (12). Containers are available with specialized external coatings that can make
them less susceptible to scuffing and fracture if this becomes an excessive issue. Alternatively, “transport”
silicone may be sprayed on the exterior of containers (e.g., cartridges) to reduce the transport friction in the
depyrogenation tunnel and along the line.
10.4 Disinfection, Biodecontamination, and Sterilization Associated with
Material Transfer
The more elements associated with the transport system, the greater the risk for cleaning and disinfection or
sterilization to maintain a clean, aseptic environment. If using a disinfectant, such as hydrogen peroxide
within an enclosure, the surface biodecontamination may be easily addressed. On a conventional line,
without the potential for a gas or vapor-phase biodecontamination, disinfection (e.g., nonproduct-contact
parts), or disassembly and sterilization (e.g., direct and indirect product-contact parts) may be required
between batches.
When designing the cycle conditions for hydrogen peroxide within the filling zone, care must be taken to
ensure that hot and cold spots are minimized and the consistent distribution of the gas or vapor-phase
biodecontamination is maintained. This is the case in such areas as motors, cooling coils, autoclave or oven
doors, tunnel-cooling zone surfaces, lyophilization surfaces, or surfaces that are subjected to CIP or SIP.
Care must also be taken with residuals to ensure they are brought to safe levels before any product is
exposed to materials or surfaces that have had contact with the hydrogen peroxide. More detailed
information can be found in PDA points-to-consider technical documents on isolators and oxidation (16,
24).
Tunnels are designed to directly discharge to the filling line; however, glass containers must traverse a
cooling zone within the tunnel so they may enter the filling line at a safe temperature for filling that does not
disrupt the temperature and airflow within the filling line or degrade the product being filled. The tunnel’s
cooling zone must be periodically biodecontaminated (e.g., by heating up for conventional lines, by vapor-
phase for isolators) to maintain the integrity of this transport zone (21).
Steam sterilization within an autoclave can be widely applied to both direct and indirect product-contact
parts. When of appropriate size, parts may be sterilized directly within a transport container. When a
transport container is not in use and the autoclave is not directly connected to the filling enclosure, parts will
require wrapping before being transported to the line. Those parts can then be introduced to the enclosure
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 163

--- PDF Page 178 ---
prior to a hydrogen-peroxide cycle if one is being used. Alternatively, multiple layers of wrap or other
secondary sterile packaging applied to the parts can be stripped as the parts approach the critical zone for
installation. This latter approach is no longer favored from a contamination control perspective. Topic 6,
“Material Transport and Loading of Isolators,” of the PDA Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of
Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators identifies additional controls for the introduction of parts to an
isolator when they are too large for transport containers (16).
Sterilization by SIP especially applies for direct product-contact parts, such as pumps and needles, and for
clean media supply, such as water for injection and nitrogen (see Section 2.0).
Dry-heat ovens, like autoclaves, are batch processors. Unlike steam sterilization, however, many polymers
cannot handle the high temperatures associated with dry-heat sterilization or depyrogenation. Consequently,
sterile wraps are not an option for materials to be processed with dry heat. The three options for transfer of
dry-heat processed materials are (1) transport containers with dry-heat-capable alpha-beta ports, (2) metal
trays, or (3) direct connection of the oven to the filling enclosure. The use of metal trays has fallen into
disfavor due to their poor sealing unless a secondary process, such as hydrogen peroxide, can be conducted
after introduction of the parts.
Penetration into filling enclosures represents points of potential ingress of contamination. Therefore, utility
penetrations, glove ports, alpha-ports for docking, and door–hatch seals should be checked routinely for
correct installation (e.g., for those that are removed) and for tightness. The “ring of concern” for alpha and
beta ports should be carefully disinfected or biodecontaminated to reduce contamination risks.
Specialized sterilization processes (e.g., E-Beam, X-ray, EtO, gamma irradiation) and depyrogenation
processes (e.g., chemical degradation, washing) are also possible, but these are often conducted as off-line
processes, with subsequent transport and introduction (see Section 9.0).
164 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 179 ---
11.0 Sterile Filtration and Filling System Considerations
There is no one filling path that will work for every process. The design and integration of a filtration
system with the fluid pathway will result from the consideration of a wider variety of factors that will suit
the product attributes, SA, and risk.
11.1 Overview of the Integration of Sterile Filtration with the Filling
System
The integration of the product sterilizing filter for subsequent sterile filling is impacted by various
considerations related to the product, filter positioning in the fluid path, and integrity testing of the fluid
pathway and sterilizing filter. Decisions must also be made on how many filters will be integrated into the
fluid path—one or two (in-line or parallel)—as well as the rationale for the choice.
PDA Technical Report No. 26 (Revised 2025): Sterilizing Filtration of Liquids and two PDA technical
documents—Points to Consider for Risks Associated with Sterilizing Grade Filters and Sterilizing Filtration
and Points to Consider for Implementation of Pre-Use Post-Sterilization Integrity Testing (PUPSIT)—
address the majority of the technical challenges and the integration of sterile filtration into a filling operation
(26-28).
The regulatory expectation is that the final sterilizing filter should be close to the point of filling (3). The
industry recognizes that there are practicalities for how close is “close,” and there is a requirement for risk
assessment when justifying any specific configuration. Prefiltration bioburden reduction will also need to be
considered along the full product pathway, from formulation to the point of filling.
For SUS configured as fluid paths, the PUPSIT considerations include whether the wetting of the filter is via
product or water and, if by water, whether post-integrity-test drying is required. When the fluid path
includes rigid intermediate or header vessels, integrating a vent filter is necessary, as is considering how
such filters will be managed (installed and integrity-tested).
When a nitrogen overlay is required for sensitive products, the gas sterilizing filter, that filter’s integrity, and
the sterility of the gas pathway also need to be considered.
With so many variables involved in the configuration and management of integrity, both for the fluid
pathway and the installed filters, risk assessment is needed. The risk assessment must consider inherent and
corrective interventions and their inclusion in an APS. Additional robust justifications will be required for
any configurations that are contrary to regulatory expectations, presenting appropriate scientific support for
the balance between product risk and benefit.
In some cases, the filling-system design will influence the exact filtration-system design that must be
implemented.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 165

--- PDF Page 180 ---
The key points to consider in designing a fluid-pathway configuration include:
• Product attributes
• Product transfer mechanism (e.g., overpressure vs. pumping)
• Selection and type of filter housing (e.g., capsule vs. cartridge)
• Number of filters and their installation (e.g., parallel installations for redundancies)
• Duration of fill vs. sterile-hold period, if filtering to a bulk intermediate vessel
• Sterilization methodology (e.g., gamma-irradiated SU, autoclave, SIP connection)
• Filter position (inside or outside barrier)
• Integrity testing in place (and its influence on the fluid path)
• PUPSIT implementation considerations
• Fluid-path design (and integration with the filler and sterilization of the fluid path)
• Other filtration requirements for the process (e.g., vessel-vent filters, inert-gas point-of-use filters,
exhaust filtration for DPs)
The design elements must be selected with the goals of fluid transfer in mind, including but not limited to:
• Ensure that the fluid pathway can be sterilized using the selected method (e.g., gamma irradiation,
off-line sterilization, or SIP)
• Ensure that the fluid pathway is capable of the aseptic conveyance of the product end-to-end
• Limit product loss (e.g., during activities such as PUPSIT, priming, conclusion of the fill)
• Limit geometries that could result in shear forces or cause foaming (e.g., pressure drop, sharp angles
or sharp transitions)
• Support required monitoring and control (e.g., temperature, pressure, high-speed cameras for filling
curve monitoring)
• Compatible with product contact (e.g., limited adsorption or absorption, limited extractables and
leachables)
11.2 The Influence of Product Attributes on Filtration System Design
One of the first considerations when selecting a filtration system and fluid pathway configuration is to
understand the product attributes. These product attributes will drive the filtration and fluid pathway
configuration including:
• Filter-positioning
• Number of filters
• Integrity-testing
For example, if the product is a solution, there are few limitations to the selected design. Products that
require temperature control, such as cooling throughout the filling operation (including prefill hold times),
may require special considerations to keep the majority of the bulk in a jacketed vessel or cold room to
reduce the time out of temperature. The design considerations might include minimizing line-length of
transfer and filling-fluid pathway while positioning the bulk holding vessel in a location that does not
adversely impact the cleanroom operations (e.g., influence on unidirectional airflow due to temperature
differentials, condensation) while maintaining adequate cooling to the point of fill. Process validation must
ensure that the time out of temperature (whether after thaw-for-frozen product or cooling for refrigerated
products) is maintained within acceptable standards for product quality (see Section 4.7 for additional
considerations for temperature-controlled products).
166 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 181 ---
The filterability of the product, including such attributes as viscosity and likelihood of product blocking or
blinding the filter, will drive the need to consider whether parallel filter trains or in-line prefilters are needed
to provide redundancy and prevent blockage during the filling operation.
The hazardous nature of the product is another consideration for filtration, whether it is highly potent,
sensitizing, or toxic. Containment and decontamination considerations should be included in the design of
filtration manifolds so that waste associated with PUPSIT or filter-flush at the beginning of processing is
handled in a way that does not risk the employees, the environment, or the outside of any filled containers.
11.3 Product Transfer Modalities and Influence on System Design
The two primary methods to get product from a vessel through the filter-manifold, either to another vessel
or directly to the filler, are overpressure and pumping. Overpressure is provided by the application of a
sterile gas (either clean, compressed air or an inert gas such as nitrogen) in the headspace of the pressure
vessel. The increase in pressure in the headspace forces the product through the bottom outlet of the vessel
and through the transfer lines. The pressure can be controlled to either continuously or intermittently feed
the product. Pumping is the application of a mechanical transfer of the fluid in the transfer line. The pump
can be product-contacting (e.g., rotary lobe, centrifugal) or non-product-contacting (e.g., peristaltic). Care
must be taken to ensure that, with either transfer mechanism, the pressure and any pulsation of the liquids
does not harm the filter membrane or create shear stress on the product that can result in the formation of
particulate or harm-filterable suspensions for example.
Configurations for transfer can include presterilized intermediate vessels (also known as surge vessels) in
conjunction with a manifold, or the transfer can be made directly to the filler manifold without an
intermediate vessel. The filler manifold assists in securing a stable flow of product to the filling pumps and
needles by providing a small upstream reservoir or widening of the fluid pathway. Table 11.3-1 lists some
of the considerations for these different configurations.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 167