
--- PDF Page 189 (doc p175) ---
• For rolling DPs, the pump itself may cause some pulsation (depending on design and size), which
presents a higher risk to the filter membrane. Increasing the distance between the filter and the
pump may dampen this effect.
• For RPPs, there is a risk of back-flow through the filter if the volume (e.g., manifold or reservoir)
between the pump and the filter is inadequate.
• Having a manifold (header) upstream of the filling heads (e.g., filling pumps for RPP or DP, pinch
valves in TP filling systems, rotors in PP filling systems) is a common design feature. When the
filter is positioned to provide point-of-use filtration, a small dead-leg can be formed between the
filter and the end of the manifold. This dead-leg can create a risk when performing such activities as
filter-flushing at the beginning of the filling operation. The dead-leg provides some uncertainty
about whether the full volume of the waste solution has been expelled from the system.
• For RPP and TP filling systems, including a mechanism that vents air from the filling system should
be considered. For example, air removal is beneficial at startup, as the manifold first fills, or when
there are interventions that introduce air to the system. If the manifold can be positioned below the
filling pumps, this positioning may reduce or eliminate the need for a separate venting mechanism,
if air can escape through the filling heads.
• Design of the manifold should be carefully considered to ensure that it can be appropriately
sterilized and assembled in the fluid pathway in an aseptic manner, especially when introducing the
manifold through a RTP for assembly. If it is subject to SIP, the manifold represents a widening of
the line and a transition to multiple filling systems, so it is imperative to ensure that an adequate
mechanism for complete air removal during sterilization is present.
Table 11.10-1 Fluid Pathway Design Risk by Liquid Filler Type
Considerations Rotary Diaphragm Pump Time Pressure Peristaltic
Piston (DP) (TP)
Pump
(RPP)
Filtration Point of Use
Requirement
Operation Risks Back-flow Consider pulsation Pressure-drop None
caused by risk on filter through the filter
idle stroke membrane due to when not using a
pump operation sterile receiver
Design Risk for Avoid dead-leg at the end of the manifold
Manifold
Ensure manifold is designed for either aseptic assembly or SIP with appropriate
maintenance of sterile pathway
Design Risk for Consider design to vent air out of the filling system
Venting
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 175

--- PDF Page 190 (doc p176) ---
In addition to these considerations for in-line filtration to liquid filling systems, other filters may be in place
along the fluid pathway, including:
• Vessel vent filters (not required for SU bags)
• Inert-gas point-of-use filters
• Manifold/filling-head venting system filters (as applicable)
Integrity-testing will be required for each of these additional process filters. That integrity-testing will
commonly be performed off-line as these are hydrophobic filters that would commonly be tested with
alcohol.
11.11 Considerations Regarding Products that are Not Filterable
Some products cannot be sterile-filtered, for example, some suspension products and cell therapy products
where the particle size of the suspension or cells exceeds the porosity rating of the filter. Terminal
sterilization should always be the first choice for the preparation of sterile products. However, where neither
terminal sterilization nor sterile filtration are possible due to the composition and attributes of the product, a
control strategy must be in place. The product and process control strategy must address the steps taken to
ensure the sterility of each ingredient/component of the product, including the potential for filtration of each
prior to introduction to the unfilterable component, and to ensure that the procedures used to bring the
various ingredients/components together provide the highest possible SA. Minimizing the length of the fluid
pathway and ensuring its integrity after sterilization are essential elements to success for these products. A
risk assessment is recommended to support the robustness of the overall control strategy for SA. In these
cases, the process is the product; that is, the combination of all the sterile inputs provides the assurance of
sterility for the final product. Hence, each must be separately assured.
11.12 Filtration Associated with Powder Filling
Although there is no filtration associated with a product in powder-filling, filtration is associated with:
• Powder delivery and handling
• Inerting
• Drying after cleaning
• Exhaust and dust collection
For vacuum pressure powder fillers (VPPF), point-of-use filtration is used for the clean compressed air and
the vacuum. The filters are installed between the utility source (e.g., vacuum, dosing air, purge air) and the
mechanical backplate or the pneumatic rotary joint. (For fillers designed for dosing needles, there is one
filter per air or vacuum pathway.) The filter assembly is installed as part of the aseptic setup of the filling
system.
For both VPPF and auger fillers (AF), an inert gas or clean compressed air may also be introduced to assist
with powder flow within the hopper. For both VPPF and AF, if the product requires protection from oxygen,
a filtered inerting-gas is also used during the filling operation.
For AF, no clean compressed air or vacuum is associated with the filling operation; however, filtered clean
compressed air is associated with drying the powder pathway after cleaning. If CIP is associated with the
bulk-hopper component of the VPPF filler, the bulk hopper would also be subject to drying with filtered
clean compressed air. (VPPF dosing-system elements, other than the bulk hopper, are not capable of CIP
and, therefore, will not have clean compressed air for system drying.)
176 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 191 (doc p177) ---
All filter usage for VPPF and AF described here make use of a sterilizing-grade hydrophobic filter with a
nominal pore size of 0.22 µm. These filters are typically procured as sterile, gamma-irradiated capsule
filters, although autoclavable options may also be used. All piping downstream of the filter should be
capable of sterilization. All filters should be subject to integrity-testing, and the integrity-test results should
be considered in the batch disposition process.
Either filler type may make use of dust collection, which would use HEPA-filtered exhaust at the point of
collection. These filters are generally located within a gray space to facilitate change-out of the filter and
emptying of the reservoir outside the cleanroom environment; however, cleanroom models do exist. Dust-
collection systems may also employ a bag-in–bag-out configuration for potent compounds that require
containment. These HEPA filters are intended for containment rather than microbiological control;
therefore, the frequency of integrity-testing is at the discretion of the manufacturer based on application,
system design (e.g., location of the filter), and risk.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 177

--- PDF Page 192 (doc p178) ---
12.0 Discard Strategies for Aseptic Filling of Liquids
The selection of a filling technology and its specific system design can influence the discard strategies that
are employed for such line events as startup, priming, line stoppage, interventions, and end of the aseptic
fill-unit operation. Products that are very expensive or limited in availability will be impacted
disproportionately by systems that have high discard requirements. Therefore, careful consideration of the
system design and the integration of the filling technology with the filling enclosure/isolator is warranted.
12.1 Discard Strategies at Startup
Product rejection at the start of the filling operation, immediately after setup, is not uncommon and may
occur for several reasons. It may be associated with the product formulation, the product’s physicochemical
characteristics, the upstream process, or the filling equipment or it could be due to standardizing the dose of
the product.
Several common causes of container or product rejection include:
• Interaction with the product (e.g., adsorption of API, excipients, preservatives) for tubing or other
polymers (e.g., filters) or elastomers (e.g., diaphragms, gaskets)
• Degradation of the product due to first exposure to surfaces (e.g., free-radical exposure associated
with gamma-irradiated components, oxidation of product within tubing/manifolds) (24)
• Leachables entering the product from first product exposure to surfaces (e.g., filters, transfer lines,
SU intermediate bags)
• Dilution of the product arising from filter integrity-testing (e.g., PUPSIT) or initial filter-flushing if
these tasks are not performed with product
Priming of the filling stations may be required to ensure:
• Elimination of air
• Elimination of foam
• Homogenization (e.g., suspension products)
• Dose standardization (e.g., fill-weight/volume)
• Seating (e.g., relaxation) of tubing within peristaltic pumps
The quantity of product/number of units to be rejected due to these influences should be established prior to
process validation through careful evaluation of content uniformity and fill accuracy. Then, the discard
quantities should be standardized for use in the process validation and in subsequent routine filling. Any
changes to the upstream process involving polymers/elastomers in use, or changes to filling conditions,
could require reevaluation of rejection quantities.
178 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 193 (doc p179) ---
12.2 Discard Strategies at Priming
Some fillers are equipped with a priming feature that is linked to a discard mode for the units processed
while in this mode. Other systems are designed to permit rejection directly to a discard vessel. Fillers may
establish the quantity to be discarded based on the dose volume/weight, the number of priming cycles, or
both.
For high-value products, it may be possible to start the filler in phases to ensure the number of completely
filled containers is maximized. For example, filling can take place directly on the weigh-cells to avoid the
occurrence of partially filled containers during the priming procedure. This approach eliminates the need to
discard containers used during priming, as they are assured to be filled appropriately (see Section 5.0). This
approach requires that other possible priming quality concerns (e.g., adsorption, oxidation, leachables) have
been addressed.
Some filling systems are equipped with a dedicated refilling pump as well as a dedicated weighing system
that permits accurate refilling of any under-filled units associated with the priming stage. The equipment
needs to be designed to properly handle this separate filling path during production.
In all cases, the performance of this priming mode must be challenged during operational qualification to
ensure that the filler is rejecting any units that are improperly filled, in accordance with the intended system
design. Product-development data may be leveraged to ensure that all product attributes have been
accounted for when determining the discard quantities.
12.3 Discard Strategies During Filling and Interventions
During the filling operation, interruptions that stop the line (e.g., gaps in component supply, interventions,
operator breaks) or are caused by unexpected events (e.g., particle excursion, loss of temperature in the
tunnel, breakage, fallen units, collisions on the lyophilizer loader) may require rejections. While many
filling-equipment designs have accumulation capability that creates a buffer to prevent stoppages or
minimize their impact, stoppages may still occur. Depending on their duration, these stoppages may result
in:
• Loss in homogeneity (e.g., suspensions)
• Changes in binding to elastomers or polymers (e.g., loss of API, preservative, excipients)
• Loss of headspace or oxidation for oxygen-sensitive products
• Drying at the tip of a needle that causes plugging
• Dripping and loss of weight control (if not 100% IPC)
• Loss of temperature control for products that are cold-filled (e.g., 2–8 °C)
• Risk of compromising containers due to exposure to intervention activities
These, and other similar filling interruptions, may result in the need to reject units. In the case of oxygen-
sensitive products, for instance, any open containers may need to be rejected, in addition to the possible
need to reprime the filler and reject bulk solution associated with the repriming. The number of
units/volume or weight rejected after a line stoppage of a specified time period should be established prior to
process validation through equipment validation and product testing. The requirements for stoppages should
then be included in the site SOP.
Line interventions associated with the filling system itself also may require the discard of product or product
containers. In an optimal line-design, the mechanical components of the system are installed outside the
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 179

--- PDF Page 194 (doc p180) ---
filling enclosure (e.g., isolator, RABS), so adjustments can be made in an area that is not proximate to the
open containers and would minimize the risk of introducing contamination to either empty or filled
containers. Some filling designs have clear advantages in enabling the mechanical equipment to be installed
outside of the enclosure, minimizing interventions within the enclosure. The PP tubing, for example, is a
closed system; therefore, PPs can easily be installed remotely from the filling needles. The minor downside
of any technology installed outside the barrier is that the tubing leading to each filling needle represents a
separate penetration to the enclosure. If a leak occurs or an adjustment is needed, an intervention within the
enclosure may still be required. Such an approach, however, is significantly less of a sterility-assurance risk
compared to a system where the majority of the mechanical components are inside the enclosure.
Advancements continue to be made in system design as the industry recognizes the SA advantage in
providing remote mechanical components (see Section 2.0).
Interventions that occur within the filling enclosure may require significant line clearance for components
and for filled, unsealed containers present in the zone where the intervention is to occur. With some systems,
an automated clearance mode is available that will stop the infeed to the filler and reject all containers
within the conveyor system in front of the filler. With legacy systems, where the rejection is entirely manual
care must be taken to perform the intervention using appropriate aseptic techniques, so as to not cause any
product spills and discarding each rejected container with a sterile tool. If there are filled, fully sealed
containers within the line-clearance zone, the decision to reject or retain those containers must be based on
appropriate risk assessment and documented following intervention SOPs at the site.
For oxygen-sensitive products, inert gas overlay (e.g., nitrogen) may need to be established to purge the air
from the headspace of the container. Units with excess oxygen in the headspace may need to be rejected at
the point of headspace-analysis of the containers or at the conclusion of filling. Any failure in the inert-gas
headspace controls during the filling operation (e.g., when the filler is shut down) will result in the rejection
of impacted units during the processing.
12.4 Discard Strategies Associated with Dose Control
The loss of dose control is another reason units may be rejected. In this case, the mechanism for weight
verification will influence the number of needed rejections. If 100% weight verification is employed, only
the affected containers will be discarded (see Section 2.0 and Section 5.0). If statistical weight control is
employed, units back to the last known correct weight check will need to be rejected. Filling technology
does not typically affect the discard strategy, although the type and degree of intervention required to correct
and recover the dose control will vary. Any intervention that results in the loss of prime will require not only
the affected containers during the intervention to be discarded, but also any containers associated with the
new priming activity.
With containers of narrow-diameter openings, targeting the delivery of the dose to make sure product is not
sprayed on the neck opening or down the barrel of a syringe or cartridge is important to ensure that
elastomers form effective seals with the container. Any evidence of improper dose-targeting during the
filling operation could also result in rejection.
180 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 195 (doc p181) ---
12.5 Discard Strategies Associated with Conclusion of Fill
At the end of the aseptic fill-unit operation, as bulk product volume decreases, fillers can encounter a loss of
fill accuracy. This may be due to:
• Low levels in the filling manifold/intermediate vessel
• Foam or air introduced while the final volume of product is pumped or pressurized through the filter
or transferred from the bulk vessel
• Loss of homogeneity due to loss of recirculation or mixing capability from low volumes, especially
for suspension products
Fillers may receive automated signals from the manifold or intermediate vessel to start and stop transfer
from the bulk vessel. When the alarm is triggered due to the lack of available bulk (e.g., low or low-low-
level alarm), the filler is directed to begin shut down or initiate line clearance or empty mode. For high-
value products, the shutdown may occur in stages. For example, individual filling paths will be shut down to
reduce the number of filling paths that remain active to complete the fill. Eventually arriving at the point
where all filling paths are shut down, and all partially filled containers are discarded.
The same technology used to permit refilling, to ensure every container is filled properly during priming,
can also be employed to ensure all aseptic end-of-fill unit-operation containers are appropriately filled (see
Section 2.0). The company must establish procedures to handle the end of fill consistently to ensure that
only good-quality containers are produced. These end-of-fill procedures must be included in the validation
of the process (see Section 13.0 for more information on the end of fill).
12.6 Discard Strategies Associated with Nested Components
Filling syringes that are nested in tubs can pose discard challenges when the dose-control performance fails
on an individual filling-needle position. Discarding the affected doses is the minimum action required. This
can be accomplished through one of two approaches: Discard individual syringes from a failing
pump/needle or discard the full tub. The discard of individual syringes can be significantly more
complicated as it will require some form of verification, either robotically (e.g., through reject
marking/tracking or through physical segregation) or by employing the four-eyes principle (i.e., independent
verification step) to ensure that all the affected syringes are discarded. (It should also be noted that some
filling technologies do not easily permit the deactivation of a single filling station; this is especially true in
nested configurations. Reset of the entire line may be more appropriate should a fault occur in a single
filling station for these systems.) Discard of the entire tub is a more conservative, and perhaps simpler,
approach from the standpoint of the quality system and the documentation that will be required.
Filling lines that permit the return of units for re-dosing or which employ re-stoppering, technology can be
employed to reduce the number of discards (see Section 5.0 and Section 7.3).
Table 12.6-1 provides some generalizations about the relative risk of different discard events based on the
type of filling technology employed.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 181