
--- PDF Page 212 ---
15.1 Operational Considerations for Utilities Supplied to Aseptic Filling
Systems
Operational considerations for supplied utilities include:
• Point-of-use filtration
• Capability of cleaning and disinfection of supply lines
• Sampling for routine monitoring
The use of clean compressed air, other compressed gases, exhaust, and dust collection may require sterile
filtration (nominal pore size <0.22 µm). The placement of the filters should be carefully considered to
ensure appropriate access for integrity-testing and replacement. Ideally, these operations should take place
away from the Grade A environment to reduce the risk of contamination in the critical zone. In some cases
(e.g., exhaust and dust collection), placement within a gray space entirely outside of all cleanroom areas will
enable the safe exchange of filters without the risk of product contamination. The mechanisms by which the
ducts and piping lead to the filters, however, must be kept clean and sanitary; this should be included in the
design and assessed regularly.
Similarly, most supplied utilities will require some ability to collect samples at the point of use. The position
of the sampling ports should be carefully designed to provide access without disrupting the Grade A space,
while also ensuring that the samples will represent the quality of the utility as it is delivered to the process.
Water always brings the risk of microbiological proliferation. While it may be a risk-mitigating measure to
have CIP/SIP capability for a filler, to avoid the need for aseptic assembly, the presence of the associated
utilities within the cleanroom remains a significant risk to be managed. Frequent checking to ensure that
points of use are not leaking and are in good repair are warranted. The thermal expansion and contraction of
piping that occurs during cycles or disinfection of these systems should also be considered as it may result in
a loosening of connectors as they expand and contract with the heating and cooling. Therefore, the
verification of tightness of the sanitary connectors should be part of routine system-status checks. Welded
connections should be sought in sensitive zones of the cleanroom to reduce this risk.
198 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 213 ---
Part 4: Powder Filling Technology
Selection and Design
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 199

--- PDF Page 214 ---
16.0 Filling Systems for Powder Filling
Parts 1, 2, and 3 of the PDA Manufacturing Technology Guide No.1: Aseptic Filling, Engineering and
Operation have addressed both liquid-filling technologies and general topics concerning aseptic-filling
operations. Part 4 focuses on the aseptic filling of powders.
16.1 Common Elements Between Aseptic Powder and Liquid Filling
To properly consider the requirements for the aseptic filling of powders, many of the general topics already
addressed also apply to powders, as listed in Table 16.1-1.
Table 16.1-1 Portions of this Document that Pertain to Powder Filling Considerations
Applicable PDA Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 Sections
Introduction and Scope for Aseptic Filling
Glossary and Acronyms
Section 1.0 Aseptic Filling System Design Elements
Section 4.1 Continuous Filling/Campaign Filling Versus Batch Filling
Section 4.2 Changeover Functionality
Section 4.10 Enhancing Functionality with Robotics
Section 5.0 Designs for Dose Control Systems
Section 6.0 Special Considerations for Advanced Container–Closure Design and Implementation
Section 7.0 Closures and Closing System Design
Section 7.7 Requirements for Effective Container–Closure Integrity and Validation
Section 8.1 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated with Line Setup
Section 8.2 General Considerations Regarding Aseptic Interventions
Section 8.3 Microbiological Considerations for Filter Changes
200 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 215 ---
Applicable PDA Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 Sections
Section 8.5 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Related to Broken or Blocked Primary
Packaging Materials
Section 8.6 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated with Supply of
Components
Section 8.7 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Associated with Sorting Systems for
Components
Section 8.8 Microbiological Considerations for Mechanical Interventions
Section 8.9 Microbiological Considerations for Aseptic Manipulations Related to Environmental Monitoring
Section 9.0 Component and Filling Supply Handling Considerations
Section 10.0 Material Transfer System Design
Section 11.0 Sterile Filtration and Filling System Considerations
Section 11.12 specifically addresses filters that may be used in powder-filling. Although the
o
majority of the topic addresses liquid fluid pathways, the general considerations for handling,
configuration, and integrity- testing of filters do apply to powder when filters are present.
Section 13.0 Considerations for the End of the Aseptic Fill Unit Operation
Section 14.0 Filling System and Environmental Considerations
Section 15.0 Utility Considerations for Aseptic Operations
Sections 16.0- 19.0 address the filling technologies that are specific to the aseptic filling of powders, the
product characteristics that influence technology selection, the methods of product transfer, and the causes
of rejection.
In the case of sterile powder-filling, there are two main technologies available: AF systems and VPPF.
These systems are different from both technology and complexity standpoints. The AF is based on the
concept of mechanical movement of the powder, whereas the VPPF enables filling through the mechanical
flow of powder by means of vacuum and air pressure. The VPPF is a volumetric filler at its core, where a
correctly sized chamber is filled with powder (using vacuum) and dispensed. The AF does not require
vacuum or pressurized air, but it is dependent on the mechanical transfer of the powder in the auger; in some
systems, transfer may be facilitated by vibration.
Both methods are strongly influenced by the characteristics of the sterile powder to be filled. In some cases,
this influence is such that only one of the two technologies is suitable for a specific type of sterile powder or
fill-weight range. There are many filling system characteristics to keep in mind when choosing the filling
system that best matches each product’s needs. These characteristics are described in Section 16.2 and
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 201

--- PDF Page 216 ---
Section 16.3. Table 17.1-1 provides a side-by-side comparison of product and filling operation
characteristics for both filler designs.
16.2 Aseptic Filling Technologies: Vacuum Pressure Powder Filling
VPPF technology is depicted in Figure 16.2-1.
Figure 16.2-1 Typical Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler
Powder is loaded in the upper feeding-hopper, then moved to the lower hopper, which feeds the dosing disc.
The dosing disc is fitted with radial chambers housing the dosing pistons. The powder is drawn into the
dosing chamber or port from the lower hopper, via constant vacuum, and densified into a slug during disc
rotation (see directional arrows around the dosing wheel in Figure 16.2-1). In its lowest position, above the
container opening, the disc discharges the powder into the container by means of dry sterile air. After
dosing, the chamber that discharged the powder is cleaned by sterile air jets, with dust control applied to
exhaust any residual powder. The filling dose is governed by the overall volume (the dosing cylinder depth
and cylinder diameter), by the vacuum negative-pressure (which compacts the powder), and by the number
of doses delivered into the same container.
See Section 18.0 for a discussion on the transfer of product from bulk containers to the filler hopper.
As the dosing disc rotates, the vacuum and pressure are transferred to the dosing disc via a mechanical
backplate and/or rotary pneumatic joint. This mechanism on the rear side of the dosing disc provides the
vacuum and pressure to each dosing chamber at the relevant position.
202 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 217 ---
16.2.1 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler: Design Configurations
There are alternative designs to the configuration shown in Figure 16.2-1 that include:
• Dosing drum
• Filling needles
The dosing disc and dosing needle operate on the same vacuum-pressure principle, utilizing a piston and
filter mounted inside a dosing chamber. In the dosing disc, the bulk powder is fed from a hopper positioned
above the disc, whereas the fill needle draws powder from a reservoir positioned below the needle. The
needle is mounted vertically on a bar, which is equipped with ports to supply the vacuum and pressure (the
analogue to the dosing disc’s mechanical backplate or rotary pneumatic joint). The needle assembly will dip
into the reservoir to draw the powder into the chamber. The filling needle may be moved vertically, which
enables it to dispense powder into the mouth of the containers where the dosing disc’s position is fixed.
Thus, the needle dispenses just above the opening to the container.
The dosing drum, in contrast, is essentially a dosing wheel with two lanes, feeding two containers at the
same time. The drum is likely to have twenty-four cavities, twelve for each lane, whereas the dosing disc
has twelve cavities.
There are some filler designs that permit the assembly of the dosing wheels, connections to the hopper, and
the utility connections on a single plate or backplane in a Grade C environment. This super plate, or chassis,
permits the entire assembly to be sterilized in an assembled state. The assembled plate can then be brought
to the aseptic zone, where it takes only one or two aseptic connections to install the filler. In this approach,
specialized trolleys must be designed to transfer the super plate into the autoclave, and there must be
continuous unidirectional Grade A zoning from the unload section of the autoclave to the line when
transporting the system to the line.
16.2.2 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler: Setup
VPPF is a high-precision dosing system. Accuracy of dosing is mainly impacted by the physical
characteristics of the powder and the environment. If the powder particle-size varies, agitation in the dosing
hopper(s) is an essential means of ensuring consistent powder flow, thereby distributing an equivalent
amount into each of the chambers on the dosing disc. Particle-size distribution, powder moisture content,
humidity, temperature of the environment, and airflow can all affect the flow characteristics and accuracy
over time. Each dosing chamber has a dosing filter (e.g., sintered stainless steel, nylon), and it is essential to
ensure that there is no plugging of the filters over the course of the filling operation. The rate of plugging
can be optimized by using filters with differing airflow characteristics to balance the powder and
environmental constraints.
Statistical weight-check is a must for all filling operations; however, an in-line 100% weighing system is a
highly recommended upgrade. Some filler models offer automatic dosing chamber adjustments to address
trends in weights.
16.2.3 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler: Product Characteristic Compatibility
There are a wide variety of product characteristics that can impact filler design. A combined table of the
common attributes to consider with the different filling technologies (both VPPF and AF) is included in
Section 17.0.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 203

--- PDF Page 218 ---
16.2.4 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler: Filling Container Compatibility
VPPF systems can be used with a variety of container types, depending on the selected filler design. Table
16.2.4-1 depicts typical containers and their applicability to the various VPPF system designs.
Table 16.2.4-1 Filling Container Compatibility with Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler Designs
Vacuum Vial Cartridge Syringe Ampoule Bag Inhalers
Pressure
Powder Filler
(VPPF) Type
Dosing Disc Yes No No No Yes* No
Dosing Drum Yes No No No Yes* Yes
(and
blisters)
Dosing Needle Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes* Yes
(manual
units)
*Bag shape is specifically designed to configure the bag mouth to be suitable to the chosen technology.
When working with nested components, such as syringes or cartridges, VPPF fillers are adapted to either
provide robotics to dose from a dosing needle to each position within the nest (e.g., XY table) or to de-nest
the components, fill them, and then re-nest the components. When considering nested components, care
should be taken with the approach for the IPC weight check, as these approaches may restrict the ability to
perform 100% net-weight capabilities. See Section 9.0 and Section 10.0 for more information on the
introduction of components. See Section 5.0 for information on dose control strategies.
16.2.5 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler Sterility Assurance (Microbial and Total Particles)
The dosing disc transports the powder slugs at approximately 10-20 rpm from the powder hopper to the
point of product delivery. The dosing disc is shrouded from the aseptic environment as it rotates by a dust
collector, which prevents stray powder outside of the disc from escaping to the environment. At the point of
dosing the powder into the container, there is a small (1-2 mm) gap between the filler and the mouth of the
container. The gap is necessary to accommodate differences in container dimensions and to enable weigh
cells (with net weight fillers) to properly register the tare and gross weight of the container.
VPPF does not permit CIP/SIP except for the bulk-feed portion of the filler. The dosing disc, drum, and
needle, which are cleaned and sterilized off-line, will require aseptic assembly within a downflow booth.
The dosing disc, drum, and needle are then mounted within the RABS or isolator. (Alternatively, a super
plate design can be employed as discussed above.) For isolators, the mounting can be performed after the
external biodecontamination of the packages containing the assembled parts (e.g., vapor phase hydrogen
peroxide surface biodecontamination) or after aseptic transfer into the isolator through an alpha-beta port or
through direct connection to a sterilizer. Controls and risk mitigations must be in place to ensure that
204 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 219 ---
integrity of the isolator environment, and parts are maintained throughout any transfer steps, aseptic
assembly operations, and mounting steps.
To support the validation, aseptic assembly and setup must be properly designed and described in detail in
SOPs, and all operators must be trained. The assembly procedures are confirmed during both AVS and APS.
Filling system interventions must be qualified and included in an appropriately designed APS. The
continuity of the SA must be considered with the design and implementation of these systems, since there
are different sterilization processes that may be followed for different sections of the equipment (e.g.,
CIP/SIP for bulk-feed portions, off-line sterilization with aseptic assembly for the dosing disc, autoclave
sterilization transport and mounting for super plate technologies).
During the assembly and setup phases, EM must be conducted to monitor the aseptic assembly of the filler.
Regulatory expectations are that aseptic-filling operations are constantly monitored for both viable and total
particulate. Due to the nature of the filling media (powder), during the filling phase, particulate may
interfere with monitoring. As a consequence, the location of monitoring probes should be evaluated to
reduce the incidence of false-positive signals from the product itself. This may require positioning of the
probes at a height above the typical working height that would be used for liquid filling. Firms should
defend and document the location of the probes in their operation. In case the powder being filled has an
inhibitory effect on media, special EM materials must be used.
Microbiological plates must be positioned at the critical points during the filling operation. As powder fillers
tend to be wider than liquid fillers, the ergonomics for microbiological plate placement should be verified as
part of the initial qualification to avoid the risk of contamination during placement. Monitoring positions
should be included as part of the filler design (e.g., during mock-up) to ensure effective ergonomics.
16.2.6 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler Efficiency and Impact on Risk
VPPF speed (containers per minute) is quite fast and can be increased with a filler that employs multiple
dosing lanes and fill heads for larger doses. The use of multiple fill heads will require additional aseptic
interventions during setup.
16.2.7 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler Costs: Initial and Ongoing
If multiple fill-weights are required, VPPF encounters additional costs for different formats and discs.
Lifecycle costs for VPPF consumables include filters and O-rings for the filter and pistons. Other wear parts
are those typical of any filling machine (e.g., bushings, bearings, seals). VPPF uses clean compressed air
and vacuum. These can be supplied via house utilities or through localized generation. These systems will
also potentially have consumables (e.g., filters, desiccant dryers).
The mechanical backplate and/or pneumatic rotary joint that is behind the dosing disc may be a point of
friction during the rotation of the dosing disc. Therefore, over time, this rotational mechanism may need
replacement, generally after multiple millions of cycles.
16.2.8 Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler System Complexity: Setup, Handling, and
Changeover
VPPFs are systems with a high complexity during the setup phase. Setup can be lengthy, but by
implementing ergonomic features and installation aids, the setup could potentially be reduced. Assembly
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 205