
--- PDF Page 203 ---
14.0 Filling System and Environmental Considerations
Aseptic processing is expected to take place in a manner that separates personnel from the process, which is
commonly accomplished by providing a barrier to attain separation. A barrier is a physical partition that
separates the aseptic processing area (Grade A) from the background environment, protecting it from the
environment and the people working in it. Further, most regulatory authorities consider standard aseptic
cleanrooms, those that do not include controlled separation of operators and product filling, legacy systems
that require improvements. Risk assessments and risk mitigations to continue operations until full barrier-
technology upgrades are in place are recommended to be undertaken in consultation with the appropriate
regulatory partners.
For additional detail beyond what this section provides on the design of cleanrooms, isolators and RABS,
see the following references:
• ISO 14644 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments
• ISO 13408-6 Aseptic Processing of Healthcare Products Part 6 – Isolator Systems
• PDA Technical Report No. 34: Design and Validation of Isolator Systems for the Manufacturing
and Testing of Health Care Products
• PDA Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators
• PDA Points to Consider No. 12 Restricted Access Barrier Systems (RABS)
14.1 Types of Barrier Systems for Aseptic Operations
The two barrier systems primarily used by the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical industry that provide
the required separation between operators and aseptic operations in Grade A environments are:
• Isolators
• Restricted Access Barrier Systems (RABS)
Isolators are either fully closed or partially open to allow the ingress and egress of components and finished
goods; they are characterized largely by their ability to withstand automated biodecontamination cycles
usually with a vapor phase, gaseous, or aerosolized agents (e.g., hydrogen peroxide). In contrast, RABS
provide a rigid-wall enclosure that cannot always be fully sealed. RABS are disinfected mainly with liquid
disinfectants and/or sporicides applied to surfaces, though some closed RABS can support automated
biodecontamination (e.g., using hydrogen peroxide in vapor phase) with or without the same treatment for
the surrounding cleanroom environment. Both isolators and RABS may provide access to the enclosed
equipment and process through glove ports and make use of RTPs to introduce equipment, components,
monitoring, and cleanroom supplies. Likewise, the sterile fluid pathway may be introduced through a
transfer port or intrinsic sterile connection device at the barrier boundary. See Section 9.0 and Section 10.0
for more information on various transfer mechanisms, their operations, and controls. See Section 11.0 for
more information on sterile fluid pathways.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 189

--- PDF Page 204 ---
Both isolators and RABS have doors; however, how and when they are used differs. For the isolator, the
door is opened only at the beginning of the setup and, again, at the end of the aseptic fill-unit operation or, if
multiple batches can be manufactured, at the end of the campaign. After the initial setup and cleaning are
performed, the isolator is closed and biodecontaminated before use. RABS, on the other hand, must be fully
disinfected prior to setup, and any further opening of the RABS doors, including setup, constitutes an
intervention. Any ingress or egress after disinfection must be protected by overhead unidirectional airflow
that covers the region of the open door to prevent contamination of the Grade A environment. Consequently,
intense design activities should be undertaken to minimize the number and types of open-door interventions
that will be required within a RABS. The intent is to limit open-door interventions to the absolute minimum
(see Section 8.2). Highly detailed procedures must govern those open-door interventions (and indeed all
interventions) due to the potential disruption of the unidirectional airflow and the proximity of the operator
to the critical aseptic zone. See Section 8.0, PDA Points to Consider No.1: Aseptic Processing (Revised
2023) and PDA Points to Consider No 12: Restricted Access Barrier Systems (2025) for additional details
on critical interventions and for working within RABS, respectively.
14.2 Design Considerations for the Integration of the Filling System with
the Environment
RABS have historically been designed in two configurations—open (oRABS) and closed (cRABS)—
although engineering innovations have often blurred the lines between them as each design has improved to
enhance controls and operation. Traditionally, oRABS use HEPA-filtered unidirectional airflow flowing
down through the process, within the barrier, before the air is returned to the cleanroom low-wall returns for
recirculation. Thus, the enclosure is neither sealed to the equipment nor to the cleanroom. The oRABS have
been commonly employed as an effective improvement to conventional cleanrooms previously without
barriers. The cRABS, in contrast, is a positive-pressure system that provides a process enclosure with
integrated HEPA-filtered fan units that provide filtered unidirectional airflow down through the process with
integrated low-level returns within the equipment base. One common use for cRABS is the handling potent
products. Both oRABS and cRABS are placed within a Grade B (or better) environment as the interior of
the barrier may be exposed to the external environment during processing which, in the case of oRABS, is
an incomplete barrier. There are many variations of RABS that can borrow features from isolators to
improve the capabilities of any specific barrier.
Regardless of the type of barrier employed, airflow visualization studies (i.e., smoke studies) must be
performed as part of the equipment qualification. In addition, CFD can be of great help during the design
phase to understand airflow within and around the barrier and to confirm that, by design, the airflow is
unidirectional with minimal turbulence and minimal potential to introduce contamination at all equipment
and product surfaces. As stated in Section 8.2, open-door interventions performed on RABS during the
aseptic process, where product or product contact surfaces are exposed, presents a high level of risk to
sterile product and should be avoided.
The type of barrier selected, whether isolator, oRABS, or cRABS, will drive very different design decisions
and cleanroom operating principles. Depending on which barrier design is selected, specific design elements
that should be considered include:
• Room conditions
• Room and equipment finish
• Air handling (room and equipment)
190 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 205 ---
• Transfer mechanisms for materials:
̶ Equipment format parts
̶ Sterile fluid pathway (e.g., tubing, sterilizing filters and PUPSIT connections, needles, fill
pumps)
̶ Supporting equipment and consumables (e.g., forceps, sterile wipes, environmental
monitoring equipment, contact and settle plates)
̶ Primary packaging materials (e.g., containers, closures)
̶ Product and associated vessels
• Use of cleaning, disinfection (or biodecontamination for closed systems), and SIP
Table 14.2-1 provides a comparison of the key design features and control attributes for isolators, cRABS,
and oRABS. In all cases, the company’s CCS should identify the controls needed and the monitoring for
both the isolator and its surrounding environment.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 191

--- PDF Page 206 ---
Table 14.2-1 Comparison of Control and Design Elements for Isolators and Restricted Access Barrier Systems
Attribute Isolator Closed Restricted Access Open Restricted Access
Barrier System (cRABS) Barrier System (oRABS)
Barrier Design Intent
Product Protection Yes Yes Yes
Containment for Operator Yes Yes (although degree of No
Protection and/or protection depends on design
Contamination Control specifics; cRABS offer improved
protection compared to oRABS)
Control Elements for Barrier and Surrounding Environment
Background (Exterior) Open isolators should be Grade B Grade B
Environment placed in at least a Grade C
environment
Closed isolators should be
placed in at least a Grade D
environment
Control of Differential Yes, inside isolator to Some designs, if adequately No, open barrier prevents this
Pressure from Barrier to immediate surrounding closed from surroundings
Room environment (e.g., minimal
fluctuation between isolator
and environment and
notification/warning) (3, 29)
Differential Pressure Across Yes Yes Yes
HEPA Filters
(No, if HEPA is part of room fan
units, i.e., passive oRABS)
192 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 207 ---
Attribute Isolator Closed Restricted Access Open Restricted Access
Barrier System (cRABS) Barrier System (oRABS)
Zone Pressure Cascade Maintained and measured Pressure cascade possible, Airflow regulation is the only
(within the Same Grade) between different zones measurement should be defined means for creating a pressure
within the same Grade A space by criticality cascade (e.g., with depyrogenation
(e.g., from filling zone to tunnel, by setting overspill vent
tunnel-discharge zone) surface area), but pressure
differential is not actively
controlled.
Control of Temperature and Yes, separate controls possible Yes, but might be Yes, but is indistinguishable from
Humidity within barrier and surrounding indistinguishable from surrounding environment
environment surrounding environment
EM Systems (viable and total Yes Yes Yes
particle) Through All Phases
from Setup to Batch
Completion
Qualification Elements
Airflow Visualization Studies Yes, may include open door (as Yes, will include open door to Yes, will include open door to
during setup) and recovery represent setup and recovery represent setups, intervention, and
recovery
Aseptic Process Simulation Yes Yes Yes
Maintenance/Periodic Testing Elements
Maintenance of Glove Yes Yes Yes
Ports/Integrity Testing Before
and at End of Aseptic Fill-Unit
Operation or Campaign
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 193

--- PDF Page 208 ---
Attribute Isolator Closed Restricted Access Open Restricted Access
Barrier System (cRABS) Barrier System (oRABS)
Chamber Integrity/Gas Yes Maybe (depends on design) No
Tightness
(Predecontamination Leak
Test) (30)
Design Elements for Barrier and Surrounding Environment
Materials of Construction Chemically resistant and low Chemically resistant and low Chemically resistant and low
particulate; must be resistant particulate particulate
to surface biodecontamination
agents (e.g., hydrogen
peroxide)
Geometry/Design of Exterior Appropriate for use within Appropriate for use within Appropriate for use within Grade
Grade C or Grade D Grade B environment (e.g., B environment (e.g., surface finish,
environment (e.g., surface surface finish, coved corners, coved corners, sloped, drainable)
finish, coved corners, sloped, sloped, drainable)
drainable); interfaces with
other equipment, should not
have gaps; interfaces should
be able to be
biodecontaminated
Number and Positioning of Yes, ensure that gloves do not Yes, ensure that gloves do not Yes, ensure that gloves do not
Gloves disrupt airflow; ensure that disrupt airflow; gloves will be disrupt airflow; gloves will be
gloves can be extended for removed for autoclaving unless removed for autoclaving unless
biodecontamination the system undergoes automatic the system undergoes automatic
biodecontamination, in which biodecontamination with the
case, they must be able to be surrounding environment, in which
fully extended case, they must be able to be fully
extended
194 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 209 ---
Attribute Isolator Closed Restricted Access Open Restricted Access
Barrier System (cRABS) Barrier System (oRABS)
Mechanisms of Transfer Critical to ensure that all Important to ensure transitions Important to ensure transitions
control elements can be due to change from Grade A to due to change from Grade A to
managed through transitions Grade B Grade B
due to change from Grade A
to Grade C
Suitability of Yes Maybe (depends on design) No
Containment/Safety (e.g.,
Filtration of Exhaust)
Equipment Base Sealed and gas-tight/liquid- Sealed and gas-tight/liquid-tight Protected to facilitate disinfection
tight, coved corners to (depends on design), coved to enhance cleanability, with
enhance cleanability corners to enhance cleanability coved corners for cleanability
Design of Piping Transiting Critical (Grade A to Grade C Less Critical (Grade A to Grade Less Critical (Grade A to Grade B)
Grades common) B)
Exercise of Mechanical Necessary during surface Jog feature, disinfection position Jog feature or disinfection position
Components biodecontamination to have all to make surfaces available for to make surfaces available for
equipment moving disinfection; if conducting gas- disinfection; if conducting gas-
phase, disinfection will require phase, biodecontamination of both
automated exercise to keep oRABS and surrounding
equipment moving environment will require
automated exercise to keep
equipment moving
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 195