
--- PDF Page 230 ---
Consideration Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler (VPPF) Auger Powder Filler (AF)
High Requires off-line cleaning and sterilization, which may Capable of CIP/SIP
Potency/Toxicity represent a risk
Improved containment possible
Speed Tied to weight of fill Tied to weight of fill
Higher number of fill stations will enable higher speeds for Higher number of fill stations will enable higher speeds for
large fill-weights that require more shots per container large fill-weights
Machine footprint, the number of connections, and the Machine footprint, the number of connections, and the
number or rate of bulk-container connections will be rate- number or rate of bulk-container connections will be rate
limiting limiting
Weight of Fill Large weights will require multiple “shots” during the filling Large weights will require a number of rotations of the
auger
Typically, 1 cc is the largest single shot with current
technology, with an approximate 0.050 cc as the effective Auger size can be modified to support different fill weights
minimum single shot (a single machine can accommodate several auger sizes)
Weight Control Highly accurate weight control With very small weights of powder, off-line weight check
is required (see Section 5.0) and accuracy may be more
With very small weights of powder, off-line weight check
variable
is required (see Section 5.0) and accuracy may be more
variable
Powder Overspray May occur if the powder is not well compressed or doesn’t Less likely to occur as the auger is within the mouth of the
on Neck of form a plug container
Container
Needle-dosing systems are a specialty adaptation for
small-neck containers and for precision-dosing that will
also prevent overspray
216 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 231 ---
18.0 Effect of Powder Transfer on Technology Selection
Powder transfer from the bulk source to the powder filler will influence the filler design. There are several
types of bulk containers that can be used for drug product, including bags and kegs. Typically, bags or kegs
are loaded and connected manually; therefore, when considering machine speed, the rate of replenishment
and duration of reconnection should also be considered.
Split valve connections will require that the hopper receiving the product from the bag or keg be placed in
the Grade A environment to maintain the connection in an aseptic state. Intrinsic sterile connection devices
may permit the charge-point to be located in a lower grade. During disconnection, either connector type
might have exposed product on the surfaces, so containment should be considered for highly potent or toxic
products. A risk analysis should be performed to determine the microbiological and containment needs for
the product.
Powder transfer can be accomplished by gravity or with augmented feeding, such as vibratory feeders or
positive displacement with compressed air. There are practical limitations for gravity-fed powders with
regard to the distance that can be traversed. With augmented feed systems the distances can be extended, but
it is still best to keep the distance as short as possible. In some factories, the manufacturing process and
facility layout may dictate the position and distance that the bulk powder needs to travel, which will
mandate feeder augmentation.
Minimization of the transfer distances will also help to ensure that segregation of powders (i.e., separation
of powders by particle size, possibly resulting in the separation of one molecule from another within the
transfer) does not occur. The filler designs incorporate mixers, which also help to ensure homogeneity of the
powders at the point of fill. Homogeneity and content uniformity are important measures that will be tested
during the process validation and as part of routine batch Quality Control.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 217

--- PDF Page 232 ---
19.0 Discard Strategies for Aseptic Filling of Powders
The selection of a filling technology and its specific system design can influence the discard strategies that
are employed for such line events as startup, priming, line stoppages, interventions, and end of the aseptic
fill-unit operation. Products that are very expensive or limited in availability will be impacted
disproportionately by systems that have high discard requirements. Therefore, careful consideration of the
system design and the integration of the filling technology with the filling enclosure or isolator is warranted.
VPPF and AF are selected based on the attributes of the powder to be filled, the required fill weight, and the
opening of the container. Both VPPF and AF will encounter some need to reject containers during the
process. In many cases, the cause of rejection is the same for both technologies. The various points within
the process at which rejection might occur are included in Sections 19.1–19.5.
19.1 Discard Strategies at Startup and Priming
During powder-filler setup, standardizing the dose and priming the filler are necessary actions; however,
both of these actions can result in rejections. Taking the following steps during setup may help avoid
rejections or minimize their number during the priming and dose-standardization steps:
• Adjust the conveyance mechanism to ensure the proper centering of the container under the dosing
station
• Ensure that the correct distance of the dose delivery system from the container is established
• Adjust the agitator type (should be part of system design) and speed to ensure homogeneous
delivery of the powder for powder blends (6)
Startup rejection may also occur as a consequence of the risk that the initial product has been degraded due
to exposure to conditions that would adversely impact the product. To avoid or minimize rejections, an inert
gas overlay (for products that are oxygen-sensitive) should be established and any product that was exposed
to air during the priming should be eliminated.
For VPPF, during setup, the piston depth may be set with a fixture or gauge which will expedite the process
of establishing the weight within the specified range. As standardizing the dose is undertaken, the piston is
adjusted to change the volume of the dosing chamber. Typically, a progressive increase in the depth of
piston-movement occurs to adjust the dose. For some piston and filter designs, the potential exists for
powder to be retained between the piston-filter OD and the dosing-chamber ID, which may create
difficulties in reducing piston depth. For AF, the dose is adjusted by changing the number of rotations of the
auger. Some fillers are equipped with a 100% net-weight filling, which will minimize priming rejects due to
an underfilled or inaccurate dose.
218 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 233 ---
During process validation, careful evaluation of content uniformity (for powder blends) and fill accuracy
should be performed. Once established, the process parameters that deliver these CQAs should be carefully
defined in SOPs and batch records.
19.2 Discard Strategies at Filling and Interventions
Changes in powder attributes during the run could also result in dosing inaccuracies due to changes in the
dynamics of flow, for example, the powder becoming gummy or sticky due to environmental conditions, the
presence of an undissipated electrostatic charge, or an increase in density due to an increase in fines,
particularly at the end of bulk containers.
Modern filling lines are equipped with adequate environmental controls (i.e., humidity, temperature,
deionization technology), making environmental and electrostatic failure modes less likely. However, care
should be taken to ensure that the filling system operation does not increase the temperature of the powder
(e.g., due to friction forces).
Electrostatic build-up may not be associated with the powder or filler itself but is often due to dry conditions
and the conveyance of glassware. Electrostatics, if left undissipated, can affect dust on the container neck
and closure surfaces, can affect the environment, and can affect the weigh-cell accuracy.
For powder-density changes on VPPF, once cavity sizes are set, an increase in density will require a
reduction in dose size (which may be automatic on some models). During setup, the potential exists for
powder to be retained between the piston-filter OD and the dosing chamber ID, which may create
difficulties in reducing piston depth with some piston–filter designs. For AF, changes in product density
may require an adjustment to the number of rotations of the auger to adjust the fill weight (may be an
automatic function with some models).
As with liquid filling, during powder-filling operations, interruptions in the filling operation that result in
stoppage on the line (e.g., gaps in component supply, interventions, breaks) or other unforeseen events (e.g.,
particle excursion, loss of temperature in the tunnel resulting in an equipment stoppage, jams or collisions at
the capper) may result in rejections. While many filling-equipment designs can create a buffer to prevent
some of these stoppages, stoppages may still occur or may be unavoidable.
When interventions occur during powder-filling, the powder, or the powder-filler itself is not generally
impacted detrimentally. If the intervention requires an open door, such as might occur within a RABS,
consideration should be given to ensuring that the environment surrounding the RABS is also well-
controlled to avoid any powder characteristic changes. If the product requires inert gas overlay (e.g.,
nitrogen), the overlay must be maintained through any intervention or stoppage, or it will require rejection
of containers and filled unsealed units that have potentially been exposed to air. With some systems, an
automated clearance mode is available that will stop the infeed to the filler and reject all containers within
the conveyor system in front of the filler. With legacy systems, the rejection may be entirely manual, and
care must be taken to perform the intervention, picking up each rejected container with a sterile tool and
following appropriate aseptic techniques, while taking care not to cause any spills. If there are filled, fully
sealed containers within the line’s clearance zone, the decision to reject or keep those containers must be
based on an appropriate risk assessment and documented in intervention SOPs at the site.
For oxygen-sensitive products, an inert gas overlay (e.g., nitrogen) may need to be established to purge air
from the headspace of the container. When analyzing container headspace at the conclusion of filling,
containers with too much oxygen in the headspace may need to be rejected. Any failure in the inert-gas
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 219

--- PDF Page 234 ---
headspace controls during the filling operation (e.g., when the filler is shut down) will result in rejections
during the processing.
If there is powder at the neck of the container during filling (e.g., due to inaccurate fill-targeting into the
container opening or uncontrolled electrostatic charge), the powder may cause a poor seal around the
elastomer, which can result in an ingress of oxygen during the shelf life of the product. Powder at the necks
of containers may be difficult to observe during initial visual inspection due to the crimp seal. Therefore,
additional controls should be put in place for targeting delivery of the powder to the container-opening
during setup, and electrostatic control should be part of the standard environmental controls. The filling
process should be verified intermittently to ensure continued dust control at the neck. Headspace analysis
may be used for nitrogen-flooded containers to ensure that the closure is integral, thereby demonstrating an
effective seal between elastomer and neck without interference due to the presence of powder.
19.3 Discard Strategies at Dose Control
For net-weight fillers, rejection should be automatic and demonstrated during the qualification of the
equipment to determine that the correct containers have been rejected. As with liquid filling, if the weight-
check function is statistical (intermittent), the segregation and rejection will need to occur beginning at the
last confirmed correct-weight check (see Section 5.0).
One of the key reasons that dosing becomes inaccurate for VPPF is blinding of the screen, which affects
both powder compression and powder expulsion. Another, less-frequent reason could be screen breakage.
(Screens should be changed as part of routine preventive maintenance and inspected regularly after cleaning
to verify screen integrity.) Either condition can result in rejections during the run due to inaccurate dosing.
AF primarily encounters dosing inaccuracies when the conditions of the powder change during the run. Both
the VPPF and AF are available with net-weight models that enable automatic adjustments to keep the
weights within preset weight limits throughout the run. For some AF fillers, the weight adjustment may be
capable of occurring dynamically for each dose, whereas the VPPF will react to a trend in weights over
several cycles.
19.4 Discard Strategies at Conclusion of Fill
At the end of the filling process, as powder levels start to drop in the hopper, dosing may become
inconsistent. Proper hopper design is essential to minimize residual powder waste and to maintain filling
accuracy for as long as possible. It is important during development of the filling process parameters that the
level at which this occurs is noted and defined (measurable). Shutting down when this level is reached must
become a normal part of the operation and must be defined in the site SOPs or batch record. For net-weight
fillers, there may be an option to continue to fill until the rejection level becomes too high to be practicable
and compliant. The company must establish procedures to handle the end of fill consistently to ensure that
only good-quality containers are produced (see Section 13.0).
Table 19.4-1 summarizes common discard events and the specific risks represented by primary powder-
filling technologies.
220 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.