
--- PDF Page 195 ---
12.5 Discard Strategies Associated with Conclusion of Fill
At the end of the aseptic fill-unit operation, as bulk product volume decreases, fillers can encounter a loss of
fill accuracy. This may be due to:
• Low levels in the filling manifold/intermediate vessel
• Foam or air introduced while the final volume of product is pumped or pressurized through the filter
or transferred from the bulk vessel
• Loss of homogeneity due to loss of recirculation or mixing capability from low volumes, especially
for suspension products
Fillers may receive automated signals from the manifold or intermediate vessel to start and stop transfer
from the bulk vessel. When the alarm is triggered due to the lack of available bulk (e.g., low or low-low-
level alarm), the filler is directed to begin shut down or initiate line clearance or empty mode. For high-
value products, the shutdown may occur in stages. For example, individual filling paths will be shut down to
reduce the number of filling paths that remain active to complete the fill. Eventually arriving at the point
where all filling paths are shut down, and all partially filled containers are discarded.
The same technology used to permit refilling, to ensure every container is filled properly during priming,
can also be employed to ensure all aseptic end-of-fill unit-operation containers are appropriately filled (see
Section 2.0). The company must establish procedures to handle the end of fill consistently to ensure that
only good-quality containers are produced. These end-of-fill procedures must be included in the validation
of the process (see Section 13.0 for more information on the end of fill).
12.6 Discard Strategies Associated with Nested Components
Filling syringes that are nested in tubs can pose discard challenges when the dose-control performance fails
on an individual filling-needle position. Discarding the affected doses is the minimum action required. This
can be accomplished through one of two approaches: Discard individual syringes from a failing
pump/needle or discard the full tub. The discard of individual syringes can be significantly more
complicated as it will require some form of verification, either robotically (e.g., through reject
marking/tracking or through physical segregation) or by employing the four-eyes principle (i.e., independent
verification step) to ensure that all the affected syringes are discarded. (It should also be noted that some
filling technologies do not easily permit the deactivation of a single filling station; this is especially true in
nested configurations. Reset of the entire line may be more appropriate should a fault occur in a single
filling station for these systems.) Discard of the entire tub is a more conservative, and perhaps simpler,
approach from the standpoint of the quality system and the documentation that will be required.
Filling lines that permit the return of units for re-dosing or which employ re-stoppering, technology can be
employed to reduce the number of discards (see Section 5.0 and Section 7.3).
Table 12.6-1 provides some generalizations about the relative risk of different discard events based on the
type of filling technology employed.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 181

--- PDF Page 196 ---
Table 12.6-1 Common Discard Events and Their Impact Based on Liquid Filling Technology
Filling Technology for Liquid Products
Consideration Peristaltic (PP) Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump (DP)
(RPP)
Discards due to priming, loss of Risk depends on High risk, as there is Risk depends on Risk depends on
dose control, or end of the mechanisms employed commonly no feedback mechanisms employed mechanisms employed for
aseptic fill unit operation for weight control mechanism for individual for weight control Low weight control
pistons unless designed for risk for systems with laser
that purpose piston control
Discards for pump interventions Low risk if interventions High risk, as interventions Low risk if interventions Low risk if interventions
(e.g., pump mechanical occur outside of filling commonly occur inside the occur outside of filling occur outside of filling
malfunction) enclosure or isolator filling enclosure or isolator enclosure or isolator enclosure or isolator
May be high risk if May be high risk if May be high risk if
intervention occurs intervention occurs within intervention occurs within
within the enclosure or the enclosure or isolator the enclosure or isolator
isolator
Discards due to homogeneity loss High risk depending on Low risk when recirculated Low risk when Medium risk depending on
in suspensions length of tubing recirculated mechanism for recirculation
Discards due to absorption or High risk, as tubing sets Low risk, as tubing is Low risk if tubing is kept Medium risk due to contact
leachables (risk is driven in large can be long, numerous, generally short with the short with both diaphragm and
part by the surface area of and multi-part with pumps installed within the tubing; tubing may be long to
product contact elastomer vs. different materials of filling enclosure or isolator support external mounting
volume)1 construction of pump
Discards due to oxidation2 High risk due to Low risk due to limited Medium risk depending Medium risk depending on
significant lengths of lengths of tubing on type and length of type and length of tubing
tubing in use tubing
1 Risk levels are highly variable depending upon selected materials and the design of the system, which will influence the length of the elastomers in use. Minimizing
distances will always result in lower risk. SUS with intermediate vessels that are also polymeric may have higher adsorption/leachable risk.
2 For more information, see the PDA Points to Consider for Sensitivity to Oxidation by Peroxide (24).
182 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 197 ---
12.7 Miscellaneous Discard Strategies while Operating
Rejections along the filling line may occur for other reasons that may not be directly related to the operation
of the filler, for example:
• Raised stopper/plunger placement detection
• Missing stopper/plunger
• Fallen components
• Bad crimp seals/closures (at capper)
These sensors and rejection stations should be integrated into the filling conveyance system and tested
during qualification to ensure that detection and rejection timing is appropriately integrated.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 183

--- PDF Page 198 ---
13.0 Considerations for the End of the Aseptic Fill Unit
Operation
After the completion of filling, a number of elements should be considered for an orderly completion of the
filling, both in terms of the activities to be performed and the sequence of performing those activities.
For production activities that are performed on a single-batch basis, the end of the aseptic fill unit operation
is quite clear cut, as the necessary activities will be performed, and then, the entire line will be disassembled
for cleaning and sterilization (or CIP/SIP). The end of batch for campaign production, however, may result
in more limited interventions prior to resuming operations for the next batch in the campaign. These limited
interventions are necessary because the line will not be fully disassembled mid-campaign, and there is a
desire to ensure that the aseptic status of the line remains undisturbed.
The activities and the sequence that should be considered for the end of the aseptic fill-unit operation
include:
• Completion of EM
• Handling of remaining unused containers and closures
• Collecting, off-line labeling and accounting for batch samples
• Handling of residual product
• Washing in place of the containment barrier (especially for hazardous or potent products)
• Line clearance activities
• Close-out of documentation (e.g., rejects, line losses, samples, finished goods)
• Assessing equipment batch reports and audit trails
13.1 Completion of Environmental Monitoring at End of Aseptic Fill
EM (both total particle and viable sampling) must continue until all filled containers are fully closed, sealed,
and have exited the filling line. In the case of campaign production, if the environment will be reused, the
EM will need to continue through any changeover or setup activities in preparation for the subsequent batch.
EM (surface) is typically conducted at the end of the aseptic fill for critical product-contact surfaces (e.g.,
filling needles, feed bowls in sorting systems). These samples should be collected before significant
disassembly activities are performed so they accurately reflect the environmental status of the end of the
batch. However, to collect some of these samples, excess containers and closures may need to be removed
from the filling environment before collection of the EM samples (e.g., some or all of the stoppers must be
removed from the sorting systems before sampling of the bowl can be performed). Therefore, careful
sequencing of each of the tasks associated with the end of the aseptic filling-unit operation must be
preplanned and documented within the SOPs for each specific filling-line design to ensure the representative
nature of these samples.
184 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 199 ---
If any used media plates have accumulated within the barrier during the production period, they need to be
removed and reconciled for submission to the laboratory.
Exit monitoring for cleanroom personnel will be conducted, as required, when personnel leave the
environment.
13.2 Handling of Unused Containers and Closures at End of Aseptic Fill
When not being used for the next batch in the campaign, unused containers can often be emptied from the
line by conveying them to the end of the line, and closures/components can be removed from sorters and
hoppers, although the latter may require the assistance of vacuum cleaners or other specialty tools to clear
tracks. Care must be taken to ensure complete line clearance to avoid the possibility of mix-up. EM at the
end of the aseptic fill will still need to be performed as described in Section 13.1; therefore, performing
these activities in a manner that does not compromise the environment and sequencing this activity with the
environmental monitoring is imperative. In some cases, if partial clearance will be performed to allow for
final samples; then, the bulk of the clearance will be performed afterwards, potentially with an open barrier.
Consideration should also be given to serialization. Serialization is the process of assigning a unique serial
number to each saleable product unit for prescription products. The unique serial number is linked to
information about the product's origin, batch number, and expiration date. The application of the unique
serial number is intended to reduce the likelihood of counterfeiting or diversion. If the serialization identity
is conferred at the point-of-fill, the serialization system should be subjected to an orderly shutdown. The
orderly shutdown ensures that the empty containers can be conveyed down the line without being assigned a
serial number and without further accounting (tracking) within the software. Any empty containers that did
receive a serialization mark must be included in the rejects, so that the batch serialization records accurately
reflect the number of filled (tracked) and rejected containers.
13.3 Handling of Batch Samples at End of Aseptic Fill
Any batch samples (e.g., filled containers, bulk samples) that remain within the line will need to be
submitted to the designated laboratory with the appropriate labels and submission paperwork. Samples of
product with a sensitivity (e.g., temperature, light) may have been sequestered when they were collected and
stored in local controlled environments until ready for laboratory submission, or they may have already been
transported to the laboratory. At the end of the aseptic fill, it should be ensured that all samples are (or have
already been) collected, accounted for, and submitted. This activity will require that all collected samples
are included in the reconciliation section of the batch record as an important recordkeeping activity. Batch
samples can also be removed with an open barrier after EM activities are finished, as appropriate to the
operation of the line.
13.4 Handling of Residual Product at End of Aseptic Fill
A small amount of residual product will remain in bulk vessels, transfer lines, filtration apparatus, and the
filler itself at the conclusion of the batch. The batch record should include the methodology for calculating
this waste for accountability and yield purposes. The method of collection and disposal will depend on the
filler technology and the intended risks. Some filler control systems have a programmed end-of-batch cycle
that will facilitate the emptying and disposal of the bulk product.
Considerations for the handling of residual product include:
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 185

--- PDF Page 200 ---
• Running the filler up to the point of dry-cycling to purge fill lines before disconnection while
rejecting the final containers
• Breaking connections, draining liquid product through low points in the system or evacuating
powder product
• Controlling the potential for drips (or powder) and controlling excess product that might impact the
cleanliness of the cleanroom or isolator environments
If the product is potent or toxic, additional controls may need to be employed, such as including flushing
parts to avoid drips (or powder) or to sending excess product to waste treatment (e.g., chemical or heat
inactivation).
13.5 End of Aseptic Fill for Potent or Hazardous Products
After processing potent or hazardous products, a wash-in-place (WIP) cycle must be performed before the
containment barrier (e.g., isolator) can be opened. WIP may be used to:
• Knock down aerosols or dust
• Dilute active ingredients
• Flush active ingredients to drain or to a waste treatment system
• Inactivate the active ingredient (in cases where water or chemical-cleaning agents or temperature
are capable of inactivation)
WIP is performed using an automated system with spray balls installed within the barrier and/or with spray
wands operated through the glove ports. The WIP process takes place within the zone where product
exposure is possible, from below the HEPA filters (below the Ciba-Geigy (CG) membrane, which aids in
providing unidirectional airflow) down to the air returns. Since HEPA filters associated with the HVAC
system supply (and returns when present) cannot be wetted, care must be taken to ensure that the washdown
can be accomplished without compromise to these filters. In some systems, with particularly potent
products, it might be necessary to replace filters (e.g., bag in–bag out of return air filters) to ensure there is
no breach in containment. A risk assessment should be conducted to ensure that the appropriate risk level
has been considered in the treatment of these critical system components.
The intent of a properly executed WIP is to allow the safe opening of the barrier without the risk of exposure
to personnel or the external environment. As a consequence, WIP is commonly performed before the
containment barrier is breached, but:
• After bulk product has been consumed and any residuals drained/evacuated
• After the final EM has been completed and all samples and sampling devices are closed
• After the unused containers and closures have been removed from the line
Keep in mind that some WIP activities may have an inactivation component which may be done by liquid or
gas. For example, when handling biologically active materials that are rated with a Biosafety Level, it may
be necessary to ensure that the WIP inactivation process (by liquid and/or gas) is sufficiently rigorous to
inactivate the hazardous infectious agent or toxin in a manner that renders it harmless to operators and the
surrounding environment before opening. Vapor phase hydrogen peroxide (VPHP) has been successfully
used for the inactivation of biohazardous materials which is convenient for filling systems that already make
use of VPHP for biodecontamination prior to the initiation of filling. Risk assessments are commonly
performed to identify the needed controls and routine monitoring for such WIP inactivation processes (by
liquid and/or gas) and their associated process validation to ensure appropriate safety.
186 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 201 ---
Note: Filling lines that are designed for filling potent or hazardous products will often employ a separate
unit operation for external container washing. This treatment reduces the risk of adverse effects to operators,
as well as healthcare workers and patients during administration of the product, by the risk of contact with
any potent material that is potentially present on the exterior of containers. The exterior container washing
may occur in-line with filling operation immediately after capping, or as a separate off-line process. When
working with nested containers, it is common to denest the containers to ensure adequate coverage of all
external container surfaces, but the nests themselves must also be treated or disposed of. For syringes, there
may be challenges in cleaning the syringe barrel above the stopper while preventing the stopper from
becoming dislodged and ensuring complete drying of this region, as well as the challenges in washing and
drying the interface between the syringe and the needle shield. This document does not attempt to describe
all potential designs or solutions for this unit operation. At the end of the aseptic fill for a potent or
hazardous product, the exterior container washer should be cleaned and dried to reduce the risk of exposure
to any potent materials, prevent external cross-contamination, or microbial contamination within the washer
due to residual moisture.
13.6 Line Clearance at End of Aseptic Fill
Line clearance is the inspection of the line to ensure that no product, containers, or components were missed
during the clearing of the line after the completion of the aseptic fill and final EM.
Line clearance has several purposes, including:
• Preventing the mix-up of materials from batch to batch
• Ensuring that all samples are captured and accounted for
• Ensuring that all rejects are captured and accounted for
Line clearance may be performed more than once. Operators often conduct an initial clearance to ensure that
all batch-related materials are captured in the documentation and then conduct a formal line-clearance check
activity with a double-check by Quality Assurance, or their designee, who is independent of the clearance
activity, to ensure that the line can be released for further production purposes.
13.7 Close-Out of Documentation at End of Aseptic Fill
The master batch-record should provide locations for the capture of usage quantities, usage statistics,
percentage yield, and reconciliation. Many different item types may need to be recorded, such as inventoried
materials, rejects and line losses, samples, labels, packaging materials, and finished goods. The data are
collected for various purposes, including inventory control, process comparability, and process efficiency.
When the requirement is for inventory control or business/process optimization, an Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) System may be used in place of the master batch record to capture quantities issued,
scrapped, and/or returned to inventory.
Regardless of whether the data are captured in batch records or an ERP system, the most important reason to
collect and record the data is to account for all the materials prepared and consumed in order to prevent a
mix-up. By accounting for all materials entering and exiting the process and ensuring that all material is
accounted for, there is less likelihood that stray materials can be unknowingly introduced to the next or to an
adjacent process.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 187

--- PDF Page 202 ---
13.8 Assessment of Batch Reports and Audit Trails at End of Aseptic Fill
As part of the batch-record review, printouts or electronic records from a variety of process equipment will
be included with the batch records. For example, records will be collected from washers, tunnels,
autoclaves, ovens, CIP/SIP systems, biodecontamination units (e.g., hydrogen peroxide), fillers,
lyophilizers, cappers, exterior vial washers, terminal sterilizers, and packaging equipment, including the
serialization system. In addition, EM (total particulate, temperature, and relative-humidity monitoring) and
utility monitoring will be reviewed through building automation systems, isolator control systems, and EM
systems. From each of these systems, not only will the report of process parameters and their achievement
be confirmed, but alarms and alarm acknowledgement will be reviewed. Audit trails will be evaluated to
demonstrate that there were no inappropriate adjustments or changes in process parameters and to
demonstrate that all personnel interacting with the system were qualified and permitted to do so.
188 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 203 ---
14.0 Filling System and Environmental Considerations
Aseptic processing is expected to take place in a manner that separates personnel from the process, which is
commonly accomplished by providing a barrier to attain separation. A barrier is a physical partition that
separates the aseptic processing area (Grade A) from the background environment, protecting it from the
environment and the people working in it. Further, most regulatory authorities consider standard aseptic
cleanrooms, those that do not include controlled separation of operators and product filling, legacy systems
that require improvements. Risk assessments and risk mitigations to continue operations until full barrier-
technology upgrades are in place are recommended to be undertaken in consultation with the appropriate
regulatory partners.
For additional detail beyond what this section provides on the design of cleanrooms, isolators and RABS,
see the following references:
• ISO 14644 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments
• ISO 13408-6 Aseptic Processing of Healthcare Products Part 6 – Isolator Systems
• PDA Technical Report No. 34: Design and Validation of Isolator Systems for the Manufacturing
and Testing of Health Care Products
• PDA Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators
• PDA Points to Consider No. 12 Restricted Access Barrier Systems (RABS)
14.1 Types of Barrier Systems for Aseptic Operations
The two barrier systems primarily used by the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical industry that provide
the required separation between operators and aseptic operations in Grade A environments are:
• Isolators
• Restricted Access Barrier Systems (RABS)
Isolators are either fully closed or partially open to allow the ingress and egress of components and finished
goods; they are characterized largely by their ability to withstand automated biodecontamination cycles
usually with a vapor phase, gaseous, or aerosolized agents (e.g., hydrogen peroxide). In contrast, RABS
provide a rigid-wall enclosure that cannot always be fully sealed. RABS are disinfected mainly with liquid
disinfectants and/or sporicides applied to surfaces, though some closed RABS can support automated
biodecontamination (e.g., using hydrogen peroxide in vapor phase) with or without the same treatment for
the surrounding cleanroom environment. Both isolators and RABS may provide access to the enclosed
equipment and process through glove ports and make use of RTPs to introduce equipment, components,
monitoring, and cleanroom supplies. Likewise, the sterile fluid pathway may be introduced through a
transfer port or intrinsic sterile connection device at the barrier boundary. See Section 9.0 and Section 10.0
for more information on various transfer mechanisms, their operations, and controls. See Section 11.0 for
more information on sterile fluid pathways.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 189