
--- PDF Page 224 ---
16.3.4 Auger Powder Filler Sterility Assurance (Microbial and Total Particles)
The AF is mainly a closed system as all components can be subjected to CIP/SIP and the product is not
exposed up to the point of product delivery. At the point of discharge into the container, there is a small (1-2
mm) gap between the filler and the mouth of the container. The gap is necessary to accommodate
differences in container dimensions and to enable weigh cells (with net-weight fillers) to properly register
the tare and gross weight of the container. For some filler designs, the auger may be capable of descending
past the plane of the opening to enter the container, reducing the possibility that powder would escape
during the dosing cycle.
Due to the presence of possible multi-axial screws and mixer, AF systems normally do not allow an aseptic
installation, which is why this system is recommended to include a proper CIP/SIP capability. The entire
procedure must be validated.
Due to the shape and design of the system, the cleaning and sterilization needs to consider the different
shapes and passages, and it must be designed to guarantee proper cleaning, drying, and sterilization of the
whole system. Both the inside and the outside of the auger-dosing tube need to be properly cleaned.
Microbiological plates must be positioned at the critical points during the filling operation. As powder fillers
tend to be wider than liquid fillers, the ergonomics for microbiological plate placement should be verified as
part of the initial qualification to avoid the risk of contamination during placement. Monitoring positions
should be included as part of the filler design (e.g., during mock-up) to ensure effective ergonomics.
16.3.5 Auger Powder Filling Efficiency and Impact on Risk
AF speed (containers per minute) is quite fast and can be increased with a filling system that is equipped
with multiple lanes and augers.
The CIP/SIP unit should be properly designed to consider eventual multiple-dosing points if that is
anticipated for future production. The end user should specify the proper requirements for the intended
CIP/SIP controls in case of a split-fill system, if any.
16.3.6 Auger Powder Filling Costs: Initial and Ongoing
Implementation of AF systems should consider the additional costs associated with the presence of a
CIP/SIP system. CIP/SIP is highly recommended due to the extreme difficulty in aseptic assembly.
If multiple fill-weights are required, AF will incur costs for different format parts and augers.
Lifecycle costs are negligible because the AF has few disposable items (due, in part, to the CIP/SIP, which
makes SU parts unnecessary) or consumable items.
16.3.7 Auger Powder Filler System Complexity: Setup, Handling, and Changeover
AFs are systems with low complexity during the setup phase as the vast majority of the assembly is
completed prior to CIP/SIP of the system. Only the connection with the powder-supply system needs to be
properly designed and managed according to technology specifications (e.g., bin, keg, bag).
Once the setup is completed, the system adjustment, if any, is governed by the machine. Modern systems
are provided with 100% weight checks and with automatic adjustment of the dosing auger rotation to
maintain weight(s) within specified limits.
210 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 225 ---
16.3.8 Auger Powder Filler Maintenance and Aging through the Product Lifecycle
As for VPPF, maintenance requirements for AF are typical of any mechanical system with moving parts.
Bearings, bushings, and belts may all require replacement. Self-lubrication is a design requirement for
product-contact parts. If there are dust boots around any mechanical cams or shafts, the boots may need to
be inspected for integrity and replaced as necessary. The manufacturer’s recommendations on maintenance
intervals and requirements should be observed.
16.3.9 Auger Powder Filler Strategy: Single-Use Versus Reusable
AF is not suitable as a SUS. As a consequence, SUS do not exist, and cleaning validation is necessary.
16.3.10 Auger Powder Filler Clean-In-Place/Sterilize-In-Place
CIP/SIP is considered necessary for this machine design, as the reassembly is extremely difficult to perform
as an aseptic manipulation. Consequently, cost differences due to CIP/SIP are not generally a significant
differentiator between different AF models.
16.3.11 Use of Auger Powder Filler with Potent or Toxic Products
AF technology is ideal for potent or toxic products due, in part, to the capability of being able to be cleaned
in place. In addition, as the system relies on the mechanical transfer of the powder with the auger, there is
minimal dust generation. Although there is typically a small gap at the point of transfer to the container
mouth (1–2 mm), there are some filler designs where the auger can enter the container mouth, which will
reduce the chance of powder escaping to the environment.
The product attributes will also influence the risk for potent and toxic products. If there is a very small dose,
as is typical of potent products, even with very motile powders, the risk of dust exposure is lessened. As
with all products, if the product is granular in nature, it is typically less likely to generate airborne particles
(dust).
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 211

--- PDF Page 226 ---
16.3.12 Auger Powder Filler Benefits and Risks
Filler designs are highly varied and, depending on the features included with the specific filler, the
capabilities may vary. Included in Table 16.3.12-1 are some generalized features and ranges that may be
considered when contrasting AF technology to VPPF.
Table 16.3.12-1 Benefits and Risks of Auger Powder Filler
Benefits Risks
Large range of fill weights (~50 mg to 200 gm); CIP and SIP can increase costs
upper end of the range is bounded by the number
of rotations and the required fill speed and,
therefore, is essentially limitless
Large range of possible container types can be Possibility of leaving residual powder in the bulk
filled hoppers (reducing % yield)
Accuracy in dosing-weight depends on fill weight May require powder-handling know-how for
and powder characteristics; typical ranges may products that have challenging characteristics
include ~2% to 5%
Production rates of up to 300 pieces per minute N/A
with two parallel systems and six augers
Low complexity for assembly N/A
CIP and SIP available for all product-contact parts N/A
Available both for RABS and isolator installations N/A
Low maintenance N/A
212 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 227 ---
17.0 Product Characteristics Compatibility for Vacuum Pressure
Powder Filler and Auger Powder Filler Technologies
With all powder filling, the attributes of the powder influence the powder-handling and flow characteristics,
which will drive the selection of the technology. The attributes to be considered include:
• Density (tap and bulk)
• Particle size
• Porosity and particle surface area
• Angle of repose (flowability)
• Friction effects and temperature sensitivity
• Electrostatic charge
• Hygroscopicity
Section 17.1 explores powder attributes and their influence on the selection and design of a powder filling
system.
17.1 Influence of Product Attributes on Selected Powder Filling
Technology
During product and process development, the attributes of the powder should be tested to confirm its
handling characteristics and to establish the critical process parameters and machine setup (e.g., mesh sizing
and material for VPPF or auger selection for AF) that will be required for successful filling. While the
powder characteristics may not limit the selection of the filling technology, the restrictions on certain
process parameters, such as speed of filling, may make one technology more favorable than another. Often,
equipment suppliers can perform this testing for the company if the equipment is not available within the
development department to confirm the appropriate equipment settings.
The selection of the container and its neck size are more critical for powder filling than for liquid filling.
The centering of the container is essential to the delivery of the powder to the container. The size of the neck
opening will impact the quantity of powder that can be dosed with each rotation for VPPF. For both VPPF
and AF, a small neck opening may affect the speed at which the machine can be operated. The neck opening
does not necessarily impact the selection of the specific filling technology, although with very small neck
openings, such as ampoules, there may be some practical limits for each technology.
Table 17.1-1 evaluates the attributes of the product, one aspect at a time, with each filling technology. In
reality, however, the powder has aspects of each attribute simultaneously, and the best technology will be
the most suitable compromise for all characteristics. In practice, it is not always possible to determine the
appropriate technology from a list of attributes; often, testing the powder with the selected technologies is
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 213

--- PDF Page 228 ---
the best way to determine handling and behavior. Finally, cost, flexibility, fill speed, containment
considerations, and availability of the technology within the factory may also be deciding factors.
214 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 229 ---
Table 17.1-1 Product and Filling Operation Characteristics Versus Filler Design
Consideration Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler (VPPF) Auger Powder Filler (AF)
Density (tap and Independent of powder-flow characteristics High-porosity Largely independent of powder-flow characteristics;
bulk) products will result in good control with effective particularly suitable for free-flowing powder
formation of the plug with the vacuum However, high
& porosity will result in less-dense plugs, which may reduce There are no limits as to the number of rotations that can
be performed to compensate for high-porosity powders to
the quantity of product that it is possible to dose with a
Porosity and deliver the needed dose
single shot
Particle Surface
Area
Angle of Repose Independent of powder-flow characteristics, although Largely independent of powder-flow characteristics;
(flowability) filling-needle technology is best suited for free-flowing particularly suitable for free-flowing powder
powders
Initial charge to the hopper may be a challenge and may
Initial charge to the hopper may be a challenge and may require vibratory feeder
require vibratory feeder
Friction Effects Mixing is the only source of consistent friction; therefore, Friction effects can be higher (due to both mixing and
VPPF does not typically encounter higher temperatures movement of the auger) and can potentially result in
from high-friction products slightly elevated temperatures, which may represent
concerns for thermosensitive products
Hygroscopicity Ensure that relative humidity of compressed air (or No compressed air is typically in contact with the powder
nitrogen) is controlled for hygroscopic powders during the transfer of the powder
Environmental controls to manage relative humidity are Environmental controls to manage relative humidity are
critical critical
Electrostatic Electrostatic control is critical for VPPF dosing accuracy Electrostatic control is less challenging for auger as the
Control linked to proper plug formation and release; risk will be delivery is directly to the container opening
that powder gets on the neck of the container
Can be equipped with electrostatic control at the point of
Can be equipped with electrostatic control at the point of fill
fill
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 215

--- PDF Page 230 ---
Consideration Vacuum Pressure Powder Filler (VPPF) Auger Powder Filler (AF)
High Requires off-line cleaning and sterilization, which may Capable of CIP/SIP
Potency/Toxicity represent a risk
Improved containment possible
Speed Tied to weight of fill Tied to weight of fill
Higher number of fill stations will enable higher speeds for Higher number of fill stations will enable higher speeds for
large fill-weights that require more shots per container large fill-weights
Machine footprint, the number of connections, and the Machine footprint, the number of connections, and the
number or rate of bulk-container connections will be rate- number or rate of bulk-container connections will be rate
limiting limiting
Weight of Fill Large weights will require multiple “shots” during the filling Large weights will require a number of rotations of the
auger
Typically, 1 cc is the largest single shot with current
technology, with an approximate 0.050 cc as the effective Auger size can be modified to support different fill weights
minimum single shot (a single machine can accommodate several auger sizes)
Weight Control Highly accurate weight control With very small weights of powder, off-line weight check
is required (see Section 5.0) and accuracy may be more
With very small weights of powder, off-line weight check
variable
is required (see Section 5.0) and accuracy may be more
variable
Powder Overspray May occur if the powder is not well compressed or doesn’t Less likely to occur as the auger is within the mouth of the
on Neck of form a plug container
Container
Needle-dosing systems are a specialty adaptation for
small-neck containers and for precision-dosing that will
also prevent overspray
216 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.