
--- PDF Page 261 (doc p247) ---
21.2.4 Case 2: Requirements for Multi-container/Multi-volume/Multi-product Filling
Table 21.2.4-1 provides guidance regarding multi-container/multi-volume/multi-product filling requirements. Refer to Section 1.0 and Section 2.0
for additional information.
Table 21.2.4-1 Case 2: Requirements for Multi-container/Multi-volume/Multi-product Filling
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Additional containers, closures, and sizes to be filled on the same line
50 IL 50 IL, Supplier Name, Drawing #123 Dimensions should be fully understood in order to design appropriate
conveyance flexibility and change parts (e.g., feed screws, star wheels, walking
rakes/beams) As above, evaluation of dimensional differences in parts on
250 IL 250 IL, Supplier Name, Drawing
sorting-system change-parts and insertion station required.
#456
500 IL 500 IL, Supplier Name, Drawing
#789
32 mm 32 mm, Supplier Name, Drawing
Lyophilization #101
Stopper
Additional fill volume / product requirements anticipated for the containers and closures
50 mL Fill Freeze-dried blood plasma protein Fill volumes to be considered for selected filling technology, including whether
change-parts will be required for the various volumetric differences Product
attributes for each product are identical, therefore, no additional sensitivities
70 mL Fill Blood plasma protein solution
(e.g., shear, oxygen, metal) are to be considered.
200 mL Fill
250 mL Fill
500 mL Fill
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 247

--- PDF Page 262 (doc p248) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Required level of flexibility for future products (Base Case: 250 mL vial, solution)
Container Bulk production with on-line Bulk-container handling will require glassware washer and tunnel, which will
Flexibility washing and depyrogenation affect line footprint. No anticipated future need for ready to use (RTU)
glassware.
Container Material All foreseen containers to be glass No anticipated adaptations due to materials of construction foreseen
Flexibility
Alternative Sizes Range from 50 IL to 500 IL Ensure that the format parts consider the range of sizes (diameters, height) to be
filled and whether the format parts will be sourced with the initial purchase, or
only when needed.
All vials indicated are molded glass infusion bottles (IL). If tubing vials (R) or
injection vials (H) were to be filled in the future, additional format parts would be
required due to different weights, diameters/tolerances, different stopper-
setting requirements, and differences in neck/shoulder for crimp sealing.
Extreme variability in glass components could also affect line speeds at the
extreme sizes.
Filling Technology Identify need-based on intended With some systems, it may be possible to add a different filling technology on
Flexibility range of filling activities and product the same machine base if required for different products and/or different
types packaging configurations (e.g., rotary piston pumps with peristaltic pumps as the
alternate filler when needed). While design with alternate filling technologies can
be more complex than a single system, the knowledge that this will be a future
requirement is a critical element to the initial filling line and isolator or RABS
design.
With the elements of this case, the similarity of the product, containers, and
closures signal that a separate technology will not be needed unless there is a
plan for a future product not described here.
248 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 263 (doc p249) ---
21.2.5 Case 2: Anticipated Batch Sizes and Operating Practices
Table 21.2.5-1 outlines typical batch parameters to consider. Refer to Section 1.0, Section 3.0, and Section 4.0 for additional information.
Table 21.2.5-1 Case 2: Anticipated Batch Sizes and Operating Practices
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Batch Sizes
1000-liter Batch Size 250 mL fill (initial) Note that the depyrogenation tunnel will likely be rate-limiting
for the line speed for this size glassware regardless of filler
10,000 units per batch
design; therefore, increasing the number of fill heads may not
50 mL – 500 mL (future) increase the line output.
20,000 to 4,000 units per batch 1,000 to 25,000 vials per lane maximum each batch if using a 4-
lane filler (the number of cycles is needed to assess potential
wear-part effects on the filling pathway).
For the smallest batch sizes with the larger fill volumes, the filler
4000-liter Batch Size 250 mL fill (initial)
may have one or more station turned off. Since all of the stations
40,000 units per batch will not be required to operate in order to match maximum
tunnel line-speed, turning off one or more fill heads will conserve
50 mL – 500 mL (future)
product and reduce line losses. Alternatively, two stations may
80,000 to 8,000 units per batch each be used to provide half the fill volume to the container. This
enables the use of smaller filling needles, which can reduce
dripping.
5000-liter Batch Size 250 mL fill (initial)
Filling system will need to be capable of long, stable run times; if
50,000 units per batch using PP or DP, tubing/diaphragm longevity may be an issue for
the largest batch sizes.
50 mL – 500 mL (future)
100,000 to 10,000 units per batch
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 249

--- PDF Page 264 (doc p250) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Campaign Criteria (and their influence on batch throughput)
Campaign Strategy (i.e., will Yes Ensure that changeover time makes sense for small batch sizes
multiple batches be campaigned to that are planned.
reduce changeover time)
Use of campaigns may drive the determination towards isolators
for greater SA (rather than RABS).
Length of Campaign 5 days At the predicted line speeds and batch size, this represents 2 – 3
batches per day with 3 – 4 filling days.
Filling Path Management Complete changeover between Filling-path must be fully disposable or be CIP/SIP capable;
batches of the campaign duration of typical CIP/SIP cycle to be assessed to determine if it
is compatible with required line throughput. If not, disposable
will be required.
Container–Closure Management Required to sterilize indirect Between batches, no changeover is required. If automated
product-contact parts before each adjustable rakes are available, different container sizes may be
campaign accommodated.
Environmental Monitoring (EM) To be performed on each batch of Adequate EM materials must be located inside of the filling line
the campaign at the start of the campaign or be able to be transferred within
the line between batches (e.g., rapid transfer chamber or RTP
canister)
Interventions Aseptic Process Simulation (APS) Filling machine must be designed to limit interventions and
must be designed to include a should limit any interventions that would require line clearance.
representative (and possibly Any intervention must be designed to utilize good aseptic
bracketed) number and type of technique.
interventions during the campaign
250 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 265 (doc p251) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Holding Times Hold times to consider intended Bulk hold times should ensure that batches are available on
operation of 16/5 to permit hold- demand after any possible delays are incurred on changeover
over nonoperational shift between batches or normal process upsets, as well as for the
hold times during the normal operational cadence of 16 working
hours per day.
Batch Failure Mode Recovery time after loss of batch The filling system (and product-supply tubing/lines) should be
to be kept to a minimum designed both to minimize loss upon line repreparation, as well
as provide redundancy for backup product supply.
APS Strategy for Campaigns Must comply with all guidelines Machine build must comply with the desired campaign strategy.
(EU GMP Annex 1, FDA Aseptic
Processing)
100% IPC for Dose Weight Yes Due to cost of product, constant final dosing (see Section 5.0) is
preferred. 100% IPC will also make it possible to conserve more
vials from priming and end of the aseptic fill-unit operation as
well.
Operating Criteria (and their influence on batch throughput)
Staffing Level 16/5 Verify whether the number of batches produced per week,
including change over time will meet production targets at
(i.e., will the facility be operated
intended bulk/filled-unit volumes.
16/5, 24/5, or 24/7 hours per day
/ days per week?)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 251

--- PDF Page 266 (doc p252) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Shutdown Allowances Two planned two-week Verify whether the selected technology maintenance and re-
shutdowns: Winter and Summer calibration can be accommodated in the planned shutdowns.
(i.e., how many days per year will
Also, consider the likely duration for technology transfer for new
the line be operated, accounting products, execution of APS, etc., relative to the number of
for such factors as shutdowns, batches required to be filled each year on top of these
APS, testing, technical studies, interruptions.
recapitalization, and changes)
Changeover Time 32 hours between campaigns Use these values to determine annualized throughput on the
line.
(i.e., what amount of time is 4 hours between batches within a
required between campaigns and campaign With the time between batches for a campaign, ensure that this
time accounts for emptying the bulk, clearing the line, closing the
between batches within a
batch documentation, addressing any needed changeover,
campaign, measured from the last
changeover of the fluid-pathway, filter-path integrity testing,
good container to the first good
closeout of EM samples, etc. All tasks should be accounted for
container?)
and considered in this time as this will influence the possible
number of batches within the campaign period that is planned.
% Yield Expected 98% Yield 2 – 4% scrap typical experience inclusive of all rejection causes
(e.g., filter flush, filler priming, end of aseptic filling-unit operation,
(i.e., amount of scrap produced on 2% Scrap
intervention clearance)
average)
% Line Efficiency 85% Desired 75% minimum target; more than 80% is possible, but each
additional percentage-point requires significant effort to achieve.
(i.e., during filling operations what
This parameter is often less about the equipment design and
is the operational “up-time” for the more on the expertise of the operators on setup, as well as
line?) appropriate sensors and detection to improve the operational
efficiency without down-time. Interruptions during small batches
will have an outsized influence on this parameter.
252 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 267 (doc p253) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
% Facility Efficiency 70 – 80% Amount includes needed maintenance, recalibration, shutdowns
for facility maintenance, APS
(i.e., what are the % available hours
in a year, during what % is it
expected that the line operates
within that range to achieve the
intended production targets?)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 253

--- PDF Page 268 (doc p254) ---
21.2.6 Case 2: Comparison of Requirements to Filling System Capabilities
Now that some of the preliminary design requirements for the product and its intended packaging have been defined, the requirements can be
compared to the filling system capabilities and attributes as described in Section 2.0. Comparison of the filling system capabilities to the product
needs for this example leads to the following evaluative matrix in Table 21.2.6-1. Refer to Section 2.0 and Section 4.0 for additional information.
Table 21.2.6-1 Case 2: Comparison of Requirements to Filling System Capabilities
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump
(PP) (RPP) (DP)
Filling Range
pump size prohibitive for pump size prohibitive
the largest volumes; for the largest volumes;
would require multi- would require multi-
stroke operation stroke operation
Viscosity Range (low
viscosity for this
product)
Product Compatibility
(proteins)
not ideal for shear-
sensitive products
Diving Needle Capable
to Reduce Foaming
Dynamic Fill Curve (e.g.,
start/stop, acceleration)
to Reduce Foaming less flexibility for dynamic
fill curve due to pressure
control at vessel
254 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 269 (doc p255) ---
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump
(PP) (RPP) (DP)
Range of Fill Volumes
will require different requires different pump will require different orifices
pump heads for sets for different fill and fluid pathway to
wide ranges of fill volumes maintain accuracy across
volumes the range
Drip Control
viscosity higher than water
will reduce likelihood to
drip, and rapid closure of
pinch-valve is likely to be
sufficient
Dosing Accuracy
very accurate, but
volume of fill
contraindicates this
technology
Dosing Accuracy
Stability Across Run
100% IPC planned statistical IPC adequate, 100% IPC planned 100% IPC planned
dosing accuracy very
stable
Single-Use (SU) Fluid
Pathway
rare (but possible) due to possible but may be
pump expense expensive
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 255

--- PDF Page 270 (doc p256) ---
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump
(PP) (RPP) (DP)
Clean-In-Place
(CIP)/Sterilize-In-Place
(SIP) Execution rare (but possible);
often SU instead
Stability Over Long
Batches/Number of
Cycles hose wear a hose wear at pinch point diaphragm wear can be
detriment, but can be a minor a minor consideration
relatively modest consideration; processor but usually only after
batch sizes make required for varying head excessive operation
this suitable pressure
Campaign Compatibility
hose wear must be filling equipment can be single-point hose-wear diaphragm-wear must
considered replaced must be considered be considered
Execution Outside
Isolator or Restricted
Access Barrier System
(RABS)
Speed of Setup
Changeover
requires aseptic setup or requires aseptic setup or requires aseptic setup,
CIP/SIP CIP/SIP, but fluid path is CIP/SIP, or SU (which is
reduced compared to RPP the fastest changeover)
= available or acceptable
= not available or not acceptable
256 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 271 (doc p257) ---
Based on the above chart, the product characteristics make PP and TP the leading candidates, as planned fill
volumes and shear-sensitivity of the product may preclude RPP (both volume and shear) and DP (volume
alone).
PP and TP are well-matched. Decision-making may come down to whether SU technology (favoring PP) or
CIP/SIP are preferred (favoring TP). That decision may be driven by the changeover time with each, as the
modest batch sizes will result in frequent changeover of the fluid pathway within the campaigns. If the
foaming with the product is severe and SU technology is the desire, then PP will be the strongest contender
if the cost of SU is not prohibitive based on the planned number of batches.
21.2.7 Other Design Elements for Consideration
There are a number of other design decisions that will impact the layout and operation of the filling line,
such as:
• Operator Interface with the line (Section 8.0)
• Supply of Components (Section 9.0 and Section 10.0)
• Product Filtration, including location of filters, required number of filter elements, integrity-testing
pre- and post-filling (Section 11.0)
• Filling Environment and Utilities (Section 14.0 and Section 15.0)
Generally, these decisions should be made as part of the filling-line specification process as they may affect
costs and can influence placement of equipment; however, these are generally less of a direct impact on the
selection of the filling technology itself.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 257

--- PDF Page 272 (doc p258) ---
22.0 Relevant Vendor and Supplier Resources
The following paid advertisements are presented to the reader as potential supplemental resources which
may aid in execution or fulfillment of the concepts, material, and information presented herein.
The inclusion of these resources does not imply any endorsement or preference on part of PDA or the
authors of this technical document.
258 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 273 (doc p259) ---
// Pharmaceutical production of the future –
Maximum safety and highest quality through
gloveless aseptic production. ///
GENEX: The next generation for aseptic production.
GENEX is a groundbreaking machine concept designed specifically for small and medium batch production.
This innovative system redefines the future of pharmaceutical production. With GENEX, Bausch+Ströbel has
developed an innovative approach that significantly reduces the risk of contamination and sets new safety
standards in aseptic processing. The fully automated GENEX filling and packaging system utilizes robot
technology, automating size changes and environmental monitoring while ensuring full compliance with
GMP regulations. GENEX is the key to tomorrow’s pharmaceutical production, combining the highest safety
standards and product quality.
GENEX Features
+ Scale out + Zero Reject Principle
+ Next Level Hygienic Design + GMP, ANNEX 1 Conforming machine design
+ Eliminate Human Intervention + Short decontominations cycle
+ Processing Various Packaging Materials + Integrated System
BAUSCH+STRÖBEL | 74532 Ilshofen | Germany

--- PDF Page 274 (doc p260) ---
Filling and closing of liquid
pharmaceuticals from small
batch to high speed. More
mation
infor
groninger is a globally recognized leader in the design and manufacture of advanced filling and
closing equipment for the pharmaceutical industry. With decades of specialized expertise, we
deliver engineered solutions that combine cutting-edge technology with precision, reliability,
and compliance. Renowned for our commitment to innovation and collaborative development,
we offer a comprehensive portfolio ranging from highly customized equipment to standardized
line concepts for series production.
Visions
We fill with life
www.groninger-group.com

--- PDF Page 275 (doc p261) ---
S I N G L E D E T E C T I O N
S I N G L E R E J E C T I O N
High-speed advanced robotic processing
for Ready-To-Use components.
Meet Injecta 36 with its new equipment, the only solution now available for RTU Nebula
components ensuring the highest fill-finish processing speeds and topmost
control with Detecta, the ultimate high-speed inspection unit. Detecta’s robotic
accuracy in checking for plunger presence and rejecting single non-conformities
guarantees the safest aseptic automation technology with Nebula, the high-speed
Detecta
decontamination tunnel.
Accelerate your aseptic.
ima.it/pharma

--- PDF Page 276 (doc p262) ---
Your home for turnkey
Fully integrated solutions from one partner:
Sterile filling, containment and freeze-drying
Aseptic vial filling
Aseptic filling solutions as part
systems for bulk
of our turnkey approach
⚪ Flexible filling of vials, syringes and cartridges
⚪ Smart solutions for filling different products:
liquid, viscos and high potent
Filling of pre-filled syringes,
⚪ Different dosing / combi-dosing systems
vials and cartridges
according to product requirements
⚪ Technologies for maximum product yield
and minimizing product loss
⚪ Innovative technologies to keep every product
safe, sterile and in excellent quality
⚪ Options for different product path handling: Visit our website Sensor filling of cartridges
CIP/SIP, single-use, autoclavable
⚪ Decades of experience in the aseptic and
sterile filling of pharmaceutical products
OPTIMA pharma GmbH | 74523 Schwaebisch Hall | Germany | pharma@optima-packaging.com | www.optima-packaging.com/pharma

--- PDF Page 277 (doc p263) ---
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication in the purchase.
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
• Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the
individual use of an Authorized User
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
• Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication
• Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to
anyone other than an Authorized User
• Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites,
either available on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license
from PDA, Inc.
• Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA
Electronic Publication
• Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the
PDA Electronic Publication
• Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA
Electronic Publication or its content
• Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk
reproduction or distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial
purpose
• Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
including any texts or graphics
• Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright
information or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication
• Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material
To License or purchase Reprints
• Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a
fee.
• To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
• Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.
To order reprints, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.

--- PDF Page 278 (doc p264) ---
Manufacturing Technology Guide No.1: Aseptic Filling, Engineering, and Operation
About PDA Technical Documents
PDA Technical Documents are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Teams (listed on
inside front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the
pharmaceutical/biopharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. The viewpoints and
strategies presented in this document are those of the authors as independent subject matter experts and do
not necessarily represent the policies and practices of their respective companies.
While in development, PDA technical documents are subjected to a global review by PDA members and
other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. Comments from the global review are then
considered by the authoring Team during the preparation of the final working draft. The level of expertise of
the Team and those participating in the global review ensure a broad perspective reflecting best thinking and
practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board(s) that sanctioned the project. PDA’s
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products Advisory Board,
Biopharmaceutical Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality Advisory Board. Following this
stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and determines whether or not to
publish the document as an official PDA Technical Document.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Document is of the highest quality, all readers are
encouraged to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or
mistakes that might be found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org.
Special Acknowledgement
PDA and the authors would like to thank groninger & co. gmbh for their generous contribution of multiple
images for use in this Manufacturing Technology Guide.
Peer Reviewers
PDA thanks the following peer reviewers for lending their time and expertise to ensure the quality and
relevance of this technical document:
James Agalloco Brent Lieffers
Agalloco & Associates Inc. Cytiva
Harold Baseman Vincent O’Shaughnessy
Valsource, Inc. Amgen
Rhonda Ezell Carlos R. Ortiz
Alkermes Eli Lilly & Company
Marc Glogovsky Jim Polarine Jr.
Valsource, Inc. STERIS Co.
David Jaworski Joahannes Rauschnabel, PhD
Jaworski Associates, LLC. Syntegon
Bruce Loxley Alexander Stoll, PhD
Glaxo Smith Kline Fresenius Kabi

--- PDF Page 279 (doc p265) ---
Manufacturing Technology Guide No.1: Aseptic Filling, Engineering, and Operation
Sanctioning Advisory Board: SAB
Chair Rishikesh Jaiwant
Ivy Louis Glaxo Smith Kline
VIENNI Training & Consulting LLP
Austin Kuo
Eli Lilly & Company
Vice-Chair
Ken Paddock Beth Kirschenheiter
Merz Therapeutics Bristol Myers Squibb
Frederic Ayers Gitte Letting
ValSource, Inc. Novo Nordisk A/S
Tiffany Baker Bruce Loxley
ValSource, Inc. Glaxo Smith Kline
Subrata Chakraborty, PhD Vincent O’Shaughnessy
Inophar Consulting & Training Amgen
Emily Cheah, PhD Julian Petersen
Charles River Laboratories groninger & co. gmbh
Thomas Damratoski Jim Polarine Jr.
Civica STERIS Co.
Cheryl Essex Jack Prior
Sanofi Sanofi
David Exline Alexander Stoll, PhD
Gateway Analytical, LLC. Fresenius Kabi
Mauro Giusti Kristin Valente
Eli Lilly Italia Merck & Co., Inc.
Gabriele Gori Rick Watson
Chiesi Farmaceutici, S.p.A. Merck & Co., Inc.

--- PDF Page 280 (doc p266) ---
Manufacturing Technology Guide No.1: Aseptic Filling, Engineering, and Operation
PDA Officers PDA Directors
Chair Marcia Baroni
Anil Sawant, PhD
Lisa Bennett
Chair-Elect
Melissa Seymour Cristiana Campa, PhD
Secretary Andrew Chang, PhD
Bettine Boltres, PhD
Cylia Chen Ooi, MA
Treasurer
Marc Glogovsky, MS
Emma Ramnarine, PhD
Andrew Hopkins
Immediate Past-Chair
Sue Schniepp
Ivy Louis, MBA
President
Amy McDaniel, PhD
Glenn E. Wright
Morten Munk
PDA Publication Brigitte Reuter-Haerle
Production and Editing
Osamu Shirokizawa
Jessie Lindner
Project Manager, SAB
Josh Eaton
Senior Director, Scientific
& Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris
Senior Director, Publishing
and Press Relations
Marilyn Foster
Technical Editor/Writer

--- PDF Page 281 (doc p267) ---
pda.org
PDA Global Headquarters
4350 East West Highway, Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
TEL +1 (301) 656-5900
FAX +1 (301) 986-0296
PDA Europe
Am Borsigturm 60
13507 Berlin, Germany
PDA Asia Pacific
20 Bendemeer Rd. #04-02 B S
Bendemeer Centre, Singapore
339914