
--- PDF Page 239 ---
21.1 Case 1: Small Volume Parenteral—Liquid in a Syringe
Specifications for Case 1 are detailed below:
• Product: monoclonal antibody
• Filling Volume: 0.5 mL
• Container / Closure System: prefilled syringe (PFS); 1 mL long
• Dosing System: to be determined
21.1.1 Case 1: Product Characteristics
Table 21.1.1-1 provides details on product characteristic considerations. Refer to Section 1.0 and Section 4.0 for additional information.
Table 21.1.1-1 Case 1: Product Characteristics
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Pharmaceutical Characteristics
Highly Potent No None; although containment for toxicity is not required, a decision has been
made to fill within an isolator to provide enhanced sterility assurance (SA)
Toxic No
Occupational Exposure Level (OEL) / No classification
Occupational Exposure Band (OEB)
level
Product Biological or Physicochemical Requirements
Temperature-sensitive No Filled under ambient conditions
Oxygen-sensitive Yes Inert gas introduction must be considered; bubble/air-gap size between
plunger and liquid is not critical, therefore vacuum stoppering is not necessary
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 225

--- PDF Page 240 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Light-sensitive Yes Isolator lighting has to have compatible spectrum
Metal-sensitive No None; no restrictions on product-contact materials of construction
Silicone-sensitive No None; no restrictions on polymers and tubing
Chemical-physical Properties
Viscosity Water-like, None; no restriction on filling technology based on viscosity
1-2 mPa-s
Liquid Product with Surface Tension No None; no significant concern for dripping, therefore no accommodation
Less than Water anticipated with the filling needle or filling technology selection; Cylindrical
needles acceptable
Solution or Suspension Solution No active agitation or recirculation required for filling machine or intermediate
vessel
Flammable or Explosive No None; NEMA/ATEX cabinetry not required for flammable; explosion-proof
operation
Shear-sensitive Yes To be verified for future products, different dosing systems could be utilized if
future products are not shear-sensitive
Foaming Tendency Yes Filling curve (e.g., start, stop, acceleration) to be carefully designed; level of
filling start, filling end, and careful needle movement must be incorporated to
prevent foam generation
226 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 241 ---
21.1.2 Case 1: Container–Closure Characteristics
Table 21.1.2-1 provides details on container-closure characteristic considerations. Refer to Section 1.0, Section 6.0 and Section 7.0 for additional
information.
Table 21.1.2-1 Case 1: Container–Closure Characteristics
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Pharmaceutical Primary–Packaging Characteristics
Syringe (syringe type, drawing, Syringe 1 mL long RNS, small round Details inform equipment designers of the needed filling
dimensions) flange, Supplier Name, Drawing #123 height and filling controls for the specific syringe design
Stopper (stopper type, drawing, Plunger 1 mL long, standard silicone, Details inform equipment designers of the requirement
dimension, and weight) Supplier Name, Drawing #456 for the sorting-system bowl and tracks
Tub (tub type, drawing, dimension) Tub Height 97 mm, Supplier Name, Details inform equipment designers of the details of the
Drawing #789 conveyance system
Nest (nest type, drawing, 160, 1 mL long, lengthwise, Supplier Details inform equipment designers of the number of fill
dimension) Name, Drawing #101 lanes, any X/Y movement needed for the fill heads and
the nest-handling
Tub Wrapping Details (bag, lid, and Polypropylene Bag, Tyvek Lid, Tyvek Details of the number of bags, bag folding, material types,
liner) Liner Supplier Name, Spec. Sheet: 567 and method of affixing lid (e.g., heat, glue) dictate details
of removal and disposal including, for example, needed
robotics, conveyance, and location of removal for outer
and inner bags and lids
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 227

--- PDF Page 242 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Assembly Drawing Supplier Name Drawing #112 Details inform equipment supplier of assembled
dimensional requirements and specific elements such as
whether position of the plunger is critical, whether an air
bubble is permissible
Components (stacked dimensional Supplier Name Drawing #134 Details inform equipment supplier of assembled
tolerances) dimensional requirements and the needed tolerance
flexibility for the handling of components and parts
Inherent-Component Container– To be confirmed by pharmaceutical firm None; ensures a container system can provide the
Closure Integrity (CCI) Development Report 12345 appropriate level of tightness for the intended application,
for instance, maintaining a modified headspace or
vacuum throughout the shelf life
Intended Capping Force or Residual N/A for syringe None
Seal Force
Multi-puncture Closure N/A for syringe None
Considerations
(also N/A for single-dose product)
(to limit risk of microbial ingress or
product leakage between doses)
Plunger Insertion Depth and Critical Bubble/air-gap size between plunger Shipping studies must support sterility at maximum
Bubble-size to Support and liquid level is not critical bubble/air-gap size
Maintenance of Sterility during
Shipment and Transportation
Headspace Maintenance for Inert- Yes Need to consider if 100% of containers must be analyzed
gas Overlay Product on-line for headspace
228 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 243 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Cold-storage Performance and Yes, product will be stored cold; product Ambient filling is acceptable
Maintenance of Integrity on Cold- is not temperature-sensitive during
Integrity of primary packaging under storage conditions
storage Conditions below the filling, but for shelf life, it is refrigerated
required at desired storage and shipping temperatures by
Material Properties (i.e., glass
the pharmaceutical manufacturer
transition temperature) for
Elastomers
21.1.3 Case 1: Specific Filling Requirements (e.g., headspace, deaeration)
Table 21.1.3-1 provides guidance on specific filling requirement considerations. Refer to Section 2.0 and Section 7.0 for additional information.
Table 21.1.3-1 Case 1: Specific Filling Requirements (e.g., headspace, deaeration)
Consideration Determination Design Implication
What inert gas will be used? Nitrogen Utility to be available; location to be determined based on subsequent answers
When will gas be applied?
Pre-gassing No Inert gas to be located at plunger-insertion station
Gassing during filling No
Post-fill gassing No
Gassing during closing Yes
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 229

--- PDF Page 244 ---
Consideration Determination Design Implication
Will vacuum be applied?
For removal of bubble at tip at the No Size of bubble at tip not critical for this application
initiation of filling
For deaeration purposes during No None; Although product has a foaming tendency, this can be adequately controlled
filling through fill curve (e.g., start, stop, acceleration) adjustments
For removal of air in headspace Yes Assists in air removal at the point of adding the inert gas
before inert-gas purge
How will Stopper-Setting be performed?
If gassing is performed, can vent Yes Gas bubble/air-gap size not critical, and plunger material is robust (i.e., no tendency to
tube be used for stopper- setting? wrinkle)
If no gassing is performed, can vent N/A Not applicable as gassing is required for this product
tube be used for stopper- setting?
Will vacuum stopper-setting be No No wrinkling tendency, therefore, vacuum short-vent tube is not required (Note that
performed with short vent tube? future use of plastic syringes with a silicone-free stopper may make this important to
consider)
Will a vacuum stopper-setting be No Stopper position is not so deep; further, there is not a large volume of gas to be
performed with a long vent tube? removed during stopper-setting (Note that future use of plastic syringes with a silicone-
free stopper may make this important to consider)
Will a vacuum bell be used? No Product is low viscosity, so a vacuum bell is not called for
230 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 245 ---
21.1.4 Case 1: Requirements for Multi-container/Multi-volume/Multi-product Filling
Table 21.1.4-1 provides guidance regarding multi-container/multi-volume/multi-product filling requirements. Refer to Section 1.0, Section 2.0 and
Section 5.0 for additional information.
Table 21.1.4-1 Case 1: Requirements for Multi-container/Multi-volume/Multi-product Filling
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Additional Containers, Closures, and Sizes to be Filled on the Same Line
1 – 3 mL Syringe, 3 mL Luer Lock, Tub and nest configuration should also be known to fully understand change-part needs (e.g.,
syringe round flange, Supplier Name, conveyance, tub height, which might affect lid and lid-liner removal, number of filling lanes
Drawing #123 needed).
1 mL-long Plunger, 1 mL-long, coated, No impact to current design if coating is compatible with closure sorting-system and insertion
plunger Supplier Name, Drawing #456 station (e.g., siliconized vs. non-siliconized) and if the number of ribs and dimensions on the
stopper are consistent with the current plunger (or have been subject to testing).
1 – 3 mL Plunger, 1–3 mL, coated, Evaluation of dimensional differences in parts on sorting-system change parts and insertion
plunger Supplier Name, Drawing # 789 station required.
Additional Fill Volume / Product Requirements Anticipated for the Containers and Closures
1 mL-long 0.2 mL fill monoclonal Fill volumes to be considered for selected filling technology, including whether change parts will
syringe antibody be required for the various volumetric differences. Product attributes should be assessed to
determine if any additional controls are required (e.g., viscosity, foam, shear-force-sensitivity,
oxygen-sensitivity, light-sensitivity, metal-sensitivity).
1 mL-long 1 mL fill peptide
syringe
1 – 3 mL 1 mL fill product uncertain
1 – 3 mL 3 mL fill NaCl
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 231

--- PDF Page 246 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Required Level of Flexibility for Future Products (Base Case: 1 mL-Long Nested Glass Syringes)
Container Nested, precapped cartridges Understanding whether future product presentations will also be nested or will include bulk-
Flexibility possible in future container-handling is important to the line footprint and design. When using only nested,
glassware washer and depyrogenation tunnels are not needed. Sensor filling may be required
for cartridges, which depending on the filler may require denesting (see Section 5.0). When
considering a change, like adding cartridges, this could result in the need for sensor-filling or the
application of vacuum for the removal of air bubbles at the tip and for vacuum-stoppering (see
Section 7.0).
Container Plastic syringes possible in Filling line should be provided with deionization capabilities for reducing static charge.
Material future Differences in tub height might influence lid and lid-liner removal station. Vacuum might be
Flexibility needed for setting the plunger in the plastic syringes, which might influence current system to
be vacuum-assisted vent-tube rather than vent-tube alone or, alternatively, might permit the
full change out of the stopper-setting system for the plastic syringes.
Alternative 2.25 mL and 5 mL syringes in Ensure that the format parts consider the range of sizes (diameters, lengths, tub and nest
Sizes future dimensions) to be filled and whether the format parts will be sourced with the initial purchase,
or only when needed.
Filling Identify need based on With some systems, it may be possible to add a different filling technology on the same
Technology intended range of filling machine-base if required for different products and/or different packaging configurations (e.g.,
Flexibility activities and product types rotary piston pumps with peristaltic pumps as the alternate filler when needed). While design
with alternate filling technologies can be more complex than a single system, the knowledge
that this will be a future requirement is a critical element to the initial filling line and isolator or
restricted access barrier system (RABS) design.
232 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 247 ---
21.1.5 Anticipated Batch Sizes and Operating Practices
Table 21.1.5-1 outlines typical batch parameters to consider. Refer to Section 1.0 and Section 5.0 for additional information.
Table 21.1.5-1 Case 1: Anticipated Batch Sizes and Operating Practices
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Batch Sizes
100-liter Batch Size 500,000 syringes at 0.2 mL fill volume 50,000 syringes per lane maximum each batch if using a 10-lane
100,000 syringes at 1.0 mL fill volume filler (the number of cycles is needed to assess potential wear-
33,300 syringes at 3.0 mL fill volume part effects on the filling pathway).
500-liter Batch Size 2.5 MM syringes at 0.2 mL fill 250,000 syringes per lane maximum each batch if using a 10-lane
500,000 syringes at 1.0 mL fill volume filler (the number of cycles is needed to assess potential wear-
166,700 syringes at 3.0 mL fill volume part effects on the filling pathway) .
Filler will need to be capable of long, stable run times; if using PP,
DP; tubing/diaphragm longevity may be an issue.
Campaign Criteria (and their influence on batch throughput)
Campaign Strategy Yes, 5 batch maximum per campaign When considering the maximum number of batches possible per
week, consider system longevity and ensure that it is clear
(i.e., will multiple batches be
whether the same primary packaging will be used for all 5
campaigned to reduce batches. Using different packaging may result in changeover
changeover time?) delays.
Length of Campaign 10 days At line speed and batch size, this represents 5 batches with
flexibility for normal downtime and change of fluid path between
batches.
Filling-path Management Replace filling-path (i.e., direct Filling-path must be fully disposable or be clean-in-place (CIP)/
product-contact parts) with each sterilize-in-place (SIP)-capable.
batch
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 233

--- PDF Page 248 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Container–closure Required to sterilize indirect product- Product utilizes the same container–closure and can be filled in
Management contact parts before each campaign the same campaign; between batches, no changeover is required.
Environmental Monitoring To be performed on each batch Adequate EM materials must be located inside the filling line at
within the campaign the start of the campaign or be able to be transferred within the
line between batches (e.g., rapid transfer chamber or rapid
transfer port (RTP) canister).
Interventions Aseptic Process Simulation (APS) Filling machine must be designed to limit interventions and
must be designed to include a should limit any interventions that would require line clearance;
representative (and possibly any intervention must be designed to utilize good aseptic
bracketed) number and type of technique.
interventions during the campaign
Holding Times Length of campaign must Consideration should be given to bulk hold times to ensure that
accommodate standard disruptions they support the campaign strategy with batches available on
demand but withstand possible delays incurred on changeover
between batches or normal process upsets.
Batch Failure Mode Recovery time after loss of batch to The filling system (and product supply tubing/lines) should be
be kept to a minimum designed both to minimize loss upon line repreparation, as well as
provide redundancy for backup product supply.
APS Strategy for Campaigns Must comply with all guidelines (e.g., Machine build must comply with the desired campaign strategy.
EU GMP Annex 1, FDA Aseptic
Processing)
234 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 249 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
100% IPC for Dose Weight No In nested fillers, 100% IPC drastically reduces the fill rate (100s
per hour rather than 100s per minute for non-100% IPC fills).
Therefore, a suitable frequency must be determined for the
statistical IPC. However, for expensive products, 100% IPC may
be more valuable at conserving product than the gains achieved
by higher-speed filling. (Note: If higher speed and 100% IPC are
both requirements, then the syringes must be de-nested and
again re-nested after filling and weight check are complete. This is
not a nest filler.)
Operating Criteria (and their influence on batch throughput)
Staffing Level 24/7 Verify whether maximum processing time per batch will be
accommodated in a single day and number of batches per week
(i.e., will the facility be
possible with changeover.
operated 16/5, 24/5, or 24/7
hours per day/days per week?)
Shutdown Allowances Two planned two-week shutdowns: Verify whether the selected technology maintenance and
Winter and Summer recalibration can be accommodated in the planned shutdowns.
(i.e., how many days per year
Also, consider the likely duration for technology transfer for new
will the line be operated, products, execution of APS, etc., relative to the number of
accounting for such factors as batches required to be filled each year on top of these
shutdowns, APS, testing, interruptions.
technical studies,
recapitalization, and changes?)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 235

--- PDF Page 250 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Changeover Time 32 hours between campaigns 4 hours Use these values to determine annualized throughput on the line.
between batches within a campaign
(i.e., what amount of time is With the time between batches for a campaign, ensure that this
required between campaigns time accounts for emptying the bulk, clearing the line, closing the
batch documentation, addressing any needed changeover,
and between batches within a
changeover of the fluid pathway, filter-path integrity-testing,
campaign, measured from the
closeout of EM samples. All tasks should be accounted for and
last good container to the first
considered in this time, as this will influence the possible number
good container?)
of batches within the campaign period that is planned.
% Yield Expected 98% Yield 2–4% scrap is typical experience, inclusive of all rejection causes
(e.g., filter flush, filler priming, end of aseptic-fill unit operation,
(i.e., amount of scrap produced 2% Scrap
intervention clearance).
on average)
% Line Efficiency 85% Desired 75% minimum target; More than 80% is possible, but each
additional percentage-point requires significant effort to achieve.
(i.e., during filling operations,
This parameter is often less about the equipment design and
what is the operational “up more on the expertise of the operators on setup, as well as
time” for the line?) appropriate sensors and detection to improve the operational
efficiency without down-time. Interruptions during small batches
will have an outsized influence on this parameter.
% Facility Efficiency 70 – 80% Amount includes: needed maintenance, recalibration, shutdowns
for facility maintenance, and APS.
(i.e., what are the % available
hours in a year, during what %
is it expected that the line
operates within that range to
achieve the intended
production targets)
236 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 251 ---
21.1.6 Comparison of Requirements to Filling System Capabilities
Now that some of the preliminary design requirements for the product and its intended packaging have been defined, the requirements can be
compared to the filling-system capabilities and attributes as described in Section 2.0. Comparison of the filling system-capabilities to the product
needs, for this example, leads to the following evaluative matrix in Table 21.1.6-1. Refer to Section 2.0 and Section 4.0 for additional information.
Table 21.1.6-1 Case 1: Comparison of Product Requirements to Filling System Capabilities
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump (DP)
Pump (RPP)
Filling Range
0.2 mL future fill-volume
at lower end of capability
Viscosity Range
(low viscosity for this
product)
Product Compatibility
(proteins and peptides
(future)) not ideal for shear-
sensitive products
Diving Needle Capable
to Reduce Foaming
Dynamic Fill Curve
(e.g., start/stop,
less flexibility for dynamic-
acceleration) to fill curve due to pressure
Reduce Roaming control at vessel
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 237

--- PDF Page 252 ---
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump (DP)
Pump (RPP)
Range of Fill Volumes
may require different requires different generally, requires different
pump heads for wide pump-sets for orifices and fluid pathway to
ranges of fill but not a different fill-volumes maintain accuracy across
problem for stated the range
range
Drip Control
true suck-back not available;
rapid pinch-valve closure
may be sufficient for some
fluids
Vacuum to Reduce
Bubble at Tip
vacuum with PP vacuum with TP technology
(future for cartridges)
technology is not typical is not typical
Dosing Accuracy
Dosing Accuracy
Stability Across Run
statistical IPC required statistical IPC statistical IPC required statistical IPC required
recommended;
dosing accuracy very
stable
238 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 253 ---
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump (DP)
Pump (RPP)
Single-Use (SU) Fluid
Pathway
rare (but possible) due possible but may be
to pump expense expensive
Clean-In-Place
(CIP)/Sterilize-In-Place
(SIP) Execution rare (but possible); often
SU instead
Stability Over Long
Batches/Number of
Cycles hose-wear a detriment hose-wear at pinch-point diaphragm wear can be a
can be a minor minor consideration but
consideration; processor usually only after
required for varying head excessive operation
pressure
Campaign
Compatibility
hose wear must be filling equipment can single-point hose-wear diaphragm-wear must be
considered be replaced must be considered considered
Execution Outside
Isolator or RABS
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 239

--- PDF Page 254 ---
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump (DP)
Pump (RPP)
Speed of Setup
Changeover
requires aseptic setup requires aseptic setup or requires aseptic setup,
or CIP/SIP CIP/SIP, but fluid path is CIP/SIP, or single-use
reduced compared to RPP (which is the fastest
changeover)
Nested Syringes
Nested Precrimped
Cartridges (future)
Sensor-Filling
Compatible (future)
sensor-filling not sensor-filling not sensor-filling not generally sensor-filling not
generally compatible generally compatible compatible with nest fillers generally compatible with
with nest fillers with nest fillers nest fillers
= available or acceptable
= not available or not acceptable
Based on the above chart for the Comparison of Needs to Filling System Capabilities, the product characteristics make PP, TP, and DP the leading
candidates as shear-sensitivity of the product may preclude RPP.
240 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 255 ---
PP, TP, and DP are well-matched. Decision-making may come down to whether smaller volume fills will be
required in the future (ruling out DP, which is at the lower end of its capability at around 0.2 mL), or
whether single-use (SU) technology (favoring PP and DP) or CIP/SIP are preferred (favoring TP and DP). If
the foaming with the product is severe and SU technology is the desire, then PP will be the strongest
contender, as long as the number of cycles between tubing changeout is managed to be within the
capabilities of the selected tubing and that this works with the intended batch sizes.
21.1.7 Other Design Elements for Consideration
There are a number of other design decisions that will impact the layout and operation of the filling line,
such as:
• Operator Interface with the line (Section 8.0)
• Supply of Components (Section 9.0 and Section 10.0)
• Product Filtration, including location of filters, required number of filter elements, integrity testing
pre- and post-filling (Section 11.0)
• Filling Environment and Utilities (Section 14.0 and Section 15.0)
Generally, these decisions should be made as part of the filling-line specification process as they may affect
costs and can influence placement of equipment; however, these are generally less of a direct impact on the
selection of the filling technology itself.
21.2 Case 2: Large Volume Parenteral—Liquid in a Bottle
Specifications for Case 2 are detailed below:
• Product: blood-plasma protein product
• Filling Volume: 250 mL
• Container / Closure System: Bottle 250 IL
• Dosing System: to be determined
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 241

--- PDF Page 256 ---
21.2.1 Case 2: Product Characteristics
Table 21.2.1-1 provides details on product characteristic considerations. Refer to Section 1.0, Section 3.0 and Section 4.0 for additional information.
Table 21.2.1-1 Case 2: Product Characteristics
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Pharmaceutical Characteristics
Highly potent No None; no firm decision has been made to fill in an isolator (preferred) or on a
conventional RABS filling line; therefore, both possibilities will be explored.
Toxic No
OEL / OEB Level No classification
Product Biological or Physicochemical Requirements
Temperature-sensitive No Filled under ambient conditions
Oxygen-sensitive Yes Inert gas introduction must be considered at stoppering
Light-sensitive No None; no restrictions on lighting
Metal-sensitive No None; no restrictions on product-contact materials of construction
Silicone-sensitive No None; no restrictions on polymers and tubing
Chemical-physical Properties
Viscosity 25 mPa-s None; no restriction on filling technology based on viscosity; not high enough to create
an issue with selected technologies
242 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 257 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Liquid Product with Surface No None; no concern for dripping, therefore, no accommodation anticipated with the filling
Tension Less than Water needle or filling technology selection; Cylindrical needles acceptable
Solution or Suspension Solution No active agitation or recirculation required for filling machine or intermediate vessel
Flammable or Explosive No None; NEMA/ATEX cabinetry not required for flammable; explosion-proof operation
Shear-Sensitive Yes To be verified for future products, different dosing systems could be utilized if future
products are not shear sensitive.
Foaming Tendency Yes Filling curve (e.g., start, stop, acceleration) to be carefully designed; level of filling start,
filling end, and careful needle movement must be incorporated to prevent foam
generation.
21.2.2 Case 2: Container–Closure Characteristics
Table 21.2.2-1 provides details on container-closure characteristic considerations. Refer to Section 1.0, Section 6.0 and Section 7.0 for additional
information.
Table 21.2.2-1 Case 2: Container–Closure Characteristics
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Pharmaceutical Primary Packaging Characteristics
Container (vial type, 250 IL, ISO 8536-1, D=68 mm, Details inform equipment designers of the needed filling height and filling
dimensions, drawing) H=125 mm, weight 170 g, controls for the specific syringe design.
Supplier Name, Drawing #123
Stopper (stopper type, 32 mm infusion stopper, (liquid Details inform equipment designers of the requirement for the sorting-
drawing, dimension, and stopper), Supplier Name, Drawing system bowl and tracks.
weight) #456
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 243

--- PDF Page 258 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Tub (tub type, drawing, N/A Will use traditional bulk line that will receive glass that is washed and
dimension) depyrogenated in-line.
Nest (nest type, drawing, N/A Will use traditional bulk line that will receive glass that is washed and
dimension) depyrogenated in-line.
Tub Wrapping Details N/A Will use traditional bulk line that will receive glass that is washed and
(bag, lid, and liner) depyrogenated in-line.
Assembly Drawing Not Required Not required if individual component drawings are provided for this
container–closure system.
Components (stacked Supplier Name Details inform equipment supplier of assembled dimensional requirements
dimensional tolerances) and the needed tolerance flexibility for the handling of components and
Drawing #789
parts.
Will also identify tolerances associated with roundness control.
Inherent-Component To be confirmed by None; Ensures a container system can provide the appropriate level of
Container– Closure pharmaceutical firm tightness for the intended application, for instance, maintaining a modified
Integrity (CCI) Development Report 12345 headspace throughout the shelf life. Important elements are correct
stopper and cap fit, including that cap cannot be rotated after crimping,
ensuring crimping results in no damage to neck of container.
Crimp Seal Specifications 32 mm Flip Seal Length of For crimp seal, may also determine placement and variability permitted in
aluminum skirt = 13 mm crimp-seal ink or laser jet labeling to ensure fit and legibility.
Supplier Name
Drawing #101
Intended Capping Force To be confirmed by After parameter-setting, on-line evaluation will be through visual inspection
or Residual Seal Force pharmaceutical firm and manual control. CCI test will be confirmed for each batch.
Development Report 121212
244 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 259 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Multi-puncture Closures N/A SU product None
Considerations (to limit
risk of microbial ingress or
product leakage between
doses)
Plunger Insertion Depth N/A for vials/bottles None
and Critical Bubble-size to
Support Maintenance of
Sterility during Shipment
and Transportation
Headspace Maintenance Yes Need to consider if 100% of containers must be analyzed on-line for
for Inert-gas Overlay headspace
Product
Cold-storage Performance No None
and Maintenance of
Integrity (e.g., glass
transition temperature) on
Cold-storage Conditions
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 245

--- PDF Page 260 ---
21.2.3 Case 2: Specific Filling Requirements (e.g., headspace, deaeration)
Table 21.2.3-1 provides guidance on specific filling requirement considerations. See Section 2.0 and Section 7.0 for additional information.
Table 21.2.3-1 Case 2: Specific Filling Requirements (e.g., headspace, deaeration)
Consideration Determination Design Implication
What inert gas will be used? Nitrogen Utility to be available; location to be determined based on subsequent answers.
When will gas be applied?
Pre-gassing No Inert gas to be located at stopper-insertion station; specification <4% O2 in
headspace.
Gassing During Filling No
Post-fill Gassing No
Gassing During Closing Yes
Will vacuum be applied?
For removal of bubble at tip at the N/A for vials/ None
initiation of filling bottles
For deaeration purposes during filling No None; although product has a foaming tendency this can be adequately controlled
through fill curve (e.g., start, stop, acceleration) adjustments.
For removal of air in headspace Yes Assists in air removal at the point of adding the inert gas.
before inert-gas purge
Will vacuum insertion or mechanical Mechanical Mechanical stopper-insertion is sufficient for the designated stopper and container;
insertion be used for stopper- development reports from line trials must demonstrate that there is limited risk of
setting? pop-off of the stoppers after insertion.
246 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 261 ---
21.2.4 Case 2: Requirements for Multi-container/Multi-volume/Multi-product Filling
Table 21.2.4-1 provides guidance regarding multi-container/multi-volume/multi-product filling requirements. Refer to Section 1.0 and Section 2.0
for additional information.
Table 21.2.4-1 Case 2: Requirements for Multi-container/Multi-volume/Multi-product Filling
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Additional containers, closures, and sizes to be filled on the same line
50 IL 50 IL, Supplier Name, Drawing #123 Dimensions should be fully understood in order to design appropriate
conveyance flexibility and change parts (e.g., feed screws, star wheels, walking
rakes/beams) As above, evaluation of dimensional differences in parts on
250 IL 250 IL, Supplier Name, Drawing
sorting-system change-parts and insertion station required.
#456
500 IL 500 IL, Supplier Name, Drawing
#789
32 mm 32 mm, Supplier Name, Drawing
Lyophilization #101
Stopper
Additional fill volume / product requirements anticipated for the containers and closures
50 mL Fill Freeze-dried blood plasma protein Fill volumes to be considered for selected filling technology, including whether
change-parts will be required for the various volumetric differences Product
attributes for each product are identical, therefore, no additional sensitivities
70 mL Fill Blood plasma protein solution
(e.g., shear, oxygen, metal) are to be considered.
200 mL Fill
250 mL Fill
500 mL Fill
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 247

--- PDF Page 262 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Required level of flexibility for future products (Base Case: 250 mL vial, solution)
Container Bulk production with on-line Bulk-container handling will require glassware washer and tunnel, which will
Flexibility washing and depyrogenation affect line footprint. No anticipated future need for ready to use (RTU)
glassware.
Container Material All foreseen containers to be glass No anticipated adaptations due to materials of construction foreseen
Flexibility
Alternative Sizes Range from 50 IL to 500 IL Ensure that the format parts consider the range of sizes (diameters, height) to be
filled and whether the format parts will be sourced with the initial purchase, or
only when needed.
All vials indicated are molded glass infusion bottles (IL). If tubing vials (R) or
injection vials (H) were to be filled in the future, additional format parts would be
required due to different weights, diameters/tolerances, different stopper-
setting requirements, and differences in neck/shoulder for crimp sealing.
Extreme variability in glass components could also affect line speeds at the
extreme sizes.
Filling Technology Identify need-based on intended With some systems, it may be possible to add a different filling technology on
Flexibility range of filling activities and product the same machine base if required for different products and/or different
types packaging configurations (e.g., rotary piston pumps with peristaltic pumps as the
alternate filler when needed). While design with alternate filling technologies can
be more complex than a single system, the knowledge that this will be a future
requirement is a critical element to the initial filling line and isolator or RABS
design.
With the elements of this case, the similarity of the product, containers, and
closures signal that a separate technology will not be needed unless there is a
plan for a future product not described here.
248 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 263 ---
21.2.5 Case 2: Anticipated Batch Sizes and Operating Practices
Table 21.2.5-1 outlines typical batch parameters to consider. Refer to Section 1.0, Section 3.0, and Section 4.0 for additional information.
Table 21.2.5-1 Case 2: Anticipated Batch Sizes and Operating Practices
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Batch Sizes
1000-liter Batch Size 250 mL fill (initial) Note that the depyrogenation tunnel will likely be rate-limiting
for the line speed for this size glassware regardless of filler
10,000 units per batch
design; therefore, increasing the number of fill heads may not
50 mL – 500 mL (future) increase the line output.
20,000 to 4,000 units per batch 1,000 to 25,000 vials per lane maximum each batch if using a 4-
lane filler (the number of cycles is needed to assess potential
wear-part effects on the filling pathway).
For the smallest batch sizes with the larger fill volumes, the filler
4000-liter Batch Size 250 mL fill (initial)
may have one or more station turned off. Since all of the stations
40,000 units per batch will not be required to operate in order to match maximum
tunnel line-speed, turning off one or more fill heads will conserve
50 mL – 500 mL (future)
product and reduce line losses. Alternatively, two stations may
80,000 to 8,000 units per batch each be used to provide half the fill volume to the container. This
enables the use of smaller filling needles, which can reduce
dripping.
5000-liter Batch Size 250 mL fill (initial)
Filling system will need to be capable of long, stable run times; if
50,000 units per batch using PP or DP, tubing/diaphragm longevity may be an issue for
the largest batch sizes.
50 mL – 500 mL (future)
100,000 to 10,000 units per batch
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 249

--- PDF Page 264 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Campaign Criteria (and their influence on batch throughput)
Campaign Strategy (i.e., will Yes Ensure that changeover time makes sense for small batch sizes
multiple batches be campaigned to that are planned.
reduce changeover time)
Use of campaigns may drive the determination towards isolators
for greater SA (rather than RABS).
Length of Campaign 5 days At the predicted line speeds and batch size, this represents 2 – 3
batches per day with 3 – 4 filling days.
Filling Path Management Complete changeover between Filling-path must be fully disposable or be CIP/SIP capable;
batches of the campaign duration of typical CIP/SIP cycle to be assessed to determine if it
is compatible with required line throughput. If not, disposable
will be required.
Container–Closure Management Required to sterilize indirect Between batches, no changeover is required. If automated
product-contact parts before each adjustable rakes are available, different container sizes may be
campaign accommodated.
Environmental Monitoring (EM) To be performed on each batch of Adequate EM materials must be located inside of the filling line
the campaign at the start of the campaign or be able to be transferred within
the line between batches (e.g., rapid transfer chamber or RTP
canister)
Interventions Aseptic Process Simulation (APS) Filling machine must be designed to limit interventions and
must be designed to include a should limit any interventions that would require line clearance.
representative (and possibly Any intervention must be designed to utilize good aseptic
bracketed) number and type of technique.
interventions during the campaign
250 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 265 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Holding Times Hold times to consider intended Bulk hold times should ensure that batches are available on
operation of 16/5 to permit hold- demand after any possible delays are incurred on changeover
over nonoperational shift between batches or normal process upsets, as well as for the
hold times during the normal operational cadence of 16 working
hours per day.
Batch Failure Mode Recovery time after loss of batch The filling system (and product-supply tubing/lines) should be
to be kept to a minimum designed both to minimize loss upon line repreparation, as well
as provide redundancy for backup product supply.
APS Strategy for Campaigns Must comply with all guidelines Machine build must comply with the desired campaign strategy.
(EU GMP Annex 1, FDA Aseptic
Processing)
100% IPC for Dose Weight Yes Due to cost of product, constant final dosing (see Section 5.0) is
preferred. 100% IPC will also make it possible to conserve more
vials from priming and end of the aseptic fill-unit operation as
well.
Operating Criteria (and their influence on batch throughput)
Staffing Level 16/5 Verify whether the number of batches produced per week,
including change over time will meet production targets at
(i.e., will the facility be operated
intended bulk/filled-unit volumes.
16/5, 24/5, or 24/7 hours per day
/ days per week?)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 251

--- PDF Page 266 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Shutdown Allowances Two planned two-week Verify whether the selected technology maintenance and re-
shutdowns: Winter and Summer calibration can be accommodated in the planned shutdowns.
(i.e., how many days per year will
Also, consider the likely duration for technology transfer for new
the line be operated, accounting products, execution of APS, etc., relative to the number of
for such factors as shutdowns, batches required to be filled each year on top of these
APS, testing, technical studies, interruptions.
recapitalization, and changes)
Changeover Time 32 hours between campaigns Use these values to determine annualized throughput on the
line.
(i.e., what amount of time is 4 hours between batches within a
required between campaigns and campaign With the time between batches for a campaign, ensure that this
time accounts for emptying the bulk, clearing the line, closing the
between batches within a
batch documentation, addressing any needed changeover,
campaign, measured from the last
changeover of the fluid-pathway, filter-path integrity testing,
good container to the first good
closeout of EM samples, etc. All tasks should be accounted for
container?)
and considered in this time as this will influence the possible
number of batches within the campaign period that is planned.
% Yield Expected 98% Yield 2 – 4% scrap typical experience inclusive of all rejection causes
(e.g., filter flush, filler priming, end of aseptic filling-unit operation,
(i.e., amount of scrap produced on 2% Scrap
intervention clearance)
average)
% Line Efficiency 85% Desired 75% minimum target; more than 80% is possible, but each
additional percentage-point requires significant effort to achieve.
(i.e., during filling operations what
This parameter is often less about the equipment design and
is the operational “up-time” for the more on the expertise of the operators on setup, as well as
line?) appropriate sensors and detection to improve the operational
efficiency without down-time. Interruptions during small batches
will have an outsized influence on this parameter.
252 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 267 ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
% Facility Efficiency 70 – 80% Amount includes needed maintenance, recalibration, shutdowns
for facility maintenance, APS
(i.e., what are the % available hours
in a year, during what % is it
expected that the line operates
within that range to achieve the
intended production targets?)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 253

--- PDF Page 268 ---
21.2.6 Case 2: Comparison of Requirements to Filling System Capabilities
Now that some of the preliminary design requirements for the product and its intended packaging have been defined, the requirements can be
compared to the filling system capabilities and attributes as described in Section 2.0. Comparison of the filling system capabilities to the product
needs for this example leads to the following evaluative matrix in Table 21.2.6-1. Refer to Section 2.0 and Section 4.0 for additional information.
Table 21.2.6-1 Case 2: Comparison of Requirements to Filling System Capabilities
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump
(PP) (RPP) (DP)
Filling Range
pump size prohibitive for pump size prohibitive
the largest volumes; for the largest volumes;
would require multi- would require multi-
stroke operation stroke operation
Viscosity Range (low
viscosity for this
product)
Product Compatibility
(proteins)
not ideal for shear-
sensitive products
Diving Needle Capable
to Reduce Foaming
Dynamic Fill Curve (e.g.,
start/stop, acceleration)
to Reduce Foaming less flexibility for dynamic
fill curve due to pressure
control at vessel
254 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 269 ---
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump
(PP) (RPP) (DP)
Range of Fill Volumes
will require different requires different pump will require different orifices
pump heads for sets for different fill and fluid pathway to
wide ranges of fill volumes maintain accuracy across
volumes the range
Drip Control
viscosity higher than water
will reduce likelihood to
drip, and rapid closure of
pinch-valve is likely to be
sufficient
Dosing Accuracy
very accurate, but
volume of fill
contraindicates this
technology
Dosing Accuracy
Stability Across Run
100% IPC planned statistical IPC adequate, 100% IPC planned 100% IPC planned
dosing accuracy very
stable
Single-Use (SU) Fluid
Pathway
rare (but possible) due to possible but may be
pump expense expensive
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 255

--- PDF Page 270 ---
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump
(PP) (RPP) (DP)
Clean-In-Place
(CIP)/Sterilize-In-Place
(SIP) Execution rare (but possible);
often SU instead
Stability Over Long
Batches/Number of
Cycles hose wear a hose wear at pinch point diaphragm wear can be
detriment, but can be a minor a minor consideration
relatively modest consideration; processor but usually only after
batch sizes make required for varying head excessive operation
this suitable pressure
Campaign Compatibility
hose wear must be filling equipment can be single-point hose-wear diaphragm-wear must
considered replaced must be considered be considered
Execution Outside
Isolator or Restricted
Access Barrier System
(RABS)
Speed of Setup
Changeover
requires aseptic setup or requires aseptic setup or requires aseptic setup,
CIP/SIP CIP/SIP, but fluid path is CIP/SIP, or SU (which is
reduced compared to RPP the fastest changeover)
= available or acceptable
= not available or not acceptable
256 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 271 ---
Based on the above chart, the product characteristics make PP and TP the leading candidates, as planned fill
volumes and shear-sensitivity of the product may preclude RPP (both volume and shear) and DP (volume
alone).
PP and TP are well-matched. Decision-making may come down to whether SU technology (favoring PP) or
CIP/SIP are preferred (favoring TP). That decision may be driven by the changeover time with each, as the
modest batch sizes will result in frequent changeover of the fluid pathway within the campaigns. If the
foaming with the product is severe and SU technology is the desire, then PP will be the strongest contender
if the cost of SU is not prohibitive based on the planned number of batches.
21.2.7 Other Design Elements for Consideration
There are a number of other design decisions that will impact the layout and operation of the filling line,
such as:
• Operator Interface with the line (Section 8.0)
• Supply of Components (Section 9.0 and Section 10.0)
• Product Filtration, including location of filters, required number of filter elements, integrity-testing
pre- and post-filling (Section 11.0)
• Filling Environment and Utilities (Section 14.0 and Section 15.0)
Generally, these decisions should be made as part of the filling-line specification process as they may affect
costs and can influence placement of equipment; however, these are generally less of a direct impact on the
selection of the filling technology itself.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 257

--- PDF Page 272 ---
22.0 Relevant Vendor and Supplier Resources
The following paid advertisements are presented to the reader as potential supplemental resources which
may aid in execution or fulfillment of the concepts, material, and information presented herein.
The inclusion of these resources does not imply any endorsement or preference on part of PDA or the
authors of this technical document.
258 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 273 ---
// Pharmaceutical production of the future –
Maximum safety and highest quality through
gloveless aseptic production. ///
GENEX: The next generation for aseptic production.
GENEX is a groundbreaking machine concept designed specifically for small and medium batch production.
This innovative system redefines the future of pharmaceutical production. With GENEX, Bausch+Ströbel has
developed an innovative approach that significantly reduces the risk of contamination and sets new safety
standards in aseptic processing. The fully automated GENEX filling and packaging system utilizes robot
technology, automating size changes and environmental monitoring while ensuring full compliance with
GMP regulations. GENEX is the key to tomorrow’s pharmaceutical production, combining the highest safety
standards and product quality.
GENEX Features
+ Scale out + Zero Reject Principle
+ Next Level Hygienic Design + GMP, ANNEX 1 Conforming machine design
+ Eliminate Human Intervention + Short decontominations cycle
+ Processing Various Packaging Materials + Integrated System
BAUSCH+STRÖBEL | 74532 Ilshofen | Germany

--- PDF Page 274 ---
Filling and closing of liquid
pharmaceuticals from small
batch to high speed. More
mation
infor
groninger is a globally recognized leader in the design and manufacture of advanced filling and
closing equipment for the pharmaceutical industry. With decades of specialized expertise, we
deliver engineered solutions that combine cutting-edge technology with precision, reliability,
and compliance. Renowned for our commitment to innovation and collaborative development,
we offer a comprehensive portfolio ranging from highly customized equipment to standardized
line concepts for series production.
Visions
We fill with life
www.groninger-group.com

--- PDF Page 275 ---
S I N G L E D E T E C T I O N
S I N G L E R E J E C T I O N
High-speed advanced robotic processing
for Ready-To-Use components.
Meet Injecta 36 with its new equipment, the only solution now available for RTU Nebula
components ensuring the highest fill-finish processing speeds and topmost
control with Detecta, the ultimate high-speed inspection unit. Detecta’s robotic
accuracy in checking for plunger presence and rejecting single non-conformities
guarantees the safest aseptic automation technology with Nebula, the high-speed
Detecta
decontamination tunnel.
Accelerate your aseptic.
ima.it/pharma

--- PDF Page 276 ---
Your home for turnkey
Fully integrated solutions from one partner:
Sterile filling, containment and freeze-drying
Aseptic vial filling
Aseptic filling solutions as part
systems for bulk
of our turnkey approach
⚪ Flexible filling of vials, syringes and cartridges
⚪ Smart solutions for filling different products:
liquid, viscos and high potent
Filling of pre-filled syringes,
⚪ Different dosing / combi-dosing systems
vials and cartridges
according to product requirements
⚪ Technologies for maximum product yield
and minimizing product loss
⚪ Innovative technologies to keep every product
safe, sterile and in excellent quality
⚪ Options for different product path handling: Visit our website Sensor filling of cartridges
CIP/SIP, single-use, autoclavable
⚪ Decades of experience in the aseptic and
sterile filling of pharmaceutical products
OPTIMA pharma GmbH | 74523 Schwaebisch Hall | Germany | pharma@optima-packaging.com | www.optima-packaging.com/pharma

--- PDF Page 277 ---
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication in the purchase.
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
• Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the
individual use of an Authorized User
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
• Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication
• Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to
anyone other than an Authorized User
• Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites,
either available on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license
from PDA, Inc.
• Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA
Electronic Publication
• Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the
PDA Electronic Publication
• Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA
Electronic Publication or its content
• Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk
reproduction or distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial
purpose
• Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
including any texts or graphics
• Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright
information or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication
• Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material
To License or purchase Reprints
• Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a
fee.
• To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
• Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.
To order reprints, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.

--- PDF Page 278 ---
Manufacturing Technology Guide No.1: Aseptic Filling, Engineering, and Operation
About PDA Technical Documents
PDA Technical Documents are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Teams (listed on
inside front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the
pharmaceutical/biopharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. The viewpoints and
strategies presented in this document are those of the authors as independent subject matter experts and do
not necessarily represent the policies and practices of their respective companies.
While in development, PDA technical documents are subjected to a global review by PDA members and
other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. Comments from the global review are then
considered by the authoring Team during the preparation of the final working draft. The level of expertise of
the Team and those participating in the global review ensure a broad perspective reflecting best thinking and
practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board(s) that sanctioned the project. PDA’s
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products Advisory Board,
Biopharmaceutical Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality Advisory Board. Following this
stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and determines whether or not to
publish the document as an official PDA Technical Document.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Document is of the highest quality, all readers are
encouraged to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or
mistakes that might be found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org.
Special Acknowledgement
PDA and the authors would like to thank groninger & co. gmbh for their generous contribution of multiple
images for use in this Manufacturing Technology Guide.
Peer Reviewers
PDA thanks the following peer reviewers for lending their time and expertise to ensure the quality and
relevance of this technical document:
James Agalloco Brent Lieffers
Agalloco & Associates Inc. Cytiva
Harold Baseman Vincent O’Shaughnessy
Valsource, Inc. Amgen
Rhonda Ezell Carlos R. Ortiz
Alkermes Eli Lilly & Company
Marc Glogovsky Jim Polarine Jr.
Valsource, Inc. STERIS Co.
David Jaworski Joahannes Rauschnabel, PhD
Jaworski Associates, LLC. Syntegon
Bruce Loxley Alexander Stoll, PhD
Glaxo Smith Kline Fresenius Kabi

--- PDF Page 279 ---
Manufacturing Technology Guide No.1: Aseptic Filling, Engineering, and Operation
Sanctioning Advisory Board: SAB
Chair Rishikesh Jaiwant
Ivy Louis Glaxo Smith Kline
VIENNI Training & Consulting LLP
Austin Kuo
Eli Lilly & Company
Vice-Chair
Ken Paddock Beth Kirschenheiter
Merz Therapeutics Bristol Myers Squibb
Frederic Ayers Gitte Letting
ValSource, Inc. Novo Nordisk A/S
Tiffany Baker Bruce Loxley
ValSource, Inc. Glaxo Smith Kline
Subrata Chakraborty, PhD Vincent O’Shaughnessy
Inophar Consulting & Training Amgen
Emily Cheah, PhD Julian Petersen
Charles River Laboratories groninger & co. gmbh
Thomas Damratoski Jim Polarine Jr.
Civica STERIS Co.
Cheryl Essex Jack Prior
Sanofi Sanofi
David Exline Alexander Stoll, PhD
Gateway Analytical, LLC. Fresenius Kabi
Mauro Giusti Kristin Valente
Eli Lilly Italia Merck & Co., Inc.
Gabriele Gori Rick Watson
Chiesi Farmaceutici, S.p.A. Merck & Co., Inc.

--- PDF Page 280 ---
Manufacturing Technology Guide No.1: Aseptic Filling, Engineering, and Operation
PDA Officers PDA Directors
Chair Marcia Baroni
Anil Sawant, PhD
Lisa Bennett
Chair-Elect
Melissa Seymour Cristiana Campa, PhD
Secretary Andrew Chang, PhD
Bettine Boltres, PhD
Cylia Chen Ooi, MA
Treasurer
Marc Glogovsky, MS
Emma Ramnarine, PhD
Andrew Hopkins
Immediate Past-Chair
Sue Schniepp
Ivy Louis, MBA
President
Amy McDaniel, PhD
Glenn E. Wright
Morten Munk
PDA Publication Brigitte Reuter-Haerle
Production and Editing
Osamu Shirokizawa
Jessie Lindner
Project Manager, SAB
Josh Eaton
Senior Director, Scientific
& Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris
Senior Director, Publishing
and Press Relations
Marilyn Foster
Technical Editor/Writer

--- PDF Page 281 ---
pda.org
PDA Global Headquarters
4350 East West Highway, Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
TEL +1 (301) 656-5900
FAX +1 (301) 986-0296
PDA Europe
Am Borsigturm 60
13507 Berlin, Germany
PDA Asia Pacific
20 Bendemeer Rd. #04-02 B S
Bendemeer Centre, Singapore
339914