Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
ANNEX 20*
QUALITY RISK MANAGEMENT
FOREWORD AND SCOPE OF APPLICATION
1. The new GMP Annex 20 corresponds to ICH Q9 guideline on Quality Risk
Management. It provides guidance on a systematic approach to quality risk
management facilitating compliance with GMP and other quality requirements. It
includes principles to be used and options for processes, methods and tools
which may be used when applying a formal quality risk management approach.
2. To ensure coherence, GMP Part I, Chapter 1 on Quality Management, has been
revised to include aspects of quality risk management within the quality system
framework. A similar revision is planned for Part II of the Guide. Other sections
of the GMP Guide may be adjusted to include aspects of quality risk management
in future broader revisions of those sections.
3. With the revision of the chapters on quality management in GMP Parts I and II
quality risk management becomes an integral part of a manufacturer’s quality
system. Annex 20 itself is not intended, however, to create any new regulatory
expectations; it provides an inventory of internationally acknowledged risk
management methods and tools together with a list of potential applications at
the discretion of manufacturers.
4. It is understood that the ICH Q9 guideline was primarily developed for quality risk
management of medicinal products for human use. With the implementation in
Annex 20 benefits of the guideline, such as processes, methods and tools for
quality risk management are also made available to the veterinary sector.
5. While the GMP guide is primarily addressed to manufacturers, the ICH Q9
guideline, has relevance for other quality guidelines and includes specific
sections for regulatory agencies.
6. However, for reasons of coherence and completeness, the ICH Q9 guideline has
been transferred completely into GMP Annex 20.
INTRODUCTION
7. Risk management principles are effectively utilized in many areas of business
and government including finance, insurance, occupational safety, public health,
pharmacovigilance, and by agencies regulating these industries. Although there
are some examples of the use of quality risk management in the pharmaceutical
industry today, they are limited and do not represent the full contributions that risk
management has to offer. In addition, the importance of quality systems has been
*
This Annex is voluntary.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -251- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
recognized in the pharmaceutical industry and it is becoming evident that quality
risk management is a valuable component of an effective quality system.
8. It is commonly understood that risk is defined as the combination of the probability
of occurrence of harm and the severity of that harm. However, achieving a shared
understanding of the application of risk management among diverse stakeholders
is difficult because each stakeholder might perceive different potential harms,
place a different probability on each harm occurring and attribute different
severities to each harm. In relation to pharmaceuticals, although there are a
variety of stakeholders, including patients and medical practitioners as well as
government and industry, the protection of the patient by managing the risk to
quality should be considered of prime importance.
9. The manufacturing and use of a drug (medicinal) product, including its
components, necessarily entail some degree of risk. The risk to its quality is just
one component of the overall risk. It is important to understand that product
quality should be maintained throughout the product lifecycle such that the
attributes that are important to the quality of the drug (medicinal) product remain
consistent with those used in the clinical studies. An effective quality risk
management approach can further ensure the high quality of the drug (medicinal)
product to the patient by providing a proactive means to identify and control
potential quality issues during development and manufacturing. Additionally, use
of quality risk management can improve the decision making if a quality problem
arises. Effective quality risk management can facilitate better and more informed
decisions, can provide regulators with greater assurance of a company’s ability
to deal with potential risks and can beneficially affect the extent and level of direct
regulatory oversight.
10. The purpose of this document is to offer a systematic approach to quality risk
management. It serves as a foundation or resource document that is independent
of, yet supports, other ICH Quality documents and complements existing quality
practices, requirements, standards, and guidelines within the pharmaceutical
industry and regulatory environment. It specifically provides guidance on the
principles and some of the tools of quality risk management that can enable more
effective and consistent risk based decisions, both by regulators and industry,
regarding the quality of drug substances and drug (medicinal) products across
the product lifecycle. It is not intended to create any new expectations beyond
the current regulatory requirements.
11. It is neither always appropriate nor always necessary to use a formal risk
management process (using recognized tools and/ or internal procedures e.g.
standard operating procedures). The use of informal risk management processes
(using empirical tools and/ or internal procedures) can also be considered
acceptable.
12. Appropriate use of quality risk management can facilitate but does not obviate
industry’s obligation to comply with regulatory requirements and does not replace
appropriate communications between industry and regulators.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -252- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
SCOPE
13. This guideline provides principles and examples of tools for quality risk
management that can be applied to different aspects of pharmaceutical quality.
These aspects include development, manufacturing, distribution, and the
inspection and submission/review processes throughout the lifecycle of drug
substances, drug (medicinal) products, biological and biotechnological products
(including the use of raw materials, solvents, excipients, packaging and labeling
materials in drug (medicinal) products, biological and biotechnological products).
PRINCIPLES OF QUALITY RISK MANAGEMENT
14. Two primary principles of quality risk management are:
 The evaluation of the risk to quality should be based on scientific
knowledge and ultimately link to the protection of the patient; and
 The level of effort, formality and documentation of the quality risk
management process should be commensurate with the level of risk.
GENERAL QUALITY RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS
15. Quality risk management is a systematic process for the assessment, control,
communication and review of risks to the quality of the drug (medicinal) product
across the product lifecycle. A model for quality risk management is outlined in
the diagram (Figure 1). Other models could be used. The emphasis on each
component of the framework might differ from case to case but a robust process
will incorporate consideration of all the elements at a level of detail that is
commensurate with the specific risk.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -253- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
Figure 1: Overview of a typical quality risk management process
Initiate
Quality Risk Management Process
Risk Assessment
Risk Identification
Risk Analysis
Risk Evaluation
unacceptable
ati o
n
Risk Control
R
is
k M
ni c a n
u a
m
m Risk Reduction g
e m
C o e
Ri
s k Risk Acceptance
n
t to
o
ls
Output / Result of the
Quality Risk Management Process
Risk Review
Review Events
16. Decision nodes are not shown in the diagram above because decisions can occur
at any point in the process. These decisions might be to return to the previous
step and seek further information, to adjust the risk models or even to terminate
the risk management process based upon information that supports such a
decision. Note: “unacceptable” in the flowchart does not only refer to statutory,
legislative or regulatory requirements, but also to the need to revisit the risk
assessment process.
Responsibilities
17. Quality risk management activities are usually, but not always, undertaken by
interdisciplinary teams. When teams are formed, they should include experts
from the appropriate areas (e.g. quality unit, business development, engineering,
regulatory affairs, production operations, sales and marketing, legal, statistics
and clinical) in addition to individuals who are knowledgeable about the quality
risk management process.
18. Decision makers should:
 take responsibility for coordinating quality risk management across various
functions and departments of their organization; and
 assure that a quality risk management process is defined, deployed and
reviewed and that adequate resources are available.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -254- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
Initiating a Quality Risk Management Process
19. Quality risk management should include systematic processes designed to
coordinate, facilitate and improve science-based decision making with respect to
risk. Possible steps used to initiate and plan a quality risk management process
might include the following:
 Define the problem and/or risk question, including pertinent assumptions
identifying the potential for risk
 Assemble background information and/ or data on the potential hazard,
harm or human health impact relevant to the risk assessment
 Identify a leader and necessary resources
 Specify a timeline, deliverables and appropriate level of decision making
for the risk management process
Risk Assessment
20. Risk assessment consists of the identification of hazards and the analysis and
evaluation of risks associated with exposure to those hazards (as defined below).
Quality risk assessments begin with a well-defined problem description or risk
question. When the risk in question is well defined, an appropriate risk
management tool (see examples in section 5) and the types of information
needed to address the risk question will be more readily identifiable. As an aid to
clearly defining the risk(s) for risk assessment purposes, three fundamental
questions are often helpful:
1. What might go wrong?
2. What is the likelihood (probability) it will go wrong?
3. What are the consequences (severity)?
Risk identification is a systematic use of information to identify hazards referring
to the risk question or problem description. Information can include historical
data, theoretical analysis, informed opinions, and the concerns of stakeholders.
Risk identification addresses the “What might go wrong?” question, including
identifying the possible consequences. This provides the basis for further steps
in the quality risk management process.
22. Risk analysis is the estimation of the risk associated with the identified hazards.
It is the qualitative or quantitative process of linking the likelihood of occurrence
and severity of harms. In some risk management tools, the ability to detect the
harm (detectability) also factors in the estimation of risk.
23. Risk evaluation compares the identified and analyzed risk against given risk
criteria. Risk evaluations consider the strength of evidence for all three of the
fundamental questions.
24. In doing an effective risk assessment, the robustness of the data set is important
because it determines the quality of the output. Revealing assumptions and
reasonable sources of uncertainty will enhance confidence in this output and/or
help identify its limitations. Uncertainty is due to combination of incomplete
knowledge about a process and its expected or unexpected variability. Typical
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -255- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
sources of uncertainty include gaps in knowledge gaps in pharmaceutical science
and process understanding, sources of harm (e.g., failure modes of a process,
sources of variability), and probability of detection of problems.
25. The output of a risk assessment is either a quantitative estimate of risk or a
qualitative description of a range of risk. When risk is expressed quantitatively,
a numerical probability is used. Alternatively, risk can be expressed using
qualitative descriptors, such as “high”, “medium”, or “low”, which should be
defined in as much detail as possible. Sometimes a "risk score" is used to further
define descriptors in risk ranking. In quantitative risk assessments, a risk estimate
provides the likelihood of a specific consequence, given a set of risk-generating
circumstances. Thus, quantitative risk estimation is useful for one particular
consequence at a time. Alternatively, some risk management tools use a relative
risk measure to combine multiple levels of severity and probability into an overall
estimate of relative risk. The intermediate steps within a scoring process can
sometimes employ quantitative risk estimation.
Risk Control
26. Risk control includes decision making to reduce and/or accept risks. The purpose
of risk control is to reduce the risk to an acceptable level. The amount of effort
used for risk control should be proportional to the significance of the risk. Decision
makers might use different processes, including benefit-cost analysis, for
understanding the optimal level of risk control.
27. Risk control might focus on the following questions:
 Is the risk above an acceptable level?
 What can be done to reduce or eliminate risks?
 What is the appropriate balance among benefits, risks and resources?
 Are new risks introduced as a result of the identified risks being controlled?
28. Risk reduction focuses on processes for mitigation or avoidance of quality risk
when it exceeds a specified (acceptable) level (see Fig. 1). Risk reduction might
include actions taken to mitigate the severity and probability of harm. Processes
that improve the detectability of hazards and quality risks might also be used as
part of a risk control strategy. The implementation of risk reduction measures can
introduce new risks into the system or increase the significance of other existing
risks. Hence, it might be appropriate to revisit the risk assessment to identify and
evaluate any possible change in risk after implementing a risk reduction process.
29. Risk acceptance is a decision to accept risk. Risk acceptance can be a formal
decision to accept the residual risk or it can be a passive decision in which
residual risks are not specified. For some types of harms, even the best quality
risk management practices might not entirely eliminate risk. In these
circumstances, it might be agreed that an appropriate quality risk management
strategy has been applied and that quality risk is reduced to a specified
(acceptable) level. This (specified) acceptable level will depend on many
parameters and should be decided on a case-by-case basis.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -256- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
Risk Communication
30. Risk communication is the sharing of information about risk and risk
management between the decision makers and others. Parties can communicate
at any stage of the risk management process (see Fig. 1: dashed arrows). The
output/result of the quality risk management process should be appropriately
communicated and documented (see Fig. 1: solid arrows). Communications
might include those among interested parties; e.g., regulators and industry,
industry and the patient, within a company, industry or regulatory authority, etc.
The included information might relate to the existence, nature, form, probability,
severity, acceptability, control, treatment, detectability or other aspects of risks to
quality. Communication need not be carried out for each and every risk
acceptance. Between the industry and regulatory authorities, communication
concerning quality risk management decisions might be effected through existing
channels as specified in regulations and guidances.
Risk Review
31. Risk management should be an ongoing part of the quality management process.
A mechanism to review or monitor events should be implemented.
32. The output/results of the risk management process should be reviewed to take
into account new knowledge and experience. Once a quality risk management
process has been initiated, that process should continue to be utilized for events
that might impact the original quality risk management decision, whether these
events are planned (e.g. results of product review, inspections, audits, change
control) or unplanned (e.g. root cause from failure investigations, recall). The
frequency of any review should be based upon the level of risk. Risk review might
include reconsideration of risk acceptance decisions (section 4.4).
RISK MANAGEMENT METHODOLOGY
33. Quality risk management supports a scientific and practical approach to decision-
making. It provides documented, transparent and reproducible methods to
accomplish steps of the quality risk management process based on current
knowledge about assessing the probability, severity and sometimes detectability
of the risk.
34. Traditionally, risks to quality have been assessed and managed in a variety of
informal ways (empirical and/ or internal procedures) based on, for example,
compilation of observations, trends and other information. Such approaches
continue to provide useful information that might support topics such as handling
of complaints, quality defects, deviations and allocation of resources.
35. Additionally, the pharmaceutical industry and regulators can assess and manage
risk using recognized risk management tools and/ or internal procedures (e.g.,
standard operating procedures). Below is a non-exhaustive list of some of these
tools (further details in Annex 1 and Chapter 8):
 Basic risk management facilitation methods (flowcharts, check sheets etc.)
 Failure Mode Effects Analysis (FMEA)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -257- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
 Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis (FMECA)
 Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)
 Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP)
 Hazard Operability Analysis (HAZOP)
 Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA)
 Risk ranking and filtering
 Supporting statistical tools
36. It might be appropriate to adapt these tools for use in specific areas pertaining to
drug substance and drug (medicinal) product quality. Quality risk management
methods and the supporting statistical tools can be used in combination (e.g.
Probabilistic Risk Assessment). Combined use provides flexibility that can
facilitate the application of quality risk management principles.
37. The degree of rigor and formality of quality risk management should reflect
available knowledge and be commensurate with the complexity and/ or criticality
of the issue to be addressed.
INTEGRATION OF QUALITY RISK MANAGEMENT INTO
INDUSTRY AND REGULATORY OPERATIONS
38. Quality risk management is a process that supports science-based and practical
decisions when integrated into quality systems (see Annex II). As outlined in the
introduction, appropriate use of quality risk management does not obviate
industry’s obligation to comply with regulatory requirements. However, effective
quality risk management can facilitate better and more informed decisions, can
provide regulators with greater assurance of a company’s ability to deal with
potential risks, and might affect the extent and level of direct regulatory oversight.
In addition, quality risk management can facilitate better use of resources by all
parties.
39. Training of both industry and regulatory personnel in quality risk management
processes provides for greater understanding of decision-making processes and
builds confidence in quality risk management outcomes.
40. Quality risk management should be integrated into existing operations and
documented appropriately. Annex II provides examples of situations in which the
use of the quality risk management process might provide information that could
then be used in a variety of pharmaceutical operations. These examples are
provided for illustrative purposes only and should not be considered a definitive
or exhaustive list. These examples are not intended to create any new
expectations beyond the requirements laid out in the current regulations.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -258- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
41. Examples for industry and regulatory operations (see Annex II):
 Quality management
42. Examples for industry operations and activities (see Annex II):
 Development
 Facility, equipment and utilities
 Materials management
 Production
 Laboratory control and stability testing
 Packaging and labelling
43. Examples for regulatory operations (see Annex II):
 Inspection and assessment activities
44. While regulatory decisions will continue to be taken on a regional basis, a
common understanding and application of quality risk management principles
could facilitate mutual confidence and promote more consistent decisions among
regulators on the basis of the same information. This collaboration could be
important in the development of policies and guidelines that integrate and support
quality risk management practices.
DEFINITIONS
Decision maker(s) – Person(s) with the competence and authority to make
appropriate and timely quality risk management decisions
Detectability - the ability to discover or determine the existence, presence, or fact
of a hazard
Harm – damage to health, including the damage that can occur from loss of
product quality or availability
Hazard - the potential source of harm (ISO/IEC Guide 51)
Product Lifecycle – all phases in the life of the product from the initial
development through marketing until the product’s discontinuation
Quality – the degree to which a set of inherent properties of a product, system or
process fulfils requirements (see ICH Q6a definition specifically for "quality" of
drug substance and drug (medicinal) products.)
Quality risk management – a systematic process for the assessment, control,
communication and review of risks to the quality of the drug (medicinal) product
across the product lifecycle
Quality system – the sum of all aspects of a system that implements quality policy
and ensures that quality objectives are met
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -259- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
Requirements – the explicit or implicit needs or expectations of the patients or
their surrogates (e.g. health care professionals, regulators and legislators). In this
document, “requirements” refers not only to statutory, legislative, or regulatory
requirements, but also to such needs and expectations.
Risk – the combination of the probability of occurrence of harm and the severity
of that harm (ISO/IEC Guide 51)
Risk acceptance – the decision to accept risk (ISO Guide 73)
Risk analysis – the estimation of the risk associated with the identified hazards
Risk assessment – a systematic process of organizing information to support a
risk decision to be made within a risk management process. It consists of the
identification of hazards and the analysis and evaluation of risks associated with
exposure to those hazards.
Risk communication – the sharing of information about risk and risk management
between the decision maker and other stakeholders
Risk control – actions implementing risk management decisions (ISO Guide 73)
Risk evaluation – the comparison of the estimated risk to given risk criteria using
a quantitative or qualitative scale to determine the significance of the risk
Risk identification – the systematic use of information to identify potential sources
of harm (hazards) referring to the risk question or problem description
Risk management – the systematic application of quality management policies,
procedures, and practices to the tasks of assessing, controlling, communicating
and reviewing risk
Risk reduction – actions taken to lessen the probability of occurrence of harm and
the severity of that harm
Risk review – review or monitoring of output/results of the risk management
process considering (if appropriate) new knowledge and experience about the
risk
Severity – a measure of the possible consequences of a hazard
Stakeholder – any individual, group or organization that can affect, be affected
by, or perceive itself to be affected by a risk. Decision makers might also be
stakeholders. For the purposes of this guideline, the primary stakeholders are
the patient, healthcare professional, regulatory authority, and industry
Trend – a statistical term referring to the direction or rate of change of a
variable(s)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -260- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
REFERENCES
ICH Q8 Pharmaceutical development
ISO/IEC Guide 73:2002 - Risk Management - Vocabulary - Guidelines for use in
Standards
ISO/IEC Guide 51:1999 - Safety Aspects - Guideline for their inclusion in
standards
Process Mapping by the American Productivity & Quality Center 2002, ISBN
1928593739
IEC 61025 - Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)
IEC 60812 Analysis Techniques for system reliability—Procedures for failure
mode and effects analysis (FMEA)
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis, FMEA from Theory to Execution, 2nd Edition
2003, D. H. Stamatis, ISBN 0873895983
Guidelines for Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA) for Medical Devices,
2003 Dyadem Press ISBN 0849319102
The Basics of FMEA, Robin McDermott, Raymond J. Mikulak, Michael R.
Beauregard 1996 ISBN 0527763209
WHO Technical Report Series No 908, 2003 Annex 7 Application of Hazard
Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) methodology to pharmaceuticals
IEC 61882 - Hazard Operability Analysis (HAZOP)
ISO 14971:2000 - Application of Risk Management to Medical Devices
ISO 7870:1993 - Control Charts
ISO 7871:1997 - Cumulative Sum Charts
ISO 7966:1993 - Acceptance Control Charts
ISO 8258:1991 - Shewhart Control Charts
What is Total Quality Control?; The Japanese Way, Kaoru Ishikawa (Translated
by David J. Liu), 1985, ISBN 0139524339
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -261- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
APPENDIX I: RISK MANAGEMENT METHODS AND TOOLS
The purpose of this appendix is to provide a general overview of and references
for some of the primary tools that might be used in quality risk management by
industry and regulators. The references are included as an aid to gain more
knowledge and detail about the particular tool. This is not an exhaustive list. It is
important to note that no one tool or set of tools is applicable to every situation in
which a quality risk management procedure is used.
I.1 Basic Risk Management Facilitation Methods
Some of the simple techniques that are commonly used to structure risk
management by organizing data and facilitating decision-making are:
 Flowcharts
 Check Sheets
 Process Mapping
 Cause and Effect Diagrams (also called an Ishikawa diagram or fish bone
diagram)
I.2 Failure Mode Effects Analysis (FMEA)
FMEA (see IEC 60812) provides for an evaluation of potential failure modes for
processes and their likely effect on outcomes and/or product performance. Once
failure modes are established, risk reduction can be used to eliminate, contain,
reduce or control the potential failures. FMEA relies on product and process
understanding. FMEA methodically breaks down the analysis of complex
processes into manageable steps. It is a powerful tool for summarizing the
important modes of failure, factors causing these failures and the likely effects of
these failures.
Potential Areas of Use(s)
FMEA can be used to prioritize risks and monitor the effectiveness of risk control
activities.
FMEA can be applied to equipment and facilities and might be used to analyze a
manufacturing operation and its effect on product or process. It identifies
elements/operations within the system that render it vulnerable. The output/
results of FMEA can be used as a basis for design or further analysis or to guide
resource deployment.
I.3 Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis (FMECA)
FMEA might be extended to incorporate an investigation of the degree of severity
of the consequences, their respective probabilities of occurrence, and their
detectability, thereby becoming a Failure Mode Effect and Criticality Analysis
(FMECA; see IEC 60812). In order for such an analysis to be performed, the
product or process specifications should be established.
FMECA can identify places where additional preventive actions might be
appropriate to minimize risks.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -262- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
Potential Areas of Use(s)
FMECA application in the pharmaceutical industry should mostly be utilized for
failures and risks associated with manufacturing processes; however, it is not
limited to this application. The output of an FMECA is a relative risk “score” for
each failure mode, which is used to rank the modes on a relative risk basis.
I.4 Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)
The FTA tool (see IEC 61025) is an approach that assumes failure of the
functionality of a product or process. This tool evaluates system (or subsystem)
failures one at a time but can combine multiple causes of failure by identifying
causal chains. The results are represented pictorially in the form of a tree of fault
modes. At each level in the tree, combinations of fault modes are described with
logical operators (AND, OR, etc.). FTA relies on the experts’ process
understanding to identify causal factors.
Potential Areas of Use(s)
FTA can be used to establish the pathway to the root cause of the failure. FTA
can be used to investigate complaints or deviations in order to fully understand
their root cause and to ensure that intended improvements will fully resolve the
issue and not lead to other issues (i.e. solve one problem yet cause a different
problem). Fault Tree Analysis is an effective tool for evaluating how multiple
factors affect a given issue. The output of an FTA includes a visual representation
of failure modes. It is useful both for risk assessment and in developing
monitoring programs.
I.5 Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP)
HACCP is a systematic, proactive, and preventive tool for assuring product
quality, reliability, and safety (see WHO Technical Report Series No 908, 2003
Annex 7). It is a structured approach that applies technical and scientific
principles to analyze, evaluate, prevent, and control the risk or adverse
consequence(s) of hazard(s) due to the design, development, production, and
use of products.
HACCP consists of the following seven steps:
1. conduct a hazard analysis and identify preventive measures for each step
of the process;
2. determine the critical control points;
3. establish critical limits;
4. establish a system to monitor the critical control points;
5. establish the corrective action to be taken when monitoring indicates that
the critical control points are not in a state of control;
6. establish system to verify that the HACCP system is working effectively;
7. establish a record-keeping system.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -263- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
Potential Areas of Use(s)
HACCP might be used to identify and manage risks associated with physical,
chemical and biological hazards (including microbiological contamination).
HACCP is most useful when product and process understanding is sufficiently
comprehensive to support identification of critical control points. The output of a