HACCP analysis is risk management information that facilitates monitoring of
critical points not only in the manufacturing process but also in other life cycle
phases.
I.6 Hazard Operability Analysis (HAZOP)
HAZOP (see IEC 61882) is based on a theory that assumes that risk events are
caused by deviations from the design or operating intentions. It is a systematic
brainstorming technique for identifying hazards using so-called “guide-words”.
“Guide-words” (e.g., No, More, Other Than, Part of, etc.) are applied to relevant
parameters (e.g., contamination, temperature) to help identify potential
deviations from normal use or design intentions. It often uses a team of people
with expertise covering the design of the process or product and its application.
Potential Areas of Use(s)
HAZOP can be applied to manufacturing processes, including outsourced
production and formulation as well as the upstream suppliers, equipment and
facilities for drug substances and drug (medicinal) products. It has also been used
primarily in the pharmaceutical industry for evaluating process safety hazards. As
is the case with HACCP, the output of a HAZOP analysis is a list of critical
operations for risk management. This facilitates regular monitoring of critical
points in the manufacturing process.
I.7 Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA)
PHA is a tool of analysis based on applying prior experience or knowledge of a
hazard or failure to identify future hazards, hazardous situations and events that
might cause harm, as well as to estimate their probability of occurrence for a
given activity, facility, product or system. The tool consists of: 1) the identification
of the possibilities that the risk event happens, 2) the qualitative evaluation of the
extent of possible injury or damage to health that could result and 3) a relative
ranking of the hazard using a combination of severity and likelihood of
occurrence, and 4) the identification of possible remedial measures.
Potential Areas of Use(s)
PHA might be useful when analyzing existing systems or prioritizing hazards
where circumstances prevent a more extensive technique from being used. It can
be used for product, process and facility design as well as to evaluate the types
of hazards for the general product type, then the product class, and finally the
specific product. PHA is most commonly used early in the development of a
project when there is little information on design details or operating procedures;
thus, it will often be a precursor to further studies. Typically, hazards identified in
the PHA are further assessed with other risk management tools such as those in
this section.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -264- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
I.8 Risk Ranking and Filtering
Risk ranking and filtering is a tool for comparing and ranking risks. Risk ranking
of complex systems typically requires evaluation of multiple diverse quantitative
and qualitative factors for each risk. The tool involves breaking down a basic risk
question into as many components as needed to capture factors involved in the
risk. These factors are combined into a single relative risk score that can then be
used for ranking risks. “Filters,” in the form of weighting factors or cut-offs for risk
scores, can be used to scale or fit the risk ranking to management or policy
objectives.
Potential Areas of Use(s)
Risk ranking and filtering can be used to prioritize manufacturing sites for
inspection/audit by regulators or industry. Risk ranking methods are particularly
helpful in situations in which the portfolio of risks and the underlying
consequences to be managed are diverse and difficult to compare using a single
tool. Risk ranking is useful when management needs to evaluate both
quantitatively-assessed and qualitatively-assessed risks within the same
organizational framework.
I.9 Supporting Statistical Tools
Statistical tools can support and facilitate quality risk management. They can
enable effective data assessment, aid in determining the significance of the data
set(s), and facilitate more reliable decision making. A listing of some of the
principal statistical tools commonly used in the pharmaceutical industry is
provided:
(i) Control Charts, for example:
- Acceptance Control Charts (see ISO 7966)
- Control Charts with Arithmetic Average and Warning Limits (see ISO
7873)
- Cumulative Sum Charts (see ISO 7871)
- Shewhart Control Charts (see ISO 8258)
- Weighted Moving Average
(ii) Design of Experiments (DOE)
(iii) Histograms
(iv) Pareto Charts
(v) Process Capability Analysis
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -265- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
APPENDIX II: POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS FOR QUALITY
RISK MANAGEMENT
This Appendix is intended to identify potential uses of quality risk management
principles and tools by industry and regulators. However, the selection of
particular risk management tools is completely dependent upon specific facts and
circumstances. These examples are provided for illustrative purposes and only
suggest potential uses of quality risk management. This Annex is not intended to
create any new expectations beyond the current regulatory requirements.
II.1 Quality Risk Management as Part of Integrated Quality Management
Documentation
To review current interpretations and application of regulatory expectations
To determine the desirability of and/or develop the content for SOPs, guidelines,
etc.
Training and education
To determine the appropriateness of initial and/or ongoing training sessions
based on education, experience and working habits of staff, as well as on a
periodic assessment of previous training (e.g., its effectiveness)
To identify the training, experience, qualifications and physical abilities that allow
personnel to perform an operation reliably and with no adverse impact on the
quality of the product
Quality defects
To provide the basis for identifying, evaluating, and communicating the potential
quality impact of a suspected quality defect, complaint, trend, deviation,
investigation, out of specification result, etc.
To facilitate risk communications and determine appropriate action to address
significant product defects, in conjunction with regulatory authorities (e.g., recall)
Auditing/Inspection
To define the frequency and scope of audits, both internal and external, taking
into account factors such as:
 Existing legal requirements
 Overall compliance status and history of the company or facility
 Robustness of a company’s quality risk management activities
 Complexity of the site
 Complexity of the manufacturing process
 Complexity of the product and its therapeutic significance
 Number and significance of quality defects (e.g. recall)
 Results of previous audits/inspections
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -266- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
 Major changes of building, equipment, processes, key personnel
 Experience with manufacturing of a product (e.g. frequency, volume,
number of batches)
 Test results of official control laboratories
Periodic review
To select, evaluate and interpret trend results of data within the product quality
review
To interpret monitoring data (e.g., to support an assessment of the
appropriateness of revalidation or changes in sampling)
Change management / change control
To manage changes based on knowledge and information accumulated in
pharmaceutical development and during manufacturing
To evaluate the impact of the changes on the availability of the final product
To evaluate the impact on product quality of changes to the facility, equipment,
material, manufacturing process or technical transfers
To determine appropriate actions preceding the implementation of a change, e.g.,
additional testing, (re)qualification, (re)validation or communication with
regulators
Continual improvement
To facilitate continual improvement in processes throughout the product lifecycle
II.2 Quality Risk Management as Part of Regulatory Operations
Inspection and assessment activities
To assist with resource allocation including, for example, inspection planning and
frequency, and inspection and assessment intensity (see "Auditing" section in
Annex II.1)
To evaluate the significance of, for example, quality defects, potential recalls and
inspectional findings
To determine the appropriateness and type of post-inspection regulatory follow-
up
To evaluate information submitted by industry including pharmaceutical
development information
To evaluate impact of proposed variations or changes
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -267- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
To identify risks which should be communicated between inspectors and
assessors to facilitate better understanding of how risks can be or are controlled
(e.g. parametric release, Process Analytical Technology (PAT)).
II.3 Quality Risk Management as Part of Development
To design a quality product and its manufacturing process to consistently deliver
the intended performance of the product (see ICH Q8)
To enhance knowledge of product performance over a wide range of material
attributes (e.g. particle size distribution, moisture content, flow properties),
processing options and process parameters
To assess the critical attributes of raw materials, solvents, Active Pharmaceutical
Ingredient (API) starting materials, APIs, excipients, or packaging materials
To establish appropriate specifications, identify critical process parameters and
establish manufacturing controls (e.g., using information from pharmaceutical
development studies regarding the clinical significance of quality attributes and
the ability to control them during processing)
To decrease variability of quality attributes:
 reduce product and material defects
 reduce manufacturing defects
To assess the need for additional studies (e.g., bioequivalence, stability) relating
to scale up and technology transfer
To make use of the “design space” concept (see ICH Q8)
II.4 Quality Risk Management for Facilities, Equipment and Utilities
Design of facility / equipment
To determine appropriate zones when designing buildings and facilities, e.g.,
 flow of material and personnel
 minimize contamination
 pest control measures
 prevention of mix-ups
 open versus closed equipment
 clean rooms versus isolator technologies
 dedicated or segregated facilities / equipment
To determine appropriate product contact materials for equipment and containers
(e.g., selection of stainless steel grade, gaskets, lubricants)
To determine appropriate utilities (e.g., steam, gases, power source, compressed
air, heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), water)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -268- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
To determine appropriate preventive maintenance for associated equipment
(e.g., inventory of necessary spare parts)
Hygiene aspects in facilities
To protect the product from environmental hazards, including chemical,
microbiological, and physical hazards (e.g., determining appropriate clothing and
gowning, hygiene concerns)
To protect the environment (e.g., personnel, potential for cross-contamination)
from hazards related to the product being manufactured
Qualification of facility/equipment/utilities
To determine the scope and extent of qualification of facilities, buildings, and
production equipment and/or laboratory instruments (including proper calibration
methods)
Cleaning of equipment and environmental control
To differentiate efforts and decisions based on the intended use (e.g. multi-versus
single-purpose, batch versus continuous production)
To determine acceptable (specified) cleaning validation limits
Calibration/preventive maintenance
To set appropriate calibration and maintenance schedules
Computer systems and computer controlled equipment
To select the design of computer hardware and software (e.g., modular,
structured, fault tolerance)
To determine the extent of validation, e.g.:
 identification of critical performance parameters
 selection of the requirements and design
 code review
 the extent of testing and test methods
 reliability of electronic records and signatures
II.5 Quality Risk Management as Part of Materials Management
Assessment and evaluation of suppliers and contract manufacturers
To provide a comprehensive evaluation of suppliers and contract manufacturers
(e.g., auditing, supplier quality agreements)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -269- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
Starting material
To assess differences and possible quality risks associated with variability in
starting materials (e.g., age, route of synthesis).
Use of materials
To determine whether it is appropriate to use material under quarantine (e.g., for
further internal processing)
To determine appropriateness of reprocessing, reworking, use of returned goods
Storage, logistics and distribution conditions
To assess the adequacy of arrangements to ensure maintenance of appropriate
storage and transport conditions (e.g., temperature, humidity, container design)
To determine the effect on product quality of discrepancies in storage or transport
conditions (e.g. cold chain management) in conjunction with other ICH guidelines
To maintain infrastructure (e.g. capacity to ensure proper shipping conditions,
interim storage, handling of hazardous materials and controlled substances,
customs clearance)
To provide information for ensuring the availability of pharmaceuticals (e.g.
ranking risks to the supply chain)
II.6 Quality Risk Management as Part of Production
Validation
To identify the scope and extent of verification, qualification and validation
activities (e.g., analytical methods, processes, equipment and cleaning methods
To determine the extent for follow-up activities (e.g., sampling, monitoring and re-
validation)
To distinguish between critical and non-critical process steps to facilitate design
of a validation study
In-process sampling & testing
To evaluate the frequency and extent of in-process control testing (e.g., to justify
reduced testing under conditions of proven control)
To evaluate and justify the use of process analytical technologies (PAT) in
conjunction with parametric and real time release
Production planning
To determine appropriate production planning (e.g. dedicated, campaign and
concurrent production process sequences)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -270- 25 August 2023
Annex 20 Quality Risk Management
II.7 Quality Risk Management as Part of Laboratory Control and
Stability Studies
Out of specification results
To identify potential root causes and corrective actions during the investigation of
out of specification results
Retest period / expiration date
To evaluate adequacy of storage and testing of intermediates, excipients and
starting materials
II.8 Quality Risk Management as Part of Packaging and Labelling
Design of packages
To design the secondary package for the protection of primary packaged product
(e.g., to ensure product authenticity, label legibility)
Selection of container closure system
To determine the critical parameters of the container closure system
Label controls
To design label control procedures based on the potential for mix-ups involving
different product labels, including different versions of the same label
_______________
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -271- 25 August 2023
Glossary
GLOSSARY
Definitions given below apply to the words as used in this Guide. They may have
different meanings in other contexts.
Action limit
Established criteria, requiring immediate follow-up and corrective action if
exceeded.
Air lock
An enclosed space with two or more doors, and which is interposed between two
or more rooms, e.g. of differing class of cleanliness, for the purpose of controlling
the air-flow between those rooms when they need to be entered. An air-lock is
designed for and used by either people or goods.
Alert limit
Established criteria giving early warning of potential drift from normal conditions
which are not necessarily grounds for definitive corrective action but which
require follow-up investigation.
Authorised person
Person recognised by the authority as having the necessary basic scientific and
technical background and experience.
Batch (or lot)
A defined quantity of starting material, packaging material or product processed
in one process or series of processes so that it could be expected to be
homogeneous.
Note: To complete certain stages of manufacture, it may be necessary to divide
a batch into a number of subbatches, which are later brought together to
form a final homogeneous batch. In the case of continuous manufacture,
the batch must correspond to a defined fraction of the production,
characterised by its intended homogeneity.
For the control of the finished product, a batch of a medicinal products comprises
all the units of a pharmaceutical form which are made from the same initial mass
of material and have undergone a single series of manufacturing operations or a
single sterilisation operation or, in the case of a continuous production process,
all the units manufactured in a given period of time.
Batch number (or lot number)
A distinctive combination of numbers and/or letters which specifically identifies a
batch.
Biogenerator
A contained system, such as a fermenter, into which biological agents are
introduced along with other materials so as to effect their multiplication or their
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -272- 25 August 2023
Glossary
production of other substances by reaction with the other materials.
Biogenerators are generally fitted with devices for regulation, control, connection,
material addition and material withdrawal.
Biological agents
Microorganisms, including genetically engineered microorganisms, cell cultures
and endoparasites, whether pathogenic or not.
Bulk product
Any product which has completed all processing stages up to, but not including,
final packaging.
Calibration
The set of operations which establish, under specified conditions, the relationship
between values indicated by a measuring instrument or measuring system, or
values represented by a material measure, and the corresponding known values
of a reference standard.
Cell bank
Cell bank system: A cell bank system is a system whereby successive batches
of a product are manufactured by culture in cells derived from the same master
cell bank (fully characterised for identity and absence of contamination). A
number of containers from the master cell bank are used to prepare a working
cell bank. The cell bank system is validated for a passage level or number of
population doublings beyond that achieved during routine production.
Master cell bank: A culture of (fully characterised) cells distributed into containers
in a single operation, processed together in such a manner as to ensure
uniformity and stored in such a manner as to ensure stability. A master cell bank
is usually stored at -70°C or lower.
Working cell bank: A culture of cells derived from the master cell bank and
intended for use in the preparation of production cell cultures. The working cell
bank is usually stored at -70°C or lower.
Cell culture
The result from the in-vitro growth of cells isolated from multicellular organisms.
Clean area
An area with defined environmental control of particulate and microbial
contamination, constructed and used in such a way as to reduce the introduction,
generation and retention of contaminants within the area.
Note: The different degrees of environmental control are defined in the
Supplementary Guidelines for the Manufacture of sterile medicinal
products.
Clean/contained area
An area constructed and operated in such a manner that will achieve the aims of
both a clean area and a contained area at the same time.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -273- 25 August 2023
Glossary
Containment
The action of confining a biological agent or other entity within a defined space.
Primary containment: A system of containment which prevents the escape of a
biological agent into the immediate working environment. It involves the use of
closed containers or safety biological cabinets along with secure operating
procedures.
Secondary containment: A system of containment which prevents the escape of
a biological agent into the external environment or into other working areas. It
involves the use of rooms with specially designed air handling, the existence of
airlocks and/or sterilises for the exit of materials and secure operating
procedures. In many cases it may add to the effectiveness of primary
containment.
Contained area
An area constructed and operated in such a manner (and equipped with
appropriate air handling and filtration) so as to prevent contamination of the
external environment by biological agents from within the area.
Controlled area
An area constructed and operated in such a manner that some attempt is made
to control the introduction of potential contamination (an air supply approximating
to grade D may be appropriate), and the consequences of accidental release of
living organisms. The level of control exercised should reflect the nature of the
organism employed in the process. At a minimum, the area should be maintained
at a pressure negative to the immediate external environment and allow for the
efficient removal of small quantities of airborne contaminants.
Computerised system
A system including the input of data, electronic processing and the output of
information to be used either for reporting or automatic control.
Cross contamination
Contamination of a starting material or of a product with another material or
product.
Crude plant (vegetable drug)
Fresh or dried medicinal plant or parts thereof.
Cryogenic vessel
A container designed to contain liquefied gas at extremely low temperature.
Cylinder
A container designed to contain gas at a high pressure.
Exotic organism
A biological agent where either the corresponding disease does not exist in a
given country or geographical area, or where the disease is the subject of
prophylactic measures or an eradication programme undertaken in the given
country or geographical area.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -274- 25 August 2023
Glossary
Finished product
A medicinal products which has undergone all stages of production, including
packaging in its final container.
Herbal medicinal products
Medicinal products containing, as active ingredients, exclusively plant material
and/or vegetable drug preparations.
Infected
Contaminated with extraneous biological agents and therefore capable of
spreading infection.
In-process control
Checks performed during production in order to monitor and if necessary to adjust
the process to ensure that the product conforms to its specification. The control
of the environment or equipment may also be regarded as a part of in-process
control.
Intermediate product
Partly processed material which must undergo further manufacturing steps
before it becomes a bulk product.
Liquifiable gases
Those which, at the normal filling temperature and pressure, remain as a liquid
in the cylinder.
Manifold
Equipment or apparatus designed to enable one or more gas containers to be
filled simultaneously from the same source.
Manufacture
All operations of purchase of materials and products, Production, Quality Control,
release, storage, distribution of medicinal products and the related controls.
Manufacturer
Holder of a manufacturing authorisation.
Media fill
Method of evaluating an aseptic process using a microbial growth medium.
(Media fills are synonymous to simulated product fills, broth trials, broth fills etc.).
Medicinal plant
Plant the whole or part of which is used for pharmaceutical purpose.
Medicinal products
Any medicine or similar product intended for human use, which is subject to
control under health legislation in the manufacturing or importing State.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -275- 25 August 2023
Glossary
Packaging
All operations, including filling and labelling, which a bulk product has to undergo
in order to become a finished product.
Note: Sterile filling would not normally be regarded as part of packaging, the
bulk product being the filled, but not finally packaged, primary containers.
Packaging material
Any material employed in the packaging of a medicinal products, excluding any
outer packaging used for transportation or shipment. Packaging materials are
referred to as primary or secondary according to whether or not they are intended
to be in direct contact with the product.
Procedures
Description of the operations to be carried out, the precautions to be taken and
measures to be applied directly or indirectly related to the manufacture of a
medicinal products.
Production
All operations involved in the preparation of a medicinal products, from receipt of
materials, through processing and packaging, to its completion as a finished
product.
Qualification
Action of proving that any equipment works correctly and actually leads to the
expected results. The word validation is sometimes widened to incorporate the
concept of qualification.
Quality control
See Chapter 1.
Quarantine
The status of starting or packaging materials, intermediate, bulk or finished
products isolated physically or by other effective means whilst awaiting a decision
on their release or refusal.
Radiopharmaceutical
"Radiopharmaceutical" means any medicinal products which, when ready for
use, contains one or more radionuclides (radioactive isotopes) included for a
pharmaceutical purpose.
Reconciliation
A comparison, making due allowance for normal variation, between the amount
of product or materials theoretically and actually produced or used.
Record
See Chapter 4.
Recovery
The introduction of all or part of previous batches of the required quality into
another batch at a defined stage of manufacture.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -276- 25 August 2023
Glossary
Reprocessing
The reworking of all or part of a batch of product of an unacceptable quality from
a defined stage of production so that its quality may be rendered acceptable by
one or more additional operations.
Return
Sending back to the manufacturer or distributor of a medicinal products which
may or may not present a quality defect.
Seed lot
Seed lot system: A seed lot system is a system according to which successive
batches of a product are derived from the same master seed lot at a given
passage level. For routine production, a working seed lot is prepared from the
master seed lot. The final product is derived from the working seed lot and has
not undergone more passages from the master seed lot than the vaccine shown
in clinical studies to be satisfactory with respect to safety and efficacy. The origin
and the passage history of the master seed lot and the working seed lot are
recorded.
Master seed lot: A culture of a micro-organism distributed from a single bulk into
containers in a single operation in such a manner as to ensure uniformity, to
prevent contamination and to ensure stability. A master seed lot in liquid form is
usually stored at or below -70°C. A freeze-dried master seed lot is stored at a
temperature known to ensure stability.
Working seed lot: A culture of a micro-organism derived from the master seed lot
and intended for use in production. Working seed lots are distributed into
containers and stored as described above for master seed lots.
Specification
See Chapter 4.
Starting material
Any substance used in the production of a medicinal products, but excluding
packaging materials.
Sterility
Sterility is the absence of living organisms. The conditions of the sterility tests are
given in the European (or other relevant) Pharmacopoeia.*
Validation
Action of proving, in accordance with the principles of Good Manufacturing
Practice, that any procedure, process, equipment, material, activity or system
actually leads to the expected results (see also qualification).
*
The procedures and precautions employed should be such as to give a theoretical level of not more
than one living micro-organism in 10 6 units in the final product.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -277- 25 August 2023