Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
65 
Entry of the plates prior to line setup can be controlled by a combination of outer-bag removal and 
disinfection at the grade transition point. Plate transfer and placement is reliant on sufficient space being 
available inside the RABS for plate storage and a method for identifying plates that have been used, from 
those still to be used.  
The EM Program provides important data associated with the effectiveness of the CCS. EM samples should 
be protected from contamination until the end of incubation. Placing the plates in a protective container or 
bag for transport is appropriate to reduce the contamination risk. Validation is required to support this 
practice to demonstrate that growth is not inhibited by the packaging. Conducting growth-promotion studies 
on plates sealed in the container or bag specified by the firm will provide the required assurance.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
66 
Q 5.4. How should media plates be stored inside a restricted access barrier system 
(RABS)? 
Recommendation 
Plate storage locations (i.e., either within the last layer bag or unbagged) should be risk-assessed and well-
defined. Considerations include, but are not limited to, the following:  
•
Plates should be stored away from product and product-contact parts in a location close to the
sampling location.
•
Plates should not be stored in the same flow of First Air that is protecting a critical surface.
•
The operator should not need to reach over or pass close to a critical surface to interact with the EM
plates.
•
Plates should not be stored close to air returns within a cRABS.
•
The use of plate stands is recommended (See Figure 5.4-1).
Figure 5.4-1 Settle Plate Stand 
Rationale 
Care must be taken to ensure that EM does not add contamination risk to the process. Risk-assessing the 
storage location and the linked activities (e.g., retrieval of a plate from pre-use storage, labeling, positioning, 
retrieval of the plate from the sampling location, relocation to post-use storage location) should be 
undertaken to define the correct storage location.  
The storage location must ensure that the handling of the plates does not require the plate or the operator to 
breach First Air or come into proximity with sterile primary packaging, open product, or product-contact 
surfaces. 
The defined storage location must also be selected with respect to the airflow within the RABS. The plates, 
and the packaging they arrive in, should not be allowed to block air exits or returns. Storage of the plates 
should be considered as part of the AVS.  
The storage of exposed and unexposed plates needs to be considered to prevent mix-ups and the potential 
reuse of a previously exposed plate, which may be dried out if used beyond allowed exposure time. Plate 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
67 
stands can aid in this, for example, by stacking plates such that fresh plates are removed from the bottom of 
the stack and used plates are returned to the top of the stack 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
68 
Q 5.5. When and how should environmental and personnel monitoring be performed 
during setup and open-door interventions? 
Recommendation 
All open-door interventions need to be monitored from the point where the first critical surface enters the 
RABS. The minimum level of monitoring inside a RABS during critical activities is continuous viable and 
total particle monitoring; continuous viable monitoring is achieved by passive-air and active-air 
monitoring.   
For open-door activities, including line set-up, monitoring within the intervention zone is recommended. 
This monitoring needs to be based on QRM principles and may need to be changed to ensure monitoring 
covers the performed activities. Sampling locations, as defined in the EM risk assessment, should be linked 
to qualified and unqualified interventions.   
Additional samples might be taken, based on QRM principles, in the UDAF immediately outside the 
intervention zone, close to the operator and open-door. This can be achieved with either passive or active 
monitoring; samples should be taken at the working position level.  
Each primary operator involved in open-door interventions, including line setup, should be monitored 
immediately as they exit the RABS Grade A interior, after having completed all the intervention steps in the 
critical zone, including any disinfection that may be required. The RABS door disinfection and closure 
should be done by the secondary operator.   
Representative samples should be taken as defined in the risk assessment of the EM program. Sample 
locations must be selected as per the risk assessment. The risk assessment should consider any body part 
entering the Grade A environment and any location selected through the risk assessment, and these must 
meet Grade A limits (e.g., taking samples from the operator’s RABS gloves, sleeves, head, and chest, as 
appropriate to the specific intervention).  
It is recommended that a second, fully trained operator should support the monitoring to prevent false 
positive growth. This sampling should be done in an environment that prevents contamination of the sample 
(e.g., the UDAF zone of protection or another UDAF zone close to the RABS).   
To be representative, samples should be taken as close as possible (i.e., physical and temporal) to the end of 
the operators’ activities inside the RABS. Gowns should be removed and replaced following sampling. Care 
must be taken to ensure that agar is not transferred to the RABS or surrounding cleanroom where the 
sampling takes place, during the degowning and gown disposal step.  
The individual whose clothing was sampled will then need to leave the cleanroom and replace some or all of 
their aseptic clothing (i.e., RABS gloves and gown). The second person should also open any doors to allow 
the person sampled to pass without transferring agar onto cleanroom surfaces.  
Rationale 
Entry of personnel into the RABS reduces the effectiveness of the barrier and potentially puts the product at 
risk of contamination. Performing personnel monitoring after, and active air sampling during, the open-door 
activities provides valuable additional data to support batch disposition.  
An approved EM risk assessment should be used to determine the representative locations that require 
sampling meeting Grade A limits (e.g., body parts entering the Grade A environment). Relying only on 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
69 
glove-sampling data may not be adequate, especially where RABS gloves are disinfected or changed 
immediately prior to the intervention.   
When sampling occurs close to the point where the person exits the RABS, the data collected will most 
closely reflect the risk posed by the operator to the RABS and will be less influenced by the surrounding 
lower-grade cleanroom and surfaces outside the RABS that are touched up to the point where the samples 
are taken. Ideally, a second person would sample the person exiting the RABS at the point they exit, this 
minimizes any external influences on the data (e.g. handling of plates, pens, documentation in grade B) and 
ensures that the samples fully represent the risk posed by the first operator to the critical zone and have not 
been unnecessarily compromised. 
Note: Operators should leave the RABS and change gloves to prevent the spread of media residues after 
finger dabs.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
70 
Q 5.6. Should environmental monitoring (EM) for line setup and filling be kept 
separate? 
Recommendation 
Yes. While not mandated, there are benefits to keeping EM for line setup and filling separate. Keeping the 
data from open-door line setup separate aids the investigation and process improvement in the event of EM 
recoveries (1, 7).   
Rationale 
Line setup activities usually pose a higher risk to the critical zone because they typically include frequent 
open-door interventions, material movements into the RABS, and the presence of personnel in the critical 
zone, whereas filling activities are typically conducted via closed-door interventions. Segregating the two 
activities for EM allows the data from line setup and filling activities to be visualized and trended 
independently. Where EM recoveries occur, identifying the assignable root cause of the microbiological 
data deviation is aided when the data for the two activities are separate.   
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
71 
Q 5.7. Where should the fixed environmental monitoring (EM) air-monitoring sampling 
points be located within the restricted access barrier system (RABS)? 
Recommendation 
Firms should conduct a risk assessment in the design phase to determine the number and locations of EM 
samples that should be taken. (See PDA Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2014): Fundamentals of an 
Environmental Monitoring Program.)   
The sampling locations should be positioned as closely as possible to the most critical operations, such as 
the point of fill, sorting bowl, or rotary-table. They should be positioned vertically at or close to the height 
of the critical surface they are monitoring and ideally in the same plane.  
Note: FDA’s 2004 Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Processing—Current 
Good Manufacturing Practice states: 
Air in the immediate proximity of exposed sterilized containers/closures and filling/closing 
operations would be of appropriate particle quality when it has a per-cubic-meter particle 
count of no more than 3520 in a size range of 0.5 μm and larger when counted at 
representative locations normally not more than 1 foot away from the work site, within the 
airflow, and during filling/closing operations. This level of air cleanliness is also known as 
Class 100 (ISO 5). 
Sampling locations should not breach First Air over critical surfaces. They should be positioned so that they 
capture the risks from any permitted intervention, for example, between the RABS door or glove and the 
critical surface being monitored, and between the door and critical surfaces where open-door interventions 
are permitted.  
Viable- and total-particle sampling locations should be co-located wherever possible (if supported by risk-
assessment) both to allow a point of comparison and for ergonomic reasons. Sampling locations should not 
cause an interference on the airflow between the sampling points (i.e., ideally isokinetic sampling for viable 
monitoring). AVS should demonstrate the noninterference during the sampling (e.g., passages of RABS 
gloves during the plate changing).   
Total-particle sampling positions need to be set to allow a tube no longer than one meter (1 m) to connect 
the isokinetic sampling-head to the particle counter. Where lengths greater than 1 m must be used,* studies 
are required to assess the particle loss, in particular, the 5.0 µm particle loss, and determine if improvements 
are required. Ideally, the connecting tube would run straight. Any necessary bends should have smooth bend 
radii, where a 90° bend is achieved over no less than 15 cm of tube.  
*Note: RABS should be designed/installed to avoid use exceeding 1 m.
Rationale
It is not possible to monitor the entire RABS. A risk assessment is required to position EM samples in 
locations where they are most likely to detect the risks posed from the main contamination risks, that is, 
conducting both open- and closed-door interventions.  
Each unique particle size will have a different deposition profile in tubing based on, for example, airflow 
velocity and sample volume, tubing diameter, sampling port arrangement, temperature, bend radius, tube 
length, and tubing material. Because particulate monitoring attempts to assess a range of sizes (e.g., 0.5 µm 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
72 
and greater in optical diameter), no single set of radii or length conditions can describe best practices for 
each of these particle sizes. Minimizing the number of tubing bends, maximizing radii, and minimizing 
overall tubing length should be the goal, and it should be done in accordance with the particle-counter 
equipment manufacturer’s recommended best practices.  
The particle-counter equipment manufacturer should provide technical justification for its recommendations. 
Instrument calibration should address sampling configuration.  
Note: 
•
EU Annex 1 now states that tube length should typically be no longer than 1 m and any bend radii
should be avoided.
•
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 14644-1:2015 Cleanrooms and Associated
Controlled Environments — Part 1: Classification of Air Cleanliness by Particle Concentration also
states that tube length should be no longer than 1 m.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
73 
Topic 6. Material Transport and Loading 
Q 6.1. How should indirect product contact surfaces be sterilized or decontaminated? 
Recommendation 
Indirect product-contact parts such as stopper bowls, hoppers, ancillary items (e.g., tweezers, forceps), and 
guides must be sterilized (1). This is typically done by wrapping the clean items in suitable semi-permeable 
packaging material and sterilizing them in a moist-heat autoclave, followed by unloading, transportation 
through the cleanroom environment, and aseptic assembly inside the RABS. Machine items that break First 
Air (e.g., sensors, holders, brackets at the filling line or rotary table) should be avoided where possible. 
When machine items do break First Air, they should be sterilized. (See Question 6.5 for more details.)  
Based on facility layout and whether Grade A continuity can be applied for the sterilized items (e.g., by 
using UDAF carts), either single-wrapping or double-wrapping can be applied to ensure transport of the 
autoclaved, sterilized parts from the Grade B autoclave to the entrance of the RABS. To provide for aseptic 
removal and transfer of the parts into the RABS, good aseptic technique must be used to ensure that the 
inner layer or part is only exposed within the Grade A environment. The wrapping materials and removal 
process should minimize particle generation as much as possible.  
When using double wrapping, the outer wrapping is ideally removed at the barrier door, where the contents 
are still protected by the inner barrier. For large items, such as the stopper bowl, two people may be needed 
to properly complete the aseptic transfer. That is, the primary and secondary operators are responsible for 
different steps: typically, one for the transfer activities outside the RABS, and one for the transfer activities 
inside the RABS. The inner wrapping is then removed toward the end of the assembly process under Grade 
A conditions, depending on the design of the manufacturing line just before or after the RABS doors are 
closed. In case parts of the assembly are done as a closed-door intervention, the wrapping could be removed 
at an earlier stage to enable removal of the wrap from the RABS just before door closure or as a final open-
door intervention. Special considerations must be taken in the sequence of removing the wrapping so as to 
ensure the First Air of already unwrapped parts is not breached during the removal of other wrappers. 
Automated surface bio-decontamination processes such as VPHP, are not considered equivalent to 
sterilization processes, however, they can reduce bioburden risk if applied after the set-up process is 
complete and the RABS doors are closed.  
If items can be directly unloaded into the cRABS (e.g., via RTP) or an aseptic transfer from the autoclave to 
the RABS is otherwise guaranteed (e.g., via Grade A continuity, typically a process requiring rigorous 
controls), different means of wrapping and/or dry-heat sterilization of the indirect product-contact items may 
be applied. The wrapping materials and removal process should minimize particle generation as much as 
possible.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
74 
In addition to open-door installation, an introduction of indirect product-contact parts via RTP or sterile 
boxes can be considered for the RABS to minimize the risk of potential contamination during installation by 
open doors. This especially applies for smaller parts such as guiding and stopper guardrails, for example. 
Rationale 
Indirect product-contact surfaces are critical for the sterility assurance of the product and must be sterilized 
(1).  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
75 
Q 6.2. Can stopper bowls, hoppers, and tracks remain installed between batches? 
Recommendation 
If a campaign manufacture has been justified and there is no risk of contamination during and in between 
the batches, which has been validated in APS, indirect product-contact parts can remain within the RABS 
system for several batches of a campaign using the same equipment. Typically, after completion of a 
campaign, the items are environmentally monitored, cleaned, and sterilized before being reused. In addition 
to the aspect of sterility assurance that the campaign time does not adversely affect particle generation by 
abrasion from stoppers also needs to be considered.   
Rationale 
Specific principles may be defined for campaign manufacture if product sterility assurance is not 
jeopardized (1).   
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
