Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
40 
Q 2.4. What are the considerations for facility layout design regarding acceptable 
personnel passage through the Grade A restricted access barrier system (RABS)?  
Recommendation 
Using a conveyor swing arm to lift the process line and doors that close into both sides to protect the line 
can allow the movement of operators from one side of the line to the other in cases where it is not possible 
to have two entrances into the room from the Grade B corridor. This movement should always be performed 
only after the impacted section of the line has been cleared of vials and is preferable in a section of the line 
where the units have already been filled and are fully stoppered. After personnel passage through the swing 
conveyor, a disinfection of the RABS interior/swing conveyor is required.   
The environment immediately adjacent to the RABS may be designed to provide unidirectional airflow. 
This will provide protection to the glove ports and the interior of the doors when opened to performed 
inherent interventions (i.e., sterile equipment installation) or rare open-door corrective interventions. 
Computational Fluid Design (CFD) modeling may determine the need to have small rigid polycarbonate 
sheets extending from the ceiling to the top of the door height to ensure the airflow is unidirectional 
providing the desired protection. 
Rationale 
The movement of the swing arm might create turbulence in the surrounding air. Every effort must be made 
to prevent air external to the RABS from entering the RABS to protect units that are not yet integral from 
contamination.   
Using smaller HEPA curtains that reach down to door height would provide some directionality and flush 
airflow without introducing risk to operators or materials.   
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
41 
Topic 3. Personnel 
Q 3.1. Should operator gloves be disinfected prior to entering the restricted access 
barrier system (RABS) gloves? 
Recommendation 
Disinfection of operator gloves prior to entry into the RABS gloves is an important component of the CCS 
and should be undertaken prior to each entry into the RABS gloves.   
Gloved hands should be disinfected with an approved disinfectant (e.g., sterile isopropanol) prior to donning 
the RABS gloves (1, 4). The disinfectant can be applied by spraying. It is considered a basic and vital 
element of hygiene and cleanroom practices to minimize contamination risk or the transfer of contaminants 
within the clean room in general. It is also important that the risk of transfer of contamination from one 
operator to another is also considered and mitigated as part of the overall CCS.  
Since RABS gloves are typically shared by more than one operator, the risk of contamination transfer from 
one operator to another through the shared use of the RABS gloves should be minimized by sanitizing the 
operator’s own gloves before they enter into the glove ports or after exiting from the glove ports. The risk 
identified above (multiple operators using same gloves) is with reference to mitigating risk of contamination 
transfer between operators. Of course, the risk of product contamination requires equal consideration.   
Rationale 
RABS gloves are an integral design element and form part of the physical barrier that enables product 
protection by separating operators from the process.   
Disinfection of gloves worn underneath RABS gloves will reduce the microbial load within the RABS 
gloves, in contrast to nondisinfected gloves. In the case of a pinhole in a RABS glove, a reduced microbial 
load on the inside of the RAB glove will reduce the chance of microbial ingress into the RABS Grade A 
environment (14).   
RABS gloves are not infallible and, with continued use, may become worn, torn, or perforated and, hence, 
may potentially compromise the integrity of the system. While controls, including visual inspection (pre- 
and post-interventions of use) of gloves, provide for some degree of detection of holes or leaks, the 
identification of a leak through glove integrity-testing is usually undertaken post-batch or post-campaign 
manufacturing. This requires a retrospective assessment to determine the impact on the batch in the event of 
a confirmed glove-integrity breach.   
For closed-door interventions that require the use of the RABS gloves, the risk profile associated with a 
potential breach of the Grade A RABS environment owing to a RABS glove integrity failure is high. This 
can be further compounded in the absence of operator glove disinfection, since the physical barrier between 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
42 
the operator hand (normally afforded through integral RABS gloves) and the Grade A environment is 
breached. A vector for microbiological contamination is thereby created, with risk profile reduced by 
ensuring adequate glove disinfection. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
43 
Q 3.2. How are personnel qualified for executing interventions? 
Recommendation 
For qualification of personnel for open-door and/or closed-door interventions, an intervention management 
program should be established. Typically, a phase-wise approach is followed to increase operator 
proficiency.   
Level 1 – Training 
A well-rounded personnel qualification training program should include, but not be limited to, the 
following: 
•
Basic elements of microbiology and hygiene with specific focus on cleanroom practices (slow,
deliberate movements of body and arms/gloves), principles about contamination control, First Air
concept, good aseptic working techniques (i.e., in particular during RABS open-door interventions),
protection of sterile products and critical surfaces, and the potential safety implications to the patient
if a product is not sterile.
•
Visual airflow studies should be used in training to support the understanding of operator
interventions in the aseptic space. Virtual reality-based training modules may be used as a best
practice in training to assess operators’ skills and mitigate risks by providing immersive, interactive
simulations that help them practice real-life situations in a controlled environment.
•
Aseptic gowning and cleanroom behavior training is to be provided. The trainee should perform dry
runs of gowning and degowning under the supervision of an experienced trainer, showing that the
trainee is able to perform the gowning process appropriately and consistently. Those dry runs can be
performed in suitable office spaces or otherwise easy-to-access rooms. Gowning qualification can
be initiated in conjunction with a trainer after successful completion of the basic elements of
microbiology and cleanroom behavior aspects outlined above. 
Level 2 – Gowning Qualification Followed by Demonstration 
The aseptic-gowning procedure should be confirmed by a visual and microbial (plating with contact plates) 
assessment, and the trainee's capability to don the complete sterile gown in an aseptic manner to allow entry 
in the aseptic area should be evaluated.   
Demonstration of Assembly/Machine Setup, Interventions, and Filling Operation 
Training is required on site-specific standard procedures, on machine parts setup and interventions, with the 
help of applicable dynamic airflow visualization studies. Training can be staggered based on intervention 
complexity, wherein operators first demonstrate competency to perform less complex interventions prior to 
moving to more complex interventions. Alternatively, the training may be certified as one block, where 
proficiency in all relevant interventions (irrespective of complexity) must be demonstrated for the operator 
to be certified.  
Personnel should observe the production activities (setup and interventions) during routine commercial 
batch-manufacturing from the view windows or by viewing remote cameras without entering into the 
aseptic area. This can be done in parallel with Level 2 training, with supervisory monitoring by experienced 
and qualified personnel.   
Personnel should simulate machine setup and interventions in the aseptic core, with the supervision of 
qualified personnel, by performing interventions in Grade A when there is no commercial batch- 
manufacturing (e.g., after completion of the routine commercial batch operations, prior to cleaning of the 
filling line). Assessment of nonviable and viable particle-monitoring during those simulations may be 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
44 
considered. The number of dry runs to be considered should be based on personnel skill set and prior 
experience before allowing participation in an APS run. 
Level 3 – Practical Assessment in Smaller-Batch and Regular APS  
After completing Levels 1 and 2, the personnel should perform setup and interventions with participation in 
an APS (1, 4, 7, 15). The run can be independent of routine APS, or it can be a routine APS run. The APS 
run may be smaller or of routine size depending on the size of the operation, the number of personnel to be 
qualified, and the process complexity oRABS/cRABS and open- or closed-interventions.   
A bracketing approach can be applied for setup operations in the case of similarities in manipulations) and 
interventions during the media manipulation run for qualifying more than one operator within the same run, 
based on the risk-based approach. However, attention should be paid to the number of units filled by an 
individual operator to be representative of the actual commercial operation.   
Choosing a setup process that is more challenging to perform or more complex in execution and grouping 
interventions to perform with different sets of tools (e.g., using short or long forceps, stopper/seal track 
adjustments, needle adjustment) is recommended.   
For open-door versus closed-door interventions, all open-door interventions and closed-door interventions 
that are classified as high risk within site-risk assessment documents should be chosen to be performed. 
When certifying the personnel to perform the aseptic processing activities in commercial batches, the same 
procedures that were qualified in the APS run should be chosen. Upon the successful result of APS, the data 
compliance monitoring (continuous viable and total particle), assessment of aseptic techniques, and the 
behavior of the operator(s) to be qualified for performing aseptic operations, the operator should be 
qualified.   
Within lifecycle management, when any new open-door interventions are added to the system at later 
stages, quality management tools should ensure that the personnel are qualified to perform the additional 
interventions and the interventions have been simulated in APS runs, unless it has been otherwise 
documented in risk assessments with scientific rationale that the new intervention is like the qualified one.  
Level 4 – Ongoing Training and Assessment  
Upon successful completion of personnel qualification, the operator should be certified to perform aseptic 
operations, and their aseptic behavior should be monitored on a periodic/continuous basis until a sufficient 
level of experience is achieved. The assessment should evaluate if supervision of the newly qualified person 
can be reduced or if   further training and additional assessment is required. It is recommended to qualify 
personnel annually, for both gowning and participation in APS runs.   
Disqualification of Aseptic Processing Personnel  
In the event when operators are considered disqualified, access to the aseptic area should be 
removed/prohibited until demonstration of successful requalification. The disqualification criteria may 
include:   
1.
Failure to qualify or meet periodic qualification requirements 
2.
Participation in an unsuccessful or failed APS, where their performance was identified as a cause or
contribution to the failure 
3.
Repeated aseptic processing technique in a manner deemed unacceptable in relation to cleanroom or
aseptic-process operations or functions. 
4.
Failure to maintain gowning qualification 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
45 
5.
Failure to maintain training requirements
6.
Repeated personnel monitoring excursions
7.
Extended periods of inactivity or absence from the aseptic processing area
8.
Other aspects of performance as identified by a supervisor (e.g., behavioral)
The requalification should be defined on the reason and relative risk associated with the disqualification. 
Rationale 
The performance of personnel-related activities, manipulations, and interventions in the RABS during 
aseptic operations can pose a risk to the sterility of the product or adversely affect it if it is not performed in 
an aseptic manner. Therefore, proper training and qualification of personnel with APS experience is a must.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
46 
Q 3.3. Is there a clear distinction between the operator qualification for closed- and 
open-door operator interventions, and are operators qualified for closed-door 
interventions allowed to perform open-door interventions (For operators qualified for 
specific tasks, e.g., primary operator, secondary operator, based on criticality)? 
Recommendation 
After setup, open-door interventions should be rare events. The personnel authorized to conduct open-door 
line setup and permitted open-door interventions should be trained and qualified specifically for open-door 
interventions after they have been permitted to undertake closed-door interventions.   
Requirements for qualification of open- and closed-door interventions should be clearly distinguished.  
An operator qualified for closed-door intervention is not allowed to perform open-door intervention due to 
the risk factors associated with aseptic techniques and intervention type. But a person qualified for open-
door interventions can be allowed to perform closed-door interventions due to the low risk and considering 
the similarities in the intervention process. However, this should be clearly documented in the site’s quality 
risk assessment and CCS documents (1).   
A qualified-operator list should clearly specify the personnel authorized to perform interventions into the 
Grade A environment, with open-, closed-, or both interventions and, within that category grouping, can be 
done based on the similarities (e.g., loading of stoppers and/or seals if the latter is performed in the RABS).  
Rationale 
Interventions should be designed and performed using proper aseptic techniques to minimize the risk of 
product contamination. Operators should be first performing closed-door interventions and gaining a skillset 
at a later stage to perform open-door interventions. (See Question 3.2 for additional information.)  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
47 
Q 3.4. What are the recommendations for qualified and unqualified interventions? 
Recommendation 
Best Practices for Qualified Interventions 
Interventions should be conducted by trained and qualified personnel. (See Question 3.2 on how to 
qualify.)   
An approved standard operating procedure (SOP) containing all defined interventions with step-by-step 
instructions, mitigation actions (if any), and images (where applicable) should exist (1, 4, 7, 15, 16). A 
dynamic AVS should be performed simulating all the listed interventions, and these studies should be 
repeated with a defined frequency as described in Question 2.3.   
Simulation of all qualified interventions in routine APS should be performed on a rotational basis; its 
maximum frequency of occurrence in routine batch-manufacturing should be covered in an initial 
qualification run and semiannual qualification runs. A rotation policy can be defined in an internal-site risk 
management process but should occur at least annually.   
Management of Unqualified Interventions 
When an unqualified intervention occurs, a real-time risk-based impact assessment shall be performed (See 
Question 1.7 on how to risk assess). If the assessment determines the unqualified intervention can be 
performed, only authorized personnel (See Question 3.2 on authorized personnel) may execute the 
unqualified intervention. If the risk assessment does not support the intervention as safe, then the 
intervention should not proceed and the appropriate steps to end the batch should be taken. As part of batch 
release, the impact of the unqualified intervention must be assessed for quality and compliance on the 
batch.   
Unqualified interventions identified to become qualified interventions shall have AVS to demonstrate 
unidirectional airflow and preservation of First Air are not impacted. The unqualified intervention will then 
be included in the ongoing APS program and upon successful completion the intervention can be added to 
the local procedure. Unqualified interventions that are similar to qualified interventions may not require 
additional AVS execution or inclusion in the APS program, to become a qualified intervention, if proven 
equivalent with supporting technical and scientific rationale. In certain situations, unqualified interventions 
may not be recommended to become a qualified intervention, based upon special events, and will not 
require simulation in AVS and APS programs.   
Rationale 
Interventions should be designed and performed using proper aseptic techniques to minimize impact to the 
production environment and the risk of product contamination. An unqualified intervention does not have 
sufficient data to demonstrate the capability of control, hence, simulating the unqualified intervention in 
APS testing to demonstrate the process capability is recommended.   
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
48 
Topic 4. Glove Integrity-Testing and Maintenance 
Q 4.1. How do you ensure the integrity of restricted access barrier system (RABS) 
gloves? 
Recommendation 
There are various aspects to designing, maintaining, and verifying the integrity of a RABS. The potential 
loss of integrity can occur at many locations, including the RABS enclosure seams, baseplate openings, 
doors, glove ports, gloves, transfer ports, UDAF (in the case of an active RABS), and the lack of First Air. 
A risk analysis should be conducted to assist in identifying design decisions and operational actions that 
have the potential for a loss of integrity. (See PDA Technical Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality Risk 
Management for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations for guidance on performing 
a risk analysis.)  
As discussed in Questions 1.1-1.6 of this document, quality-by-design techniques can reduce the risk of 
incursions to RABS by considering process and user requirements, risk analysis, and designs that limit 
potential points of contamination. However, active monitoring and verification of RABS integrity is key to 
protecting the product and operator safety, where applicable in cRABS.   
Considerations on monitoring glove integrity throughout a campaign is important as post campaign integrity 
test failures can be highly impactful. Also, integrity monitoring after significant interventions needs to be 
considered. Monitoring environmental conditions in real time within the oRABS or cRABS is essential to 
maintaining Grade A conditions to support RABS integrity. These parameters include:   
•
Temperature 
•
Humidity 
•
Differential pressure 
•
UDAF velocity 
•
EM
In addition to real-time monitoring of these environmental conditions, glove integrity-testing, both visual 
assessment and a pressure test are required (1, 17). Firms should establish the procedures for this pressure 
test based on the specifications of their gloves and testing methods. This process should be incorporated into 
the CCS. (See Topics 4-6 of this PtC.).  
A common pathway to RABS contamination is through the use of glove ports and, in particular, the loss of 
integrity of the glove material (4). While pre- and post-filling EM sampling may detect contamination via 
the gloves, it is imperative to verify the integrity of the glove itself. Glove integrity-testing should be 
performed based on an approved risk assessment. An approved risk assessment should determine the 
frequency of pressure testing, visual inspection, and glove changeout (6, 8). Additional glove visual 
assessments should be performed prior to each use during both campaign and batch production (3).   
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
49 
Rationale 
It is critical for RABS to maintain integrity in order to support Grade A conditions. The RABS gloves 
design, use, and maintenance are key elements to ensuring appropriate control and overall integrity. RABS-
related procedures and programs should encompass the continuous review of system and process 
improvements that support product quality.   
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
50 
Q 4.2. What are the considerations for a restricted access barrier system (RABS) glove-
management strategy (e.g., selection, integrity, testing, and maintenance program)? 
Recommendation 
A RABS glove-management strategy is essential to maintaining the RABS environment (i.e., product 
quality) and providing operator safety. This strategy includes glove selection, integrity testing, and an 
established glove changeout frequency (6). Interventions should be designed to in a way to minimize the 
risk of glove damage and loss of integrity. Within a Glove Management Strategy (part of CCS) the regime 
for glove integrity testing should be specified based on risk and impact of glove integrity breaches. Visual 
inspection, and where appropriate physical methods of glove integrity testing, should be applied as 
combined assurance that glove integrity has been maintained through critical process steps of set-up and 
during routine operations where inherent and corrective interventions apply.  
There are multiple considerations with the selection of glove material. (See Question 1.5 for details on 
glove materials of construction).   
Depending on the glove selected, a risk assessment should establish the appropriate and validated integrity 
test method and frequency (1). The risk associated with the process and product would have the greatest 
impact on establishing the appropriate integrity-test requirements. The integrity-test method should include 
both visual and physical testing components as detailed in Question 4.6.   
Based on the glove selected and the established integrity-test requirements, the risk assessment should 
evaluate a preventive maintenance (PM) program to establish the duration of glove changeout and 
replacement frequency (6). Once in operation, the PM frequency of the gloves should be reviewed on a 
periodic basis and adjusted based on data acquired from the RABS. For example, if certain gloves are 
experiencing higher wear due to machine setup and adjustment, operator interventions, and/or cleaning and 
disinfecting agents, the PM frequency may be increased.   
Glove rotation can be considered to minimize the damage or failure rate for reusable-type gloves. 
Consideration should be given to the location(s) where the glove is subjected for low/high utilization during 
processing for rotation from batch or campaign operations (e.g., from a high-interventions zone to a low-
interventions zone. The rotation policy and its recording procedure is to be defined by QRM for its 
traceability.  
Rationale 
The selection of the proper gloves, glove testing, and management of gloves is necessary to ensure operator 
safety and to maintain the RABS environmental conditions. The firm should evaluate their process and 
perform a risk assessment to determine an appropriate integrity test that reliably detects glove defects. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
51 
Q 4.3. What should the maintenance program be for restricted access barrier system 
(RABS) gloves? 
Recommendation 
Expectations and practices regarding the inspection and replacement of glove systems can be documented 
within the planned maintenance program. This should be supported with a quality risk assessment that 
details the rationale for glove-replacement frequency. (See PDA Points to Consider for the Aseptic 
Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators for further details on the glove maintenance 
program.)  
Gloves should not be used until failure. The frequency of PM activities must be established via risk 
assessment with input from the vendor to determine the optimal frequency of glove changeout. The quality 
risk assessment should include, but not be limited to:  
•
Glove material of construction
•
Frequency of glove use
•
How gloves are used (e.g., handling sharp-edged equipment, stretching)
•
VPHP contact time or concentration, if applicable (delamination can occur due to prolonged
VPHP/decontaminant exposure)
•
Type of disinfectant used for inner disinfection of the gloves
•
Ability to clean residual product from the gloves
•
Historical data for loss of integrity
Rationale 
Glove integrity can be critical to product quality. A robust risk assessment, including specific process 
parameters, will provide the information needed for maintenance procedures. Site procedures should define 
the maintenance and operational procedures based on risk.   
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
