Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
82 
are reasonably needed for the completion of a batch or campaign. To avoid contamination of the sterile 
items during their intended usage, suitable holders should be designed inside the Grade A space to avoid 
reaching over the critical parts of the item with the RABS gloves.  
Transfer of Items  
Methods to transfer wrapped packages into a RABS depends on whether or not the RABS has automated 
surface-decontamination functionality (e.g., VPHP). If this is the case, the outside surface of packages could 
be surface-disinfected by the automated process after a transfer through a cleanroom area. If surface-
disinfection is purely manual, either an outer-pouch should be removed if the items were sterilized double-
wrapped (preferred) or a manual disinfection of the package/wrapping needs to take place when the items 
enter the Grade A RABS.  
Non-Product Contact Equipment and Parts 
Non-product-contact equipment/parts (e.g., format parts such as vial guides) are not always suitable for 
moist- or dry-heat sterilization. Those are parts formally not required to be sterile but must meet Grade A 
conditions regarding surface cleanliness when inserted into the RABS. Those parts can either be disinfected 
manually or with the help of automated surface-disinfection processes (e.g., VPHP or similar). When 
removing the parts from the RABS (if stored outside the RABS without cleaning (i.e., for product dedicated 
parts)) and before re-usage, the parts should be protected (e.g., by adding a protective pouch) while still 
within Grade A. If parts are cleaned, they should be protected during storage and before re-usage.   
Removal of Items from RABS  
Once RABS doors are closed, the removal process of any items from the RABS (e.g., exposed plates or 
package/wrapping) must not impact the unidirectional airflow protecting direct and indirect product-contact 
surfaces. In addition, the removal should follow a unidirectional process where the flow of material into the 
RABS is separated from the flow of items to be removed. For best practice in cRABS, RTPs placed at 
different and suitable locations may be used to facilitate the transfer of material. Processing and waste-
removal flows should be considered during the equipment design and procurement phase, the placement of 
access ports should be recorded in the equipment User Requirements Specification, and the rationale should 
be documented in the Design Qualification and/or CCS.  
Rationale 
Transfer techniques into and out of the RABS are based on the type of material/accessory/equipment, its 
cleanability and disposal. Either sterilization or surface decontamination is needed.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
83 
Q 6.6. Is having an approved list of material that is permitted to enter the restricted 
access barrier system (RABS) required? 
Recommendation 
An approved list of material and equipment must be established for all items to be transferred into Grade A 
and Grade B areas. As part of the CCS, all materials allowed to be transferred into the RABS need to be 
predefined, including a description of how it is transferred (1). During shut-downs or maintenance stops, 
where the RABS and cleanrooms are not in an operational state, additional tools, equipment, and material 
might be brought into the RABS, and those must be controlled through other means of the quality system 
(e.g., change management, maintenance work orders).  
Rationale 
Control steps are to be implemented for all material that is about to be transferred to the aseptic 
environment. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
84 
Topic 7. Cycle Development and Validation: Cleaning, Bio-
Decontamination, and Disinfection 
Q 7.1. What are the considerations for planning, designing, and executing a restricted 
access barrier system (RABS) cleaning and disinfection program? 
Recommendation 
Before implementing a cleaning and disinfection program, a RABS cleanability assessment should be 
performed. This assessment should include the suitability of material surfaces to be cleaned as described in 
Question 1.2. In addition, cleaning accessibility in terms of ergonomics, the extent of reach required into the 
RABS, and areas that need cleaning tools to reach should be considered. Hard to clean mechanical spaces 
and surfaces in processing areas should have been eliminated by design as a basic GMP requirement (4). As 
disinfection programs must include the use of an approved sporicidal, the materials of construction within 
the RABS should be assessed to be compatible with such disinfectant agents.* The frequency of use of a 
sporicidal disinfection must be defined in the CCS.  
*Note: Sensitive equipment (e.g., environmental monitoring equipment) must be considered during
cleaning, disinfection and/or decontamination and may need to be covered at a certain cleaning step. This
should be documented in the CCS.
Typically, RABS will include installed process equipment (e.g., filling lines) that are also subjected to 
cleaning and disinfection together with the RABS barrier. Cleanability assessments will therefore include 
suitability and access of process equipment surfaces for cleaning and disinfection procedures. 
Cleaning is a prerequisite to effective bio-decontamination processes. Initially, at start-up and after 
shutdowns, a cleaning agent with a surfactant will assist with the removal of bonded layers of soiling (e.g., 
lubricants, grease, fatty acids from human contact). Cleaning agents are likely to leave residues that may 
require a follow-up wipe removal step with sterile 70% IPA for example, and such actions should be 
included in SOP control design (1, 6).   
Agents will be validated to demonstrate the appropriate log reduction, including bacteria, spores, and viruses 
(as required), with the target of achieving Grade A conditions in the RABS. The process in which agents are 
manually applied must be qualified to ensure appropriate environmental conditions are rendered (6). RABS 
Grade A conditions must be established and under control before sterilized parts, including fluid path or 
filling needles and indirect product-contact parts (e.g., stopper bowls, guides, chutes), are introduced (1).  
Bio-decontamination processes (e.g., VPHP, dry or wet process technologies) should be automated; an 
emphasis should be on a validated cleaning process prior to initiating the bio-decontamination process. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
85 
More automated bio-decontamination processes (e.g., VPHP, dry or wet process technologies) may be 
applied to oRABS (in combination with cleanroom) and cRABS. If disinfection cannot be implemented 
manually (i.e., considered in design), and if enhanced sporicidal efficacy and disinfection assurance is 
required.   
In such applications, cleaning is not replaced by automated disinfection alone and remains an essential pre-
step. In first application or following shutdowns cleaning, where more surface-soiling may be present, a 
neutral detergent with a surfactant may be appropriate, but inevitability it will leave residues, so a following 
residue-removal step would be required, typically with isopropanol.  
A cleanability assessment, selection of cleaning and disinfectant agents, and associated methods of 
application should be defined in a cleaning risk assessment to cover the risk-based decision-making 
requirement as part of the QRM. Having a rationale in place, a qualification methodology can be developed 
ahead of qualification protocols and execution.  
Manual Cleaning and Disinfections of RABS  
RABS require cleaning and disinfection to establish and maintain Grade A conditions. Manual processes for 
these steps are described below.   
Cleaning is the removal of soiling, residual product, and nonviable contaminants. The process is typically 
manual, completed with wipes that apply cleaning agents and a physical removal (i.e., collection in a wipe) 
of contaminants (1, 6).   
Disinfection is a process of applying, via a qualified procedure, a laboratory-validated disinfectant that 
provides an appropriate log reduction of bioburden to specified levels. All disinfection programs for RABS 
should include a sporicidal agent (1, 6). Appropriate residue removal is required after cleaning using 
purified/sterile water (e.g., WFI) or sterile isopropanol.   
There are two stages of RABS disinfection: 
1.
Establishing control of the Grade A processing environment on first installation, after shutdown,
and between batches and campaigns. This first step of disinfection should include a sporicidal
agent, hence, sporicidal disinfection of the complete internal processing area within the RABS.
2.
Routine disinfection in production, which includes after open-barrier interventions and wiping
down the barrier door before closing. The selection of the disinfectant should be based on a risk
assessment and assurance that Grade A conditions are not compromised.
It is recommended that primary and secondary operators carry out these disinfection tasks related to 
interventions. Interventions into Grade A processing zones should be undertaken by a primary operator with 
the necessary localized internal-zone disinfection followed by personnel monitoring, based on an approved 
risk assessment, prior to closing the operations. The secondary operator should complete the internal RABS 
door disinfection before closing the RABS barrier.   
Rationale 
If RABS are cleaned and disinfected by manual application methods, the prerequisite of a cleanability 
assessment is paramount.   
Different combinations of cleaning and disinfectant agents may be applied based on process steps and levels 
of soiling.   
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
86 
Q 7.2. What are the current options for ensuring consistent execution of cleaning, bio-
decontamination, disinfection, and sporicidal disinfection of a restricted access barrier 
System (RABS)?  
Recommendation 
Disinfectant agents will require qualification or validation to provide evidence of efficacy on surfaces for a 
defined contact time, typically referred to as “wet contact time” (2). Different disinfectant qualification 
methodologies can be applied based on the best combination of international standards and guidance.   
Aseptic- process filling would require Grade A particulate and microbial cleanliness levels inside the RABS, 
with cleaning and disinfection considered as the surface-contamination control measure (1). The outside of 
the RABS barrier would require following the cleanroom grading level (in filling Grade B).  
Disinfectant agents are validated for efficacy in laboratory studies, including material coupon surface- 
disinfection studies, with subsequent qualification of the application method and procedure. EM is used to 
assess the effectiveness of the cleaning and disinfection program (1, 6). In-field efficacy challenge studies 
are not typically implemented for manual disinfection applied to RABS in contrast to automated VPHP 
process technologies, bio-decontamination, and alternative sporicidal-agent processes that require 
biological-indicator (BI) inactivation challenge studies (4).   
The bio-decontamination processes of VPHP process technologies have the potential of achieving 6-log 
reduction when combined with the required qualification of the automated gaseous-disinfection system and 
method of application with associated control parameters (6). Once the bio-decontamination-equipment 
integration is qualified, a process of cycle development should be applied, followed by an efficacy-
performance qualification (PQ) with a BI reference challenge of Geobacillus stearothermophilus spores on 
stainless coupons. VPHP BI’s are described in PDA Technical Report No. 51 Biological Indicators for Gas 
and Vapor-Phase Decontamination Processes: Specification, Manufacture, Control and Use.  
Enzymatic indicators (EIs) are increasingly playing a role in cycle development to improve efficiency (time 
savings) and assessment of location-to-location efficacy. However, accepting the initial BI/EI correlation 
studies is required, and the final cycle qualification currently requires BI challenge studies.   
The outcome of manual disinfection, following the application of a qualified agent according to a qualified 
SOP, is assessed by the EM program. The EM program assesses the effectiveness of the qualified 
disinfection and bio-decontamination process. RABS cleaning and disinfection qualification should align 
with ISO 14644-1 requirements for cleanrooms and associated controlled environments and with EU Annex 
1 and FDA guidances on manufacturing sterile products by aseptic processing for qualification before 
conducting APS qualification in readiness for production activities.  
Open-door interventions into a RABS barrier during aseptic processing, a rare occurrence, requires 
additional cleaning and disinfection of the open barrier door, including the inside of the barrier door, before 
it is closed to reestablish Grade A conditions of the complete barrier. Protective airflow and procedure 
control should result in the sterilized parts that enter during setup remaining sterile without compromise. 
Disinfection applied to sterile surfaces could potentially compromise sterility and therefore should be 
avoided, instead focusing on the procedural control and protective airflow that prevents compromise to the 
sterile surfaces in the first place.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
