34
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73-2
filled Pen (Prefilled Syringe Assembled with 
Autoinjector Parts forming a Single Integral 
Product Regulated as a Medicinal Product); 
EFPIA: Brussels, 2019.
17.	 European Biopharmaceutical Enterprises 
and European Federeation of Pharmaceuti-
cal Industries and Associations. EBE-EFPIA 
Reflection Paper: An Industry Perspective on 
Article 117 of the EU Medical Devices Regu-
lation and the Impact on how Medicines are 
Assessed; EFPIA: Brussels, 2018.
18.	 Medical Device Coordination Group. 
MDCG 2021-24: Guidance on Classification 
of Medical Devices; European Commission: 
Strasbourg, 2021.
19.	 European Commission. Guidelines Relating 
to the Application of the Council Directive 
90/385/EEC on Active Implantable Medi-
cal Devices the Council Directive 93/42/Eec 
on Medical Devices: Medical Devices with a 
Measuring Function; European Commis-
sion: Brussels, 1998.
20.	 The British Standards Institution. BS EN 
60601-1-2:2015+A1:2021 Medical Electri-
cal Equipment General Requirements for Ba-
sic Safety and Essential Performance. Collat-
eral Standard: Electromagnetic Disturbances. 
Requirements and Tests; BSI: London, 2021.
21.	 The British Standards Institution. BS EN 
62366-1:2015+A1:2020 Medical Devices 
Application of Usability Engineering to Medi-
cal; BSI: London, 2020.
22.	 International Organization for Standardiza-
tion. IEC/TR 62366-2:2016 Medical De-
vices — Part 2: Guidance on the Application 
of Usability Engineering to Medical Devices; 
ISO: Geneva, 2016.
23.	 European Commission. Note for Guidance 
on Minimising the Risk of Transmitting Ani-
mal Spongiform Encephalopathy Agents via 
Human and Veterinary Medicinal Products 
(EMA/410/01 rev.3); Official Journal of 
the European Union. Publications Office, 
European Union: Brussels, 2011.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
35
Technical Report No. 73-2
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
•	 Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
•	 Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
•	 Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an 
Authorized User 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
•	 Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other 
than an Authorized User 
•	 Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available 
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
•	 Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic 
Publication 
•	 Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA 
Electronic Publication 
•	 Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication 
or its content 
•	 Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or 
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose 
•	 Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any 
text or graphics 
•	 Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information 
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material 
To License or purchase Reprints
•	 Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a fee.  
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact: 
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway, 
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
•	 Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.  
To order reprints, please contact:  
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150, 
Bethesda, MD 20814.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Application of Medical Device Regulation Annex I Requirements for Staked Needle Syringes
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside 
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are 
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. 
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the 
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a 
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available. 
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s 
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products Advisory Board, Biopharma-
ceutical Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the 
PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and determines whether or not to publish the document as an 
official PDA Technical Report. 
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged 
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be 
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org. 
PDA Officers and Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck 
Chair-Elect: Melissa Seymour, Biogen, Inc.
Secretary: Bettine Boltres, PhD, West Pharmaceutical Services
Treasurer: Emma Ramnarine, Genentech/Roche
Immediate Past-Chair: Susan Schniepp, RCA
President: Glenn Wright
Directors 
Lisa Bennett, Seer Pharma
Christiana Campa, PhD, GSK
Andrew Chang, PhD, Novo Nordisk, Inc.
Cylia Chen, MA, Amgen
Mirko Gabriele, PhD, Thermo Fisher Scientific
Marc Gloglovsky, ValSource Inc. 
Andrew Hopkins, Abbvie
Stephan O. Krause, PhD, Bristol Myers Squibb
Ivy Louis, VIENNI Training & Consulting LLP
Amy McDaniel, BMS
Brigitte Reutter-Haerle, Vetter Pharma International GmbH
Osamu Shirokizawa, Life Scientia, Ltd.
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Josh Eaton, Sr. Director, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing and Press Relations
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer
Sanctioning Advisory Board: RAQAB
Denyse Baker, Eli Lilly and Company Limited, (Chair)
Eva Urban, CSL Behring AG, (Vice-Chair)
Anette Yan Marcussen, NNE A/S, (Past-Chair) 
Masahiro Akimoto, Heartseed Inc.
Lisa Benette, SeerPharma
Chuck Bornhoeft, Rion
Marcello Colao, GSK Vaccines
Rosane Cuber, Bio-Manguinhos/FIOCRUZ
Karolyn Gale, Emergent BioSolutions, Inc.
Kir Henrici, The Henrici Group, LLC
Dinesh Khokal, Amgen, Inc.
Beth Kirschenheiter, Bristol Myers Squibb
Amanda McFarland, ValSource, Inc.
Catriona Murphy, Eli Lilly and Company Limited
Ajay Pazhayattil, Capcium Inc.
Vishal Sharma, Vienni Training and Consulting LLP
Michele Simone, Bracco
Jacqueline Veivia-Panter, Biocentriq 
Vudathala, Gopi, Incyte
Kelly Waldron, ValSource
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
