

===== PAGE 1 =====
 Page 1 of 38 
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
COMPLIANCE PROGRAM GUIDANCE MANUAL 
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
 
 
CHAPTER 56 – DRUG QUALITY ASSURANCE 
 
SUBJECT: 
STERILE DRUG PROCESS INSPECTIONS 
 
Revision Note: Program revised 09/11/2015 to update 
implementation date, completion date, 
organizational/procedural changes and program 
contacts.    
IMPLEMENTATION DATE 
September 11, 2015 
COMPLETION DATE 
September 11, 2016 
DATA REPORTING 
PRODUCT CODES 
PRODUCT/ASSIGNMENT CODES 
Industry codes 54, 56 and 60-66 inclusive 
Domestic / Foreign Inspections: 
56002A (Full Inspection) 
56002I (Abbreviated Inspection) 
Related PACs 
56002 
56002C 
56002M 
 
 
FIELD REPORTING REQUIREMENTS: 
 
Establishment Inspection Reports (EIRs) are to be created and filed electronically using the specific 
module in TurboEIR or replacement system that is accessible to both ORA and CDER. 
For inspections of routine commercial manufacturing classified as Official Action Indicated (OAI) due to 
failure to comply with 21 CFR Part 210 and 211 Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) as they 
apply to sterile drug process inspections, submit advisory, administrative, or judicial action 
recommendations via MARCS-CMS in accordance with the Regulatory Procedures Manual (RPM). 
Districts should immediately report significant issues according to current FACTS, Panorama and CMS 
procedures. This includes promptly filing and changing OAI notifications. 
During an inspection, if you obtain information pertaining to inadequate adverse drug experience (ADE) 
reporting, unapproved drug issues, or post-approval reporting violations (application supplements, Field 
Alert Reports (FARs), etc.), report in accordance with directions provided in the applicable compliance 
programs and under separate captions in the EIR. Data system information about these inspectional 
activities should be reported under separate Program Assignment Codes (PACs).  Expansion of coverage 
under these programs into a CGMP inspection should be reported under this compliance program. 


===== PAGE 2 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 2 of 38 
 
 
The Districts are requested to use this compliance program for all sterile drug process inspections. 
 
NOTE: Districts should assure that each operation performed by direction of this program circular is 
entered against the correct Product Code and Program/Assignment Code (P/AC). 


===== PAGE 3 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 3 of 38 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
PART I 
BACKGROUND ................................................................................................... 4 
 
PART II 
IMPLEMENTATION ............................................................................................. 5 
2.1   Objective....................................................................................................... 5 
2.2   Program Management Instructions .............................................................. 5 
A. Strategy ............................................................................................... 5 
B. Inspection Planning............................................................................. 6 
C. Profile Reporting ................................................................................. 6 
 
PART III 
INSPECTIONAL ................................................................................................... 7 
3.1   Types of Sterilization .................................................................................... 7 
A. Terminal sterilization ........................................................................... 7 
B. Aseptic processing .............................................................................. 7 
3.2   Reporting ...................................................................................................... 8 
3.3   Inspection Approaches................................................................................. 9 
3.4   System Inspection Coverage ..................................................................... 11 
3.5   Quality System ........................................................................................... 11 
3.6   Facilities and Equipment System ............................................................... 13 
A. Facilities ............................................................................................ 13 
B. Equipment ......................................................................................... 14 
3.7   Materials System ........................................................................................ 19 
3.8   Production System ..................................................................................... 21 
3.9   Packaging and Labeling System ................................................................ 27 
3.10 Laboratory Control System......................................................................... 27 
3.11 Sampling..................................................................................................... 29 
 
PART IV 
ANALYTICAL..................................................................................................... 30 
 
PART V 
REGULATORY/ADMINISTRATIVE STRATEGY .............................................. 31 
 
PART VI 
REFERENCES, ATTACHMENTS AND PROGRAM CONTACTS ................... 33 
6.1   References ................................................................................................. 33 
6.2   Attachments................................................................................................ 34 
6.2   Contacts ..................................................................................................... 34 
 
PART VII 
CENTER RESPONSIBILITIES .......................................................................... 36 
 
ATTACHMENT A 
.................................................................................................................A 
 
[end Cover Page] 


===== PAGE 4 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 4 of 38 
 
 
 
 
PART I - BACKGROUND 
 
 
This program covers the manufacture and testing of all sterile drug products, including drugs that are 
sterilized by filtration or other means and aseptically processed, and drug products that are terminally 
sterilized. The type of products covered by this program include sterile bulk drugs, ophthalmic drugs, 
otic dosage forms, small volume parenteral (SVS) products for small molecule and licensed biological 
therapeutic drug products, large volume parenteral (LVP) products, and any other drug products 
required to be sterile or labeled as sterile. Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) 
regulated products and veterinary drug products are excluded from coverage under this program. 
 
The guidance information in this program is tailored to sterile manufacturing operations and should be 
used in conjunction with the Compliance Program for Drug Manufacturing Inspections (CP 7356.002). 
 
In 2004, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) published the Guidance for Industry Sterile Drug 
Products Produced by Aseptic Processing-- Current Good Manufacturing Practice, which is referred to 
throughout this Compliance Program as FDA’s “2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance.” The document 
represents FDA’s current thinking on Current Good Manufacturing Practices (CGMPs) for aseptically 
processed drugs. 
 
The Guidance for Industry does not establish mandatory requirements and should not be referred to as 
the justification for an inspectional observation. Justification for inspectional observations originates 
from the CGMP regulations, 21 CFR Parts 210 and 211. 
 
Manufacturers who follow the 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance are generally considered compliant 
with CGMP regulations. However, alternate approaches may be used if such approaches satisfy the 
requirements of 21 CFR Parts 210 and 211. 
 
For technical questions and unusual circumstances encountered during an inspection, investigators are 
encouraged to contact their District, ORA Office of Medical Products and Tobacco Operations/Division 
of Medical Products and Tobacco Program Operations and/or CDER for consultation. For questions 
concerning microbiological analysis, sterility and related sampling concerns, contact ORA Office of 
Regulatory Science/Medical Products and Tobacco Scientific Staff. 
 
[end Part I] 


===== PAGE 5 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 5 of 38 
 
 
 
 
PART II - IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
2.1  OBJECTIVES 
 
The primary objective of this program is to provide guidance for conducting inspections of 
manufacturers of sterile bulk1 and sterile finished dosage drug products to determine compliance with 
the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the Current Good Manufacturing Practice Regulations (CGMPs), 
Title 21, CFR Parts 210 and 211. 
 
Other objectives include: 
• Obtain information on operations impacting on sterility, to identify areas for improvement and 
correction. 
• Evaluate current good manufacturing practices in the sterile drug industry. 
• Initiate appropriate action against manufacturers observed to be out of compliance. 
 
2.2  PROGRAM MANAGEMENT INSTRUCTIONS 
A. STRATEGY 
(1) Inspection of Systems 
 
Inspections of drug manufacturers should be made and reported using the system definitions and 
organization in this compliance program. Focusing on systems will increase inspection efficiency 
because the systems are often applicable to multiple profile classes. The selection of the system(s) for 
coverage will be made by the District Office based on the firm’s specific operation, previous coverage, 
compliance history, or other priorities determined by the District Office. 
 
The inspection should normally result in a determination of acceptability or non-acceptability for all 
profile classes. Coverage of a system should be sufficiently detailed, i.e., select an example of each 
profile class, so that the conclusion about the system’s state-of-control applies to all the profiles classes. 
However, the determination that a system is adequately controlled for one profile class can be extended 
to another profile class(es) even if that other profile class(es) was not specifically reviewed. The lead 
Investigator must consider the uniqueness of the various manufacturing situations at the plant and use 
their best judgment when selecting profile classes to review. 
 
Selecting specific areas unique functions within a system will be at the discretion of the lead 
Investigator. 
 
The options for system coverage are described in CPGM 56002. Any given inspection need not cover 
every system. See  Part III - Inspectional. 
 
Complete inspection of one system may necessitate further follow up of some items within the activities 
of another system(s) to fully document the findings. Such follow up does not constitute full coverage of 
the other system (and cannot be reported as such in FACTS); nor does that follow up obligate the 
investigator to perform full coverage of the other system. 
 
1 “Sterile bulk” refers to sterile active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs). 


===== PAGE 6 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 6 of 38 
 
 
 
 
(2) Inspectional Scope 
Inspections of sterile product drug manufacturers are performed as either Full Inspections or 
Abbreviated Inspections using the systems strategy outlined in Part II –Implementation, of Compliance 
Program 7356.002, Drug Manufacturing Inspections. 
 
See Part III – Inspectional, of this program for a complete discussion of the coverage requested under 
these inspection options. 
 
B. INSPECTION PLANNING 
Implement this program when sterile drug manufacturers are inspected as part of a regular statutory 
inspection. CDER will identify firms for inspection based on the risk-based prioritization model on 
annual performance goals, as part of the initiative to ensure risk-based prioritization of inspection 
coverage. 
 
Consider using a team approach for conducting inspections when appropriate. Utilize investigators 
familiar with sterile drug manufacturing and aseptic processing and consider the participation of a 
microbiologist with expertise in microbial controls. Specifically, 
• All team members should be very familiar with FDA’s Guidance for Industry Sterile Drug 
Products Produced by Aseptic Processing – Current Good Manufacturing Practice (September 
2004). 
• Investigators or team members should be well qualified in sterile product manufacturing, and 
have completed formal training courses in parenteral drug manufacture, aseptic technique, 
sterilization methods, and related procedures and equipment. Microbiologists involved should 
have experience in sterility, endotoxin testing, and evaluation of microbial controls in 
manufacturing. 
 
C. PROFILE REPORTING 
 
Update all applicable profile classes in the profile screen of the FACTS coversheet based on inspection 
findings. The following is a list of sterile product profile classes effective at the time this program was 
implemented. Use the codes corresponding to the product and process type covered. 
 
PROFILE 
CLASS 
FULL DESCRIPTION 
LVP 
Large Volume Parenterals are sterile injectable drugs packaged in containers labeled as 
containing more than 100 mL. Most are terminally sterilized, but some can be sterilized by 
filtration and aseptically processed. 
SVT 
Small Volume Parenterals are sterile injectable drugs packaged in containers labeled as 
containing less than 100 mL that are terminally sterilized. 
SVS 
Small Volume Parenterals are sterilized by filtration and aseptically processed. 
SVL 
Small Volume Parenteral are sterilized by filtration, aseptically filled and lyophilized. 
SLQ 
Sterile liquid (other than suspensions and emulsions) 
SON 
Sterile ointment 
SPW 
Sterile powder 
CSS 
Sterile bulk drugs that are made by chemical synthesis. 
CFS 
Sterile crude drugs made by fermentation. 
CRX 
API sterile or API intermediate/NEC inorganic/mineral 
[end Part II] 


===== PAGE 7 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 7 of 38 
 
 
 
 
PART III - INSPECTIONAL 
 
 
3.1 TYPES OF STERILIZATION 
 
There are two broad methods to produce a sterile drug product: 
 
• Terminal Sterilization 
• Aseptic Processing of sterilized unit components 
 
There are basic differences between the production of sterile drug products using aseptic processing and 
production using terminal sterilization. Terminal sterilization should be utilized when the product and 
container/closure system are able to withstand the terminal sterilization process. 
 
A. TERMINAL STERILZATION - The terminal sterilization process usually involves filling and 
sealing product containers under high quality environmental conditions designed to minimize microbial 
and particulate contamination of the product. This minimization of upstream bioburden reduces the 
challenge to the subsequent sterilization process. In most cases, the product, container, and closure have 
low bioburden, but are not sterile at the time of filling. The product is then subjected to a sterilization 
process in its final container. 
 
There are various methods of terminal sterilization including: 
 
• Moist Heat Sterilization 
• Irradiation 
• Ethylene Oxide (typically for assembled components/kits) 
Types of sterilization cycles include: 
 
1. Overkill method: 
o Generally used for heat stable materials. 
o Designed to provide a significant level of sterility assurance regardless of the number and 
resistance of the actual bioburden organisms in the load. 
o Results in greater heat/exposure input to the product or items being sterilized. 
 
2.  Bioburden Based cycle: 
o Requires studies to determine the number and resistance of the microorganisms found in the 
product and the bioburden load of the incoming components and containers/closures. 
o Cycle development to destroy the microbial load, but not degrade the product. 
o Routine bioburden monitoring of batches and ongoing knowledge of the heat/exposure 
resistance of organisms found in product bioburden, container/closure bioburden and 
environmental monitoring samples. 
 
Reference to terminal sterilization:  PDA Technical Report No. 1 (Revised 2007) Validation of Moist 
Heat Sterilization Processes: Cycle Design, Development, Qualification and Ongoing Control. 
 
B. ASEPTIC PROCESSING  - Aseptic processing presents a higher risk of microbial contamination of 
the product than terminal sterilization. In an aseptic filling process, the drug product, containers and 


===== PAGE 8 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 8 of 38 
 
 
 
 
closures are sterilized separately and then brought together under an extremely high quality 
environmental condition designed to reduce the possibility of a non-sterile unit. Aseptic processing 
involves more variables than terminal sterilization. Any manual or mechanical manipulation of the 
sterilized drug, containers, or closures prior to or during aseptic filling and assembly poses the risk of 
microbial contamination. 
 
Some types of aseptic processing involve manual manipulations of sterile components, containers, and 
closures in addition to routine operator interventions in the critical area. Humans are a significant source 
of contamination in traditional aseptic processing, especially in production lines that require operators to 
routinely enter critical areas (Class 100, ISO 5, or Grade A) of the filling line. Aseptic processing 
systems based on more advanced control-based technologies, such as Restricted Access Barrier Systems 
(RABS) and Blow-Fill-Seal systems, are designed to reduce human interventions in the critical areas of 
the fill line while an isolator system completely separates the aseptic filling line from the external 
environment and minimizes employee interaction with the critical area. 
 
Note: More information about Isolator Technology and Blow-Fill-Seal systems is found 
in FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance. 
 
When conducting inspections of sterile drug manufacturers, it is important to cover systems and areas 
within systems that present the greatest risk of product contamination and/or require strict control of 
processing parameters. For example, if a firm has several aseptic processing lines, cover the line(s) that 
require the most manual manipulations in the Class 100 (ISO 5) areas. If the firm terminally sterilizes a 
number of products, review one that is sensitive to heat and requires a product specific (bioburden 
based) sterilization cycle. 
 
Note:  For terminal sterilized products that are aseptically filled prior to terminal sterilization, less 
rigorous aseptic controls can be considered. 
 
Because of the time limitations often associated with foreign inspections, careful inspection planning is 
particularly important. Prioritize areas for coverage based upon their potential impact on product 
quality. 
 
 
3.2  REPORTING 
 
Follow instructions in the current editions of the IOM (Investigations Operations Manual) and Guide to 
International Inspection and Travel in preparing the inspection report. 
 
Use Turbo EIR for all reports, both domestic and international, even if a FDA-483 was not issued or was 
issued outside of Turbo EIR. The “Manufacturing / Design Operations” section of the report should be 
organized by the systems described in this program that were covered during the inspection. Briefly 
summarize your review of each covered system in accordance with the key elements outlined in this 
Compliance Program. Add more details and supporting evidence for the systems found to be deficient. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 9 of 38 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3  INSPECTION APPROACHES 
 
If the sterile drug products to be inspected are radioactive drugs, then Compliance Program 7356.002C, 
Radioactive Drugs, should be followed as supplementary guidance. This program should not be used for 
the inspection of Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Drug. Compliance Program 7356.002P is 
specific for PET drugs. 
 
This program (CP 7356.002A) should also be used in conjunction with Compliance Program 
7356.002M, Inspection of Licensed Biological Therapeutic Drug Products for the inspection of sterile 
licensed biological products. 
 
The CGMP Compliance Program 7356.002 provides general information on the system based approach 
to conducting inspections of drug manufacturers. It describes the six systems (Quality, Facilities and 
Equipment, Materials, Production, Packaging and Labeling, and Laboratory) and the two inspection 
options (Full Inspection and Abbreviated Inspection). It also provides guidance on when each option 
should be selected and discusses what “state of control” means in relation to the systems inspected. 
 
Inspections of sterile drug manufacturers are performed as either Full or Abbreviated inspections using 
the systems strategy outlined below. 
 
Full Inspections include surveillance or compliance inspections and provide a comprehensive evaluation 
of the firm’s compliance with CGMP. A Full Inspection will normally include an inspection of at least 
four systems, one of which must be the Quality System. Under this program, a Full Inspection should 
include the Facilities & Equipment, and Production Systems due to the critical role these systems play in 
the sterility assurance of finished product. 
 
Full Inspections (PAC 56002A) are conducted 
 
• when initial inspection of the drug firm is to be conducted; 
• when it is the first inspection conducted as a follow-up to a Warning Letter,  regulatory action, 
or significant FDA 483 findings; 
• when information obtained during the Abbreviated Inspection reveals significant deficiencies 
with the firm’s practices and procedures in one or more system areas; 
• when there have been significant changes in the firm’s operations since the last inspection; or 
• for surveillance purposes at the District’s discretion because the firm has a history of recurring 
violations, fluctuating in and out of compliance, or when other information (samples, 
complaints, Field Alerts, recalls, etc.) calls into question the firm’s ability to produce quality 
products. 
 
Abbreviated Inspections (PAC 56002I) may be appropriate if the following two conditions are satisfied: 
 
1. the firm has implemented a formal risk management program that assures effective design and 
control (including maintenance). This includes a risk mitigating design of their processing lines 
that incorporates a modern separation and automation approach (e.g., isolators, closed RABS), 
and upstream bioburden controls. The responsiveness of the firm’s quality system to potential 
hazards is also part of the evaluation, including whether the firm’s program provides robust 


===== PAGE 10 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 10 of 38 
 
 
 
 
daily assurance and effective consumer protection through a formal lifecycle quality risk 
management program that proactively uncovers and corrects issues in accord with ICH Q9. 
 
2. the firm has a record of sustained acceptable compliance history and a strong risk management 
program. 
o the firm produces finished drug products that are terminally sterilized using robust 
sterilization methods. (Note: Terminal sterilization provides a much more robust process to 
ensure sterility);  or, 
o the firm has implemented robust risk management that provides daily assurance through 
their overall design and control program; 
o at the start of the inspection, conduct an extensive review of sterility assurance data since 
the last Full Inspection. The review of media fills, sterility testing data, recalls, 
defect/adverse event complaints, and reports reveals no findings of sterility failure of a 
distributed batch, and 
o the firm has a record of satisfactory CGMP compliance (e.g., two consecutive NAI or no 
more than one VAI inspection), with no Class 1 recalls. 
 
Microbial controls and sterility assurance should be the main focus of an abbreviated sterile drug 
inspection. The following critical elements of each system (other than the Quality System) should be 
covered in an Abbreviated Inspection under this program: 
 
• Facilities and Equipment: 
o cleaning and disinfection 
o facility/equipment layout and air handling system for preventing viable and non-viable 
contamination 
o material flow 
o quality control of classified areas, including air pressure balance and HEPA filtration 
o trending data supporting the adequacy of clean room quality 
o documented investigation into discrepancy 
 
• Materials: 
o microbial and bacterial endotoxin control of incoming materials and components 
o quality of water supply, maintenance, qualification 
o operation of the systems that provide the requisite water and process gases 
o documented investigations into OOS, deviations, and discrepancies 
 
• Production: 
o observation of adequacy of operator behavior and aseptic techniques during manufacturing 
o production line operations and interventions 
o personnel training in aseptic techniques 
o major production line repair or maintenance issues 
o risk assessment on microbial and bacterial endotoxin controls, including hold times of 
critical steps 


===== PAGE 11 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 11 of 38 
 
 
 
 
o validation of sterilization of equipment, container-closures and supplies 
o media fills design and results 
o documented investigations into, deviations, discrepancies, and OOS results 
 
• Laboratory: 
o investigations into OOS, deviations, and discrepancies 
o test methods and controls, including adherence to validated methods 
o training and qualifications of laboratory personnel 
o trending of water system test results 
o systems used for recovery, identification and trending of environmental monitoring isolates 
 
 
3.4  SYSTEM INSPECTION COVERAGE 
 
Compliance Program 7356.002, Drug Manufacturing Inspections, lists the areas that should be covered 
when inspecting each of the six systems. This program provides additional guidance, by system, for 
areas of specific concern for sterile drug products. 
 
Attachment A is a list of questions intended to be an aid in conducting inspections and obtaining 
information needed to assess a firm’s operations. The answers do not have to be reported in the EIR 
unless they are relevant. The list of questions covers: moist heat sterilization; dry heat 
sterilization/depyrogenation; aseptic filling; lyophilization; isolators; environmental monitoring; and 
biological indicators. 
 
 
3.5  QUALITY SYSTEM 
 
As noted in Compliance Program 7356.002, the inspection of the quality system is two-phased. The first 
phase is to evaluate whether the Quality Unit has fulfilled their responsibility regarding the review and 
approval of procedures and assured their suitability for use. The second phase is to assess the data 
collected by the firm to identify potential quality problems. For sterile manufacturing operations, this 
latter objective involves large amounts of data that link to the other inspectional systems. The 
comprehensive review of such data by the firm is an essential element in assuring that products are 
produced with a high degree of sterility assurance. It is therefore important to review the firm’s system 
for using the data to assess the state of control of their manufacturing operations and facility. The data 
summaries and trend reports maintained by the Quality Unit should be reviewed during every 
inspection. During a routine CGMP inspection, this review can help determine which option (Full or 
Abbreviated) to select. 
 
The inspection of the Quality System should include the areas listed in CP7356.002. For this program, 
the inspection should include a review of all data and reports that may indicate product contamination 
and sterility assurance issues. 
 
Records pertaining to quality consist of the following: 
 
1. Periodic product evaluations, complaints, adverse events, investigations, Field Alert Reports, 
product retain evaluations, complaints, rejected lots, stability, and returned goods that indicate 


===== PAGE 12 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 12 of 38 
 
 
 
 
possible product contamination or risks to patients (for example, hazy or cloudy product, 
foreign matter/particulates in injectable products, cracked, and leaky containers). 
 
2. Discrepancy and failure investigations, such as: 
 
o All initial positive sterility tests and endotoxin and media fill failures regardless of final 
disposition. 
o Unexpected results or trends. 
o All failures that occurred during validation or revalidation of sterilization / depyrogenation 
processes. 
o All investigations involving media fills / process simulations. 
o Environmental (microbial/viable and particle/non-viable counts) and personnel monitoring 
results that exceed alert or action levels. 
o Process deviations or equipment malfunctions that involve critical equipment, such as 
sterilizers and lyophilizers. 
o Out of Specification (OOS) results for assay, impurities, particulate matter, or reconstitution 
time, if applicable. 
o Product rejects (rejects determined during manufacturing and Quality Control test) 
 
3. Trends reports/ summaries of quality indicators: 
 
o For aseptic processing, summary of all media fills performed since last inspection. 
o Environmental monitoring trend data (microbial and particle counts). 
o Personnel monitoring trend data. 
o Summary of water system test results. 
 
4. Summary of change controls for critical utilities and equipment implemented since the  last 
inspection, for example: 
 
o Sterilizers, lyophilizers, depyrogenation equipment 
o Aseptic processing line 
o Clean steam generator, process gas system 
o WFI and / or Purified Water system 
o Air handling systems 
o Automated building management system 
 
Every inspection of a sterile drug manufacturer should include a review of the type of information listed 
above and observation of the manufacturing operations occurring in the critical areas. The information 
can be used to select other system(s) to be covered during the inspection. 
 
In addition, the review of summary data and observation of operations can focus the inspection on 
potential problem areas and provides an overview of the effectiveness of the Quality System. The 
inspection of the Quality System may necessitate follow-up within another system. However, this 
coverage does not constitute or require complete coverage of these systems. 


===== PAGE 13 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 13 of 38 
 
 
 
 
3.6  FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT SYSTEM 
 
Compliance Program 7356.002 lists the general areas to cover when inspecting the Facilities and 
Equipment System. The areas are applicable to sterile drug products and should be covered if this 
system is selected. The principle objective of an effective sterile drug manufacturing operation from a 
facility and equipment standpoint is to provide suitable protection of product. The inspectional 
evaluation of this objective is again two-part: 
 
• Review and evaluate the firm’s rationale for, and adequacy of, the facility and equipment 
design (Reference: Section IV of FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance). 
• Evaluate the data that provide information relevant to the state of control of the facility and 
equipment. 
 
In addition to the review of design elements and data, investigators should look for visible deficiencies in 
the facility and equipment, such as cleanliness, equipment deterioration (e.g., warping, corrosion), 
inaccessible and/or difficult to clean surfaces, and changes to critical equipment or systems that have not 
been qualified which may impact product quality. Investigator should look for aberrant events due to 
facility deterioration, a pattern of recurring and uncorrected maintenance issues, and increase or changes 
in production output that exceed the capacity of the facility and equipment. 
 
A. FACILITIES 
 
Evaluate the design and layout of the facility (e.g., personnel/material flow, cleanroom design). 
 
Specifications for clean room areas (layout, air filtration, appropriate air classification, pressure 
differentials between rooms and areas, temperature, and humidity) should be appropriate, and based on 
the risk of product contamination with particulate matter and microorganisms. Review the certification 
and qualification of the clean room areas to verify the areas meet design criteria and specifications. 
Certification and qualification typically includes data in support of the following: air flow pattern 
studies, HEPA (High Efficiency Particulate Air) filter integrity testing, air velocity measurement, non- 
viable particle, and verification of appropriate pressure differentials, temperature and humidity setpoints. 
Evaluate the airflow pattern (smoke studies) conducted under dynamic conditions to verify the 
unidirectional airflow and air turbulence within the critical area where sterilized drug product, 
containers, and closures are exposed to environmental conditions. 
 
• Reference: Section IV of FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance. 
• Routine monitoring and maintenance to assure air handling systems continue to operate within 
established parameters (microbiological monitoring is discussed under the Laboratory Control 
System). 
o Afford special attention to facilities that are performing construction in the clean areas, or at 
the vicinity of cleanroom. Because microbes (e.g., fungal spores) can be liberated from the 
movement of walls and other construction activities, determine if the facility is returned to 
acceptable environmental control through proper measures (environmental monitoring, 
media fills) before production can resume. 
o Verify that environmental monitoring of non-viable particle is occurring during operations 
including sites where there is the most risk to exposed product, container and closures. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 14 of 38 
 
 
 
 
o Check if pressure differentials, temperature, and humidity are continuously monitored 
during routine production. 
o Determine if continuous monitoring systems are alarmed to alert operators of excursions. 
o Check if excursions from acceptable ranges are investigated to determine impact on product 
and that needed corrective actions are taken. 
o Evaluate the program for periodic testing / recertification of the HEPA filters in critical 
areas to maintain appropriate air flow. The tests typically include integrity testing of the 
HEPA filters and air velocity checks. 
 
• Sanitization / disinfection of clean room areas, processing lines, and non autoclavable 
equipment, materials, and components should be reviewed. Focus on the areas where the 
sterile product is exposed up to and including sealing operations. These critical areas represent 
the highest risk to the product. The suitability, efficacy, and limitations of disinfecting agents 
and adequacy of procedures should be reviewed, including the data that establishes the expiry 
of the disinfection solution. (Reference:  Section X.A.3 of FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing 
Guidance) 
• For multi-use facilities and non-dedicated equipment, evaluate the adequacy of the changeover 
procedures and cleaning to prevent cross-contamination between products. 
 
B. EQUIPMENT 
 
Equipment used in the manufacture of sterile drug products may include the following: 
 
• Production Equipment 
• Container/closure processing equipment (e.g. stopper washer, glassware depyrogenation 
equipment) 
• Support system/material system related equipment (e.g. WFI system and related equipment, 
process gas related equipment) 
 
Specific considerations include: 
 
(1) Production Equipment 
 
(a) Aseptic Processing Equipment. Determine that all equipment that comes in direct contact 
with product (e.g., filters, transfer lines, holding tanks, stopper bowls, filling line equipment) and 
sterile components (e.g., stoppers) are sterilized and protected from contamination prior to and 
during use. Equipment logs or other related information may provide insight into significant 
maintenance or other problems that may increase exposure of batches to contamination risk. 
 
(b) Stopper washer. Inspectional considerations include the qualification of the equipment, 
cycle validation and supporting data, equipment preventative maintenance (maintenance 
requirements and frequency), quality of water used for washing, and associated water 
sampling/qualification data. The appropriateness of the air supply used in any drying operations 
should also be verified. 
 
(c) Capping Equipment (vials). The vial cap provides the final closure element of a sealed vial. 
The capping machine folds and crimps the cap (aluminum) over the neck of the stoppered vial. 
The cap on the vial protects the stopper from external damage, while firmly holding the stopper 


===== PAGE 15 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 15 of 38 
 
 
 
 
in the fully seated, sealed position. Evaluate the established processing settings (crimp angles, 
pressures), and preventative maintenance schedules of the capping machine. Air supply quality 
to the capping units should also be evaluated. 
 
(d) Post fill Visual Inspection/Automated Inspection Equipment. The 100% inspection of the 
final filled and sealed product may occur via a manual, automated, or semi-automated inspection 
process. Manual and semi-automated inspection processes involve specified viewing fields and 
calibrated light sources. Semi-automated processes may use conveyor belts and rotational units 
that present the filled product to an operator for visual inspection. All conveyor and rotational 
speed set points should be verified against established parameters. Automated inspection systems 
may inspect for one or all types of defects in a given filled product. Defect categories with 
relevant action levels should be defined. The qualification of the equipment and the challenges 
performed to verify equipment functionality prior to routine use should be evaluated as well as 
the training program for operators performing manual visual inspections. 
 
(e) Sterilizers. The inspection should cover the Installation and Operation Qualification of 
equipment and the Performance Qualification of the process (IQ, OQ and PQ), and operation, 
calibration and preventative maintenance of representative types of equipment used to sterilize 
finished dosage forms, filling equipment, containers, closures, etc. Such equipment includes 
autoclaves, dry heat ovens, dry heat tunnels, steam-in-place (SIP) equipment and chemical 
sterilization systems (i.e., hydrogen peroxide, peracetic acid). Inspection of sterilizers should 
include physical examination of the equipment. Review the engineering specifications which 
may be described in the equipment’s DQ (Design Qualification). DQ is performed prior to the IQ 
(Installation Qualification) and OQ (Operational Qualification), and verify that the sterilizer is 
maintained, calibrated and drained properly and that it has appropriate measuring devices 
(temperature sensors, pressure gauges, etc.). 
 
Records of unplanned maintenance, as well as preventative maintenance, should be reviewed to 
assure all significant changes have been evaluated and qualified as appropriate. Equipment logs 
should also be reviewed. For example, repeat sterilization of loads because of cycle failures can 
indicate a serious problem with a sterilizer. Impact of re-sterilization to product quality should be 
evaluated. (Performance qualification is covered under the Production System). 
 
The equipment can be computer controlled or operated in a manual mode. For computer 
controlled system, programmable logic controller (PLC) or a more complex Supervisory 
Controlled and Data Acquisition Management System (SCADA), may require an assessment to 
determine if the computer control and/or monitoring system are Part 11 compliant. 
 
Reference: 
o PDA Technical Report No. 1 Revised 2007 Validation of Moist Heat Sterilization 
Processes: Cycle Design, Development, Qualification and Ongoing Control; 
o ISO 17665 Moist Heat Sterilization. 
 
(f) Lyophilizer. Because partially sealed vials are used in the lyophilization process, sterile 
product is exposed to the environment from the time of filling until the vials are fully stoppered 
in the lyophilization chamber at the end of the cycle. The inspection should verify that partially 


===== PAGE 16 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 16 of 38 
 
 
 
 
sealed vials are transported and loaded into the lyophilizers under Class 100 (ISO 5) protection. 
Investigators should observe the transport of vials and loading of lyophilizers. 
 
Other key equipment areas to cover include: validation of the sterilization of the lyophilization 
chamber between uses, current sterilization controls, leak testing of the chamber, integrity testing 
of air/gas filters, and calibration of temperature and pressure controllers. 
 
Reference: FDA’s Guide to Inspections of Lyophilization of Parenterals. 
 
(g) Isolators. Evaluate the design and control elements that maintain the separation or isolation 
of the product. Pressure differential, glove integrity, and protection of the transfer (i.e., entry, 
exit) ports are key elements for the isolators. The transfer of containers, closures and supplies 
(including environmental monitoring supplies) into an isolator should be carefully controlled. 
Another critical element for these systems is the effectiveness of the chamber decontamination 
program. Current methods (e.g., vaporized hydrogen peroxide, steam hydrogen peroxide, 
peracetic acid) used to decontaminate isolator barriers are capable of surface sterilization but 
lack the penetrating capabilities of steam sterilization. Investigators should be mindful of the 
limitations of these surface sterilants, including their inefficiency in penetrating obstructed or 
protected surfaces. Validation of the decontamination of the interior (surfaces) of an isolator 
should demonstrate a 6-log reduction of the biological indicator (BI). Quantitative measuring 
devices (e.g., near infrared) or chemical indicators (qualitative test) can be used to determine the 
worst case location for decontamination validation using BI. Factors to be considered in 
decontamination validation include the location of the BI and the type of surfaces where the BIs 
are inoculated. 
 
Utensils and equipment surfaces inside the isolator that have direct contact with sterile product 
and components should be sterilized to render them free of microorganisms. The sterilization 
validation should achieve a minimum of a 6-log reduction of the BI 
 
Reference: 
o Appendix 1 of FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance; 
o PDA Technical Report 51 (2010) Biological Indicators for Gas and Vapor Phase 
Decontamination Processes: Specifications, Manufacture, Control and Use provides 
general principles to be considered in decontamination by BI. 
 
(h) Restricted Access Barrier System (RABS). In general, a RABS is a fill-finish line in a rigid 
wall enclosure that provides full physical separation of the filling line from operators. It is 
important to note that the inside surfaces of the RABS are disinfected with a sporicidal agent2 , 
but this is not accomplished using the automated decontamination cycles employed for isolators. 
This requires firms to carefully supervise disinfection procedures and assure ongoing 
effectiveness of the disinfection program. Operators use glove ports, half suits or automation to 
access areas within the enclosure during filling. There are 2 types of RABS, “open” and “closed” 
RABS. The doors to a “closed” RABS are never opened during an operation. While an “open” 
RABS is designed to operate with doors closed at all times, on rare pre-defined circumstances 
 
2 Robust disinfection of all non-product contact surfaces within the RABS should be performed with a suitable sporicidal 
agent before batch manufacture. Product contact equipment should be subject to sterilization. 


===== PAGE 17 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 17 of 38 
 
 
 
 
the doors of the enclosure can be opened to perform certain interventions. If doors are routinely 
opened during a filling operation, the system is not considered a RABS because it no longer 
restricts access to the critical areas. Typically, the cleanroom surrounding the RABS is 
controlled as a Class 10,000 (ISO 7) area and operators are fully gowned. 
 
Reference: Restricted Access Barrier Systems (RABS) for Aseptic Processing; ISPE; August 16 
2005. 
 
When inspecting a RABS: 
o Determine that the gloves and gauntlets attached to the glove ports are sterile when 
installed. After installation, the gloves should be disinfected or changed at appropriate 
intervals to minimize the risk of contamination. 
o Verify there is a well defined written procedure that describes what is done when an open- 
door intervention is performed. All open-door interventions should be documented and 
described in batch records, and followed by disinfection. 
o RABS entry is often accompanied by an appropriate line clearance, which should be clearly 
documented in batch records. 
o Determine that all fluid pathways and product contact parts such as stopper bowl, feed and 
placement systems are sterilized prior to the filling of each batch. 
o Observe how sterile components and supplies are transferred to the RABS. Verify that the 
transfer system prevents exposure of sterile surfaces to less clean environments. 
o Verify that non-product contact surfaces within the RABS undergo thorough disinfection 
with a sporicidal agent before each batch. The effectiveness of the overall disinfection 
program should be validated and routinely evaluated by the environmental monitoring 
program. 
 
(i) Blow-fill-seal (BFS) Technology. BFS is an automated aseptic filling process in which 
containers are formed, filled and sealed in a continuous operation. BFS systems can reduce the 
risk of product contamination by reducing operator interventions. The systems are typically used 
for filling sterile ophthalmic and respiratory care products. See Appendix 2 of FDA’s 2004 
Aseptic Processing Guidance for information about BFS systems. It should be noted that the 
inner surfaces of the containers can be exposed to the surrounding environment during the 
formation and molding steps prior to filling. The sterile product can also be exposed to the 
environment during the filling and sealing steps of the BFS process. Therefore, the air quality 
should meet the microbiological level established for Class 100 (ISO 5) should be supplied to 
where the sterile product or its containers are exposed during the BFS process. Some of the more 
advanced BFS equipments that provide enhanced protection for the sterile product operation can 
be located in a Class 100,000 (ISO 8) area. Otherwise, a Class 10,000 (ISO 7) area is 
appropriate. Research has demonstrated a direct relationship between the number of 
contaminated units and the level of microbial contamination in the air surrounding the machine 
(see Reference #20). Typically, the product supply line and sterilizing product filters are steam 
sterilized-in-place (SIP). 
 
When inspecting BFS: 


===== PAGE 18 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 18 of 38 
 
 
 
 
o Verify that HEPA-filtered or sterile air is used during steps where sterile product or 
materials are exposed (e.g., parison formation, container molding, and filling steps). 
o Evaluate the monitoring and preventative maintenance programs to determine the integrity 
of the utilities (cooling water, heating, etc.) associated with the BFS machine is routinely 
checked. Leaks in the molds or utility connections at the molds can contaminate the sterile 
product or containers. 
o Review the SIP system used to sterilize the product line. Determine the sterilization cycle 
has been validated and the condensate properly drains from the line. The line should also be 
protected between sterilization and use. 
o Verify that personnel who enter the classified environment surrounding the BFS machine 
are properly gowned and trained. 
o If possible, observe equipment setup and any difficulties that can lead to contamination 
risks. 
 
Other control procedures (media fills, environmental monitoring, disinfection of surfaces, etc.) 
are the same as discussed for conventional aseptic processing line. 
 
(j) Reactor, Centrifuge, Dryer, Mill. This type of equipment can be used to aseptically 
manufacture sterile bulk Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs). The equipment and all 
transfer piping must be sterilized prior to processing. This is typically done with sterilize-in- 
place (SIP) systems which use clean steam or a chemical sterilant. Review the validation, cycle 
controls and the routine monitoring of the SIP system. The equipment and all transfer piping 
must remain integral (no fluid or air leaks) and sterile throughout the entire manufacturing 
process. Determine how the firm verifies the integrity of the equipment train throughout the 
process. If a piece of equipment is opened in the process (e.g. adding seed crystals), verify the 
area surrounding the open operation is robustly protected from contamination risks with a Class 
100 (ISO 5) air system as well as implementing a carefully designed aseptic operation. 
Reference: FDA’s Guide to Inspections of Sterile Drug Substance Manufacturers. 
(2) Container/Closure Processing Equipment 
 
Depyrogenation equipment may include a dry heat oven and/or depyrogenation tunnel. 
Depyrogenation of stoppers can also be accomplished by dilution via a washing process. The 
final rinse of the washing process uses Water for Injection (WFI). For more information, see 
FDA’s Aseptic Processing Guidance, Section VI.B, Containers/Closures. 
 
(3) Support Utilities 
 
(a) Water System. Specifically, review WFI generation equipment and distribution loop(s), 
including tanks, water lines, isometric diagrams, vent filters, and preventive maintenance 
schedules (See also Materials System). Monitoring equipment associated with the Water System 
should also be evaluated. 
 
(b)HVAC. Refer to Section IV of FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance on qualification 
and maintenance of the HVAC system. 


===== PAGE 19 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 19 of 38 
 
 
 
 
(c) Process Gases. Gases that are in contact with the drug product or components in drug 
manufacturing operations are referred to as process gases. Gases used in aseptic operations, or 
downstream of sterilization, must be filtered through a sterilizing grade filter to maintain asepsis. 
The integrity testing of these filters (typically hydrophobic) should be evaluated. The system 
used in the generation of the process gas(es) should also be evaluated including preventive 
maintenance (PM) schedules, monitoring (including temperature, pressure, and humidity), and 
sampling. See also under Materials System. 
 
 
3.7  MATERIALS SYSTEM 
 
Compliance Program 7356.002 lists the areas to cover when inspecting the Materials System. The areas 
are applicable to sterile drug products and should be covered if this system is selected. In sterile 
operations, the quality attributes of each of the materials (ingredients, WFI, containers, closures) have a 
bearing on the critical attributes of the finished product. Review the firm’s procedures for receipt, 
handling, sampling, testing, approval and storage of manufacturing materials to verify their fitness for 
use. Emphasis should be placed on incoming materials that are represented to be sterile and / or pyrogen 
free. 
 
Areas of special concern for sterile drug products include: 
 
(1) Water Systems. Water for Injection (WFI) is an ingredient in many sterile drugs, including 
injectable products and sterile ophthalmic products. It is also used in depyrogenation (or endotoxin 
removal) of equipment and stoppers and in cleaning operations. The quality of the water, and its 
endotoxin levels and controls, used in the upstream process should also be evaluated in order to ensure 
the removal of bacterial endotoxin to the appropriate level downstream. Purified water can be used for 
some sterile non-injectable solutions. 
 
• Observe and understand elements of the generation and distribution systems. 
• Evaluate the water system “As Built” diagrams” and inspect for leaks, pipe slopes (via the 
isometric diagrams and verification of the degree of the slopes), so called “dead legs”, and 
non-sanitary fittings in the distribution system. 
• Evaluate how microbial alert and action levels are established. 
• Evaluate sampling sites, procedures, frequencies and tests performed. 
• Review procedures for preventative maintenance and calibration of critical instruments, 
including scheduling and equipment update procedures. 
• Review raw data to verify that all of the above is completed per established procedure. 
• Review and observe routine monitoring (in-line TOC and conductivity) of water system. 
• Review trend data for chemistry, microbiological and endotoxin tests. 
• Review investigation of results that are at or over alert and action levels. 
Reference: FDA’s Guide to Inspections of High Purity Water Systems. 
 
(2) Process Gas. Process gas and related equipment controls may be covered in conjunction with the 
Facilities and Equipment System. Specific considerations include controls over final filtration of the 


===== PAGE 20 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 20 of 38 
 
 
 
 
processed gas and filter integrity testing. Gas used as a component in a finished product may include the 
Nitrogen gas overlay for Oxygen sensitive products. 
 
(3) Pre-washed / Ready to Sterilize Closures. The CGMP regulation (21 CFR 211.94(c)) states that, 
where indicated, containers and closures must be processed to remove pyrogenic substances. Many 
manufacturers of small volume parenterals purchase stoppers that are ready-to-sterilize, (i.e., they are 
pyrogen-free). No washing or depyrogenation is done by the dosage form manufacturers but these firms 
are still responsible for assuring the stoppers are of acceptable quality for use in manufacturing. The 
pyrogen requirements should be included in specifications for the stoppers and, if the manufacturer does 
not conduct testing of each incoming lots for pyrogen/endotoxin, they should establish the reliability of 
the supplier’s test results by qualification of the vendor, followed by periodic testing. 
 
(4) Microbiological and Endotoxin Testing of Component, Container and Closure. 21 CFR 
211.84(d) specifies that each lot of component, container or closure that is liable to microbial 
contamination which is objectionable in view of its intended use shall be subjected to microbiological 
tests before use. Evaluate the firm’s system for determining if microbiological or endotoxin testing is 
required and the rationale for setting acceptance criteria. Review test data to verify that the materials 
meet test criteria and, if not, verify that investigations were conducted to determine the cause and 
corrective actions were implemented. 
 
(5) Verification of Container and Closures. The physical and chemical characteristics of containers 
and closures can be critical to the sterility and stability of the finished product. Many containers and 
closures look alike (color and dimensions), but are made of different materials or have a different 
surface treatment such as silicone on stoppers and ammonium sulfate on Type I glass. Evaluate the 
firm’s procedures for assuring containers and closure consistently meet appropriate specifications. 
Determine what tests and examinations are done to verify the containers and closures are made of the 
correct materials with the correct dimensions (critical to ensuring continuing container-closure integrity) 
and are free of critical defects. 
 
(6) Container / Closure Integrity. The integrity of the container / closure system is critical to assuring 
that all units of drug products remain sterile through shipment, storage and use. Leaking containers or 
closures lead to product contamination. 
 
Reference: FDA’s 1994 Guidance for Industry for the Submission of Sterilization Process Validation in 
Applications for Human and Veterinary Drug Products. 
 
Evaluate the tests and studies performed to demonstrate the integrity of container / closure systems for 
all sterile drugs, including: 
 
• Verify that all incoming container-closure components meet specifications, including all 
appropriate dimensions. 
• Determine studies adequately simulate the stress conditions of the sterilization process, 
handling and storage. 
• Verify that the units tested in validation are appropriate (e.g., for terminally sterilized drug 
product, the units selected should be exposed to the maximum sterilization cycles using the 
production process). 


===== PAGE 21 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 21 of 38 
 
 
 
 
• Sensitivity of the test is specified. 
• Container-closure integrity is demonstrated during validation and as part of the stability 
program (in lieu of sterility testing), over the shelf life of the product. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 22 of 38 
 
 
 
 
3.8  PRODUCTION SYSTEM 
 
Compliance Program 7356.002 lists areas to cover when inspecting the Production System. The listed 
areas are applicable to sterile drug products and should be covered during inspections. 
 
Production practices and conditions can have a direct and significant adverse impact on drug sterility 
assurance. The Production System, as well as the Quality System, should be included in all Full 
Inspections. Coverage of critical elements, which are typically defined by the firm of the Production 
System, should be part of all inspections (full and abbreviated) of aseptically processed sterile drug 
manufacturers. 
 
The risk of contamination posed by an operation depends greatly on the design of the overall 
manufacturing operation. Observation of manufacturing is a critical part of evaluating the adequacy of 
an aseptic processing operation. The following should be carefully observed. 
 
• adequacy of aseptic technique [See section V of FDA aseptic processing guidance] 
• personnel behavior and practices in the cleanroom [See section V of FDA aseptic processing 
guidance] 
• movement of people and materials before and during the aseptic operation 
• robustness of production process design (e.g., process performance, validation, impact of 
equipment configuration on ergonomics of aseptic manipulations)  [See section IV of FDA 
aseptic processing guidance] 
• disinfection practices   [See section X.A.3 of FDA aseptic processing guidance] 
 
More specifically, the inspection must include real time observation of the higher risk operations 
including but not limited to (these are examples and not an all inclusive list): 
 
• Set-up of filling lines, especially difficult to assemble lines (e.g. powder filling lines), and lines 
that require multiple aseptic assemblies or do not employ SIP of the product pathway. 
• Cleaning and disinfection of the line and room to ensure all difficult to access surfaces are 
consistently and properly cleaned and disinfected. 
• Protection of critical contact surfaces to ensure their sterility throughout operations and post 
sterilizations. 
• Aseptic technique and cleanroom behavior during operations, including handling of equipment 
jams and stoppages. 
• Personnel flow in relation to microbial control of the environment. 
• Material flow (e.g., whether materials are moved from a lesser controlled area to a cleaner area 
without disinfection), including number of staff and their activities in the aseptic filling room. 
• Filling operations, especially personnel gowning technique, gown integrity, strict adherence to 
SOPs), the nature and frequency of interventions (interventions are also performed during the 
media fill simulations), and overall condition of the critical filling area. 
• Atypical interventions associated with unplanned events (e.g., operator attempts to change the 
filling pump during operations). 


===== PAGE 23 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 23 of 38 
 
 
 
 
• Extra manipulations during filling operations for assembly of sterile filtration apparatus that is 
not SIP sterilized. 
• Handling (transfer, storage, loading) of partially stoppered vials in lyophilization processes. 
Note that for lyophilized products, vials of sterile products are stoppered but not fully sealed 
until the lyophilization process is completed. The sterile product is exposed to the environment 
during filling, half-stoppering, transport, loading of the lyophilizer, and the lyophilization 
cycle. Complete seating of stoppers typically occurs in the chamber after the cycle is 
completed. All of these manipulations must be performed under Class 100 conditions. 
• Preparation of equipment for sterilization (cleaning, the type of wrapping to ensure protection 
while still allowing for penetration as part of the validated sterilization cycle with defined 
loading patterns). 
• Environmental monitoring (while the monitoring program is considered a Laboratory System, 
inspection should include observation of the actual monitoring operations and rationale for 
sample site locations). 
• Proper placement and sealing of stoppers on vials as applicable, and the capping (aluminum 
crimp) is performed in a protected area under unidirectional flow. 
• Production of sterile suspensions and sterile bulk powders (e.g., antibiotics) where sterile 
filtration of the final bulk is not feasible. These are typically formulated and manufactured 
under aseptic conditions. This requires the sterilization of large pieces of production equipment 
(e.g., tanks, reactors, dryers and associated lines) and assurance that these pieces of equipment 
retain their integrity and remain sterile. 
 
Critical operations that should be covered during an inspection of the Production System include: 
 
(1) Media fills or process simulations. Media fills are used to validate aseptic processing operations, 
including those employing newer technologies, such as isolators, BFS or RABS systems. Media fills 
representing manually intensive aseptic operations should equal or approach the size and duration of a 
commercial production lot. In contrast, a process conducted in an isolator is designed to have a lower 
risk of microbial contamination because of the lack of direct human intervention and can be simulated 
with a lower number of units as a proportion of the overall operation. All media fills should closely 
simulate manufacturing operations, incorporating, as appropriate, worst-case activities and conditions as 
well as operator interventions. FDA’s current expectations for media fills are discussed in Section IX.A 
of the 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance. 
• Verify Media Fills represent actual manufacturing operations by comparing observed 
operations to those documented in Media Fill batch records. 
• Determine if media fills are conducted semi-annually for each processing line. The activities 
and interventions representative of each shift should be included in the semi-annual media fill 
program. This may require more than one media fill per line every 6 months, if aseptic 
processing is performed during more than one shift. With the exception of isolator operations, 
at least one semi-annual media fill is performed per line per shift. Determine if the aseptic 
filling of all types of containers are supported by the media fills performed. If a matrix 
approach is used, evaluate the firm’s justification for selecting the worst case container / 
closure configurations for each line. 
• Determine accountability of all filled units (units filled vs. units incubated). 


===== PAGE 24 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 24 of 38 
 
 
 
 
• Verify that all units that were discarded during and after filling have a reasonable and 
assignable cause for rejection (e.g., rubber stopper missing, aluminum cap missing). 
• Determine that cracked and leaking units found after incubation are investigated, counted and 
all rejected units properly justified (e.g., is there an assignable cause that is reasonable for the 
rejection?). 
• Determine how and who examines units after incubation. If the examination is not performed 
by a microbiologist, determine if it is overseen by the quality unit and if the operators doing 
the exam are properly trained by a microbiologist. 
 
Reference: 
• FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance, Section IX A. 
• PDA Technical Report No. 28, revised 2006, Process Simulation Testing for Sterile Bulk 
Pharmaceutical Chemicals. 
• PDA Technical Report No. 22, revised 2011, Process Simulation for Aseptically Filled 
Products. 
 
(2) Sterile filtration (aseptic processing). 
 
• Verify filters used in production are identical to those used in validation studies (i.e., those 
submitted in drug applications) 
• Verify that actual operating parameters and allowable extremes are covered in the validation 
studies. 
• Determine that validation of filter sterilization has been performed for all products. Pay special 
attention to legacy products. These include older products and those for which applications 
have not been submitted. 
• Observe filter integrity testing to verify procedures are followed. 
• Review investigations of any integrity test failures. 
 
Reference: 
• FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance, Section IX.B; and 
• PDA Technical Report #26, 2008, Sterilizing Filtration of Liquids. 
 
(3) Sterilization and depyrogenation of containers, closures and processing equipment. 
 
• Review the validation or revalidation of sterilization and depyrogenation processes used for 
containers, closures and, in the case of aseptic processing, equipment that comes in contact 
with the sterile product or sterile components. 
• Check if firm verifies that validated parameters (loading patterns, cycle parameters) are met for 
each load. 
• Rubber stoppers that are not purchased pre-sterilized or pre-siliconized may require 
depyrogenation and siliconization prior to use. As previously noted, depyrogenation may be 
achieved via a washing dilution process with the use of repeated WFI washing steps. The 
validation should demonstrate a successful 3-log reduction of bacterial endotoxin. When the 
firm performs its own siliconization of stoppers, silicon level after wash should be validated to 
meet the predetermined acceptance criteria. 


===== PAGE 25 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 25 of 38 
 
 
 
 
• Stoppers are sterilized by steam sterilization. Verify that the clean steam used to provide the 
sterilization is acceptable and has been assayed for endotoxin. 
• Review the practices and procedures to determine if a firm needs to revalidate the sterilization 
and depyrogenation process. 
• Review change control procedures. 
• Determine if reprocessing is performed. 
• Evaluate bioburden level:  Evaluate the firm’s understanding of process bioburden (e.g., from 
incoming components/container/closure) and determine if the firm has adequately validated 
hold time for critical steps. It is important to note that increased bioburden can lead to the 
degradation of the drug product as well as contributing impurities (including endotoxin) to the 
drug product. Sampling points (location in process flow) and methods should be evaluated 
based on product quality risks. 
 
(4) Lyophilization. 
 
• Review the validation of lyophilization cycles established for selected products. 
• Verify the firm confirms all critical cycle parameters are met for each lot. 
• Determine environmental monitoring is routinely performed in the areas of loading and 
unloading of the product from the lyophilizer. In addition, ensure personnel monitoring is 
conducted on those operators who perform the loading and unloading operations. 
• Observe the transport of the partially stoppered vials and the loading of the lyophilization 
chambers to verify it is done under proper environmental conditions (Class 100) and to verify 
that proper aseptic techniques are used. 
 
Reference: FDA’s Guide to Inspections of Lyophilization of Parenterals. 
 
(5) Sealing of vials. 
 
• A vial is not sealed until the aluminum overseal is placed over the rubber stopper and crimped 
in place. 
• If stoppered vials exit the aseptic processing zone prior to capping, verify proper safeguards 
are in place, such as HEPA filtered air protection and qualified in-line detectors that reject 
vials with improperly seated stoppers. 
 
(6) Terminal sterilization. 
 
• Determine what type of sterilization cycles are used (bioburden based or overkill). 
• Review validation / revalidation / or periodic evaluation of terminal sterilization cycles for 
representative types of products. 
• For selected products, verify that the parameters and loading patterns used in production are 
the same as those used in validation studies. 
• Determine the minimum acceptable cycle allowed in the SOP (as opposed to the nominal or 
routine cycle) and compare that to the validated cycle (using BI) to verify it has been properly 
qualified. 
• Determine how sterilization cycles are documented, monitored and reviewed. 


===== PAGE 26 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 26 of 38 
 
 
 
 
• Review deviations or atypical data from sterilization operations that indicate inconsistencies in 
process performance. 
 
(7) Parametric release of terminally sterilized drug product. This is defined as a sterility assurance 
release based on demonstrated control of the sterilization process. It enables a firm to use defined 
critical process control data, in lieu of the sterility test to fulfill the intent of 21 CFR 211.167(a). It is 
allowed only for products that are terminally sterilized by heat and it must be identified in the 
appropriate regulatory filing as the release method. Parametrically released product must have an 
approved application. 
 
• If encountered during an inspection, verify the parametric release method has been submitted 
and approved in the appropriate drug application. If the drug is not the subject of an approved 
application, collect pertinent information and validation data for evaluation by the Center. 
• Verify that the conditions described in FDA’s Compliance Policy Guide Section 490.200, 
Parametric Release – Drug Products Terminally Sterilized by Heat, are met. 
 
(8) 100% inspection of injectable products including: cracks, visible particles and other significant 
defects. 
 
• Verify the firm has written procedures that define the defects to be removed from the lot and 
actions to take if the number of critical defects exceeds a pre-determined level. 
• Significant defect categories should be identified. Results of inspection of each batch should be 
compared to established action levels. 
• Evaluate the appropriateness of and the rationale or justification for pre-determined action 
levels. 
• Evaluate the firm’s investigation into the cause of rejects, including units rejected for cracks 
and visible particulates (e.g., foreign matter). 
• Observe the inspection process. 
• Challenge visual/manual inspection rates through observation. 
• Evaluate the adequacy of written procedures for visual inspection. 
• Evaluate personnel qualification and requalification and equipment qualifications according to 
established procedures. Evaluate personnel qualification including the use of reference samples 
for qualification. 
o If a manual system is used, determine if employees are trained and qualified to verify they 
can recognize and remove defects under actual or simulated production conditions. 
o If an automated or semi-automated system is used, determine the equipment is qualified and 
the software program or equipment settings have been validated for all types of products 
being inspected (e.g., clear vials, amber vials, colored solution, suspensions). If the 
equipment is an automatically controlled computer based system, an assessment of the 
system and validation is warranted. 
• Evaluate the firm’s program for sampling and examination of inspected vials and evaluate the 
effectiveness of inspection and action taken if the reject level is reached. 


===== PAGE 27 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 27 of 38 
 
 
 
 
• Evaluate the firm’s assessment of units rejected during filling operations (any separate 
inspection prior to the 100% inspection stage), established alert/action limits, and 
investigations where appropriate. 
 
(9) Personnel (gowning, training, aseptic techniques). The type of gowns and personal protective 
equipment (PPE) worn by employees should be appropriate for the areas in which they work. There 
should be detailed written procedures that describe the gowning requirements for each processing area. 
Evaluate the following: 
 
• For aseptic processing, determine the gowns (which typically include face masks, hoods, 
protective goggles, gloves, and boots) are sterilized and made of non-particle shedding 
material. Ensure that the gowns cover all skin, hair and facial hair. 
• Review how the incoming sterile gowns/garb are accepted or rejected for use. 
• Evaluate the firm’s program for training, testing and qualifying and re-qualifying employees 
who work in the controlled areas, especially those who set-up and operate aseptic processing 
lines. 
• Evaluate the aseptic techniques of employees by observing aseptic processing operations. 
• For selected employees, verify the training, testing, qualifying, and re-qualifying were done as 
specified in procedures. 
• Verify the training is done on a continuing basis. 
Reference:  FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance, Section V. 
(10) Batch records. 
 
• Review of environmental and personnel monitoring data, as well as other data relating to 
acceptability of support systems (e.g., HEPA / HVAC, WFI, steam generator) and 
manufacturing equipment. This review is considered essential to batch release decisions. The 
batch record should include documentation that assures this type of holistic review is done 
before the release of a lot for distribution. 
• For aseptic processing, verify interventions into critical areas (Class 100/ ISO 5) are 
documented so they can be reviewed and evaluated by the Quality Unit. 
• Review batch records to verify they include complete information for all sterilization 
processes. 
 
Reference: FDA Aseptic Processing Guidance, Section XII. 
 
(11) Environmental and personnel monitoring. 
 
• 
See section below under “Laboratory Control System”. 


===== PAGE 28 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 28 of 38 
 
 
 
 
3.9  PACKAGING AND LABELING SYSTEM 
 
Compliance Program 7356.002 lists the areas to cover when inspecting the Packaging and Labeling 
Control System. All of the areas that are applicable to sterile drug products and should be covered if this 
system is selected for coverage. Areas of special concern for sterile products include: 
 
• Determine that packaging and labeling operations do not introduce risk to product integrity (for 
example, damage to the container or closure that could affect the integrity of the unit). 
• Determine that the container, closure and packaging systems provide adequate protection 
against foreseeable external factors in storage, shipment, and use that can cause contamination 
or deterioration (e.g. cracked vials during shipment if not properly protected; pinhole leaks in 
bags, frozen drug products, tears or holes in overwraps of sterile bulk antibiotics and large 
volume parenterals; and unseating of stoppers in aluminum cans containing sterile bulk APIs 
due to pressure changes during shipment by air). 
• It is not unusual for filled containers of sterile products to be stored unlabeled for a period of 
time. The firm must have adequate controls to assure proper identification of the unlabeled 
product at all times. 
• Tracking of refrigerated or temperature controlled units for room temperature exposure times 
(e.g. warm up of refrigerated units prior to label application). 
• Tracking and investigation (as specified and appropriate) of rejected units culled during 
packaging and labeling operations. 
 
3.10  LABORATORY CONTROL SYSTEM 
 
Compliance Program 7356.002 lists general areas to cover when inspecting laboratories. Inspections of 
sterile drug manufacturers should also cover microbiology laboratories. Quality control tests (sterility 
and Limulus Amebocyte Lysate or LAL test) and the collection of environmental and personnel 
monitoring samples should be observed to verify that acceptable techniques are used and written 
procedures are followed. The inspection of microbiology laboratory should evaluate the following: 
 
• Sterility testing, including the collection of samples that are representative of the entire lot and 
processing conditions; adequate control and monitoring of the testing environment; validation 
of the method for specific products; growth promotion testing of the media; and incubation 
times and temperature. It is important to note that increasing the number of samples or the 
number of tests does not greatly increase the probability of detecting contamination if it is 
present at a very low level in a lot. Reference: FDA’s Guide to Inspections of Microbiology 
Pharmaceutical Quality Control Laboratories and FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance, 
Section XI. 
 
• LAL testing, including product specific validation; collection of representative samples of raw 
materials, components/containers, in-process, and finished product, where appropriate; and 
adequate laboratory facilities for conducting the tests. Verify the rationale of sample size of 
endotoxin test relative to the production batch. Reference: Bacterial endotoxins – Test 
methodologies, routine monitoring, and alternatives to batch testing. ANSI/AAMI ST 
72:2002/ (R) 2010, Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. 
• Environmental monitoring, which includes: a well defined written program that covers all 
production shifts and includes air, floors, walls, equipment surfaces, and, in aseptic process 


===== PAGE 29 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 29 of 38 
 
 
 
 
operations, critical surfaces that come in contact with sterile product, containers and closures; 
establishment of appropriate alert and action levels, use of sampling (contact plates, swabs, 
active air samplers) and testing methods (media, plate exposure times, incubation times and 
temperatures) that are designed to detect environmental isolates. Evaluation of the validity of 
the sampling locations and sampling methods. Reference: FDA 2004 Aseptic Processing 
Guidance, Section X. Note: environmental monitoring is performed during the processing of 
all types of sterile drug products, including an appropriate program for terminally sterilized 
products. 
• Personnel monitoring which includes: a routine program for daily/shift monitoring of operators 
gloves and an appropriate schedule for monitoring gowns; establishment of limits that are 
based on the contamination risk to the product; and investigations of results that exceed the 
established levels or demonstrate an adverse trend. Personnel monitoring is important in all 
sterile product operations, but it is especially critical in aseptic processing, and inspectional 
emphasis should be risk based, focusing on those operations that require employees to enter 
the critical areas of the processing line. Reference:  FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance, 
Section V.C. 
• Efficacy of disinfectants, including assessment of the suitability, efficacy and limitations of the 
disinfecting agents used in the controlled area, production equipment and laboratories. The 
firm’s assessment typically includes laboratory studies that test the effectiveness of agents on 
different surface materials. Material coupons are usually used with surfaces types as found in 
production. The studies should be done with the same disinfecting agents, contact times (which 
should be clearly defined in written procedures). It is also important to understand that 
disinfectants have limitations and most are not effective against every type of microorganism. 
For this reason, firms should normally use more than one type of disinfectant. Reference: 
FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance, Section X.A.3. 
• Identification of microorganisms, including procedures that require identification of organisms 
found in positive sterility tests, media fills, and environmental monitoring (environmental and 
personnel) samples as specified by the firm. The program should assure routine identification 
of microorganisms found in samples are taken in critical areas, surrounding areas and from 
personnel in the production area. Review the procedures, equipment and controls used in 
identification activities of the contaminants. 
• Microbiological media, including the preparation, sterilization and growth promotion testing of 
the media used in performing tests (sterility tests, raw material testing, pre-filtration bioburden, 
environmental monitoring, media fills, etc.). Where appropriate, inactivating agents for 
disinfectants or product residuals should be added to allow detection of contaminants. 
• BIs and biological cultures used in sterilization validation studies should be used and stored 
under appropriate conditions. Typically, the conditions are described in the literature received 
with the BI, if supplied by a vendor. The microbial population should be confirmed by testing 
each lot. Spore counts should be verified prior to use in validation studies. The D-value should 
be determined for each lot of a BI if it is used in a way not described by the vendor. If used 
specifically as directed, the D-value supplied by the vendor can be accepted if the reliability of 
the Certificate of Analysis has been established, but D-value of incoming batches should be 
periodically verified. Reference: 2004 FDA Aseptic Guidance. 


===== PAGE 30 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 30 of 38 
 
 
 
 
• Microorganisms (e.g., ATCC) are used for growth promotion tests of media. Organisms 
isolated from environmental monitoring samples can also be used to perform growth 
promotion test. 
• Monitoring, calibration and maintenance programs for microbiology laboratory equipment, 
such as incubators. 
• Training of microbiologists and evaluation of microbiologists or technicians that perform 
sterility, LAL and environmental monitoring tests. 
• Documented investigations into out-of-specification results. Evaluate positive sterility tests and 
media fill and LAL failures investigations. Also review environmental / personnel monitoring 
results at alert and action levels to identify and determine the firm’s response to the significant 
incidents or trends. Because of the limited sensitivity of the sterility tests to detect batch 
contamination, any positive is a serious issue and should be thoroughly investigated by the 
firm with quality unit oversight and approval. The investigation and followed should be 
reviewed during inspections to assess the decision making process. An initial positive can be 
found invalid only if there is clear documented evidence that the microbial growth was 
unequivocally a laboratory error. Reference: Section XI.C of FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing 
Guidance. 
 
21 CFR 211.180(e) requires that records be maintained in such a manner that the data can be used to 
evaluate adherence to quality standards. The evaluation of data generated by the microbiology lab plays 
an integral role in establishing the sterility assurance of the finished product. The inspection should 
determine if the firm generates and reviews testing data and product quality related data (e.g., trend 
reports) to make timely, informed and science-based decisions to assure an ongoing state of control. 
 
 
3.11  SAMPLING 
 
Samples of sterile drug products should be collected to document suspected contamination, adulteration 
or misbranding encountered during an inspection. The samples can be physical or documentary. In the 
event of a for-cause assignment where in-process samples are being requested, collect the samples 
aseptically at points where such contamination might occur. These samples should be collected by the 
firm under the observation of the investigator. Great care shall be taken to prevent the possibility of 
contamination and/or compromising the integrity of the sample for all physical samples of raw 
materials, in-process samples or finished drug products. Consult the district management and/or Center 
as well as the servicing laboratory for guidance on sample size and sampling techniques. A production 
lot with an initial sterility failure result that was invalidated by the firm may be considered a good 
candidate for sampling. 
 
Physical sample analysis is not necessary to document CGMP deficiencies. Documentary samples may 
be submitted when the documentation illustrates the deficiencies and to obtain evidence of interstate 
shipment. Please be aware to collect the appropriate number of sample units in order to accommodate 
the 702(b) section of the Act. 
 
For finished products requiring sterility testing, collect 48 units of product. For finished products 
requiring endotoxin testing, collect 20 units of product. 
 
For additional sampling guidance, refer to Investigations Operations Manual (IOM) Chapter 4. 


===== PAGE 31 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 31 of 38 
 
 
 
 
[end Part III] 


===== PAGE 32 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 32 of 38 
 
 
 
 
PART IV - ANALYTICAL 
 
 
In general, samples will be submitted to your District's designated servicing laboratory, except as 
requested in a special assignment or your supervisor. 
 
4.1 . ANALYZING LABORATORIES 
 
For Sterility and Bacterial Endotoxin testing: 
 
Region 
Examining Laboratory 
NER 
NRL 
SER 
SRL 
CER 
NRL 
PAR 
SAN-DO 
SWR 
DEN-DO 
 
For particulate matter in injectables analysis, contact the ORA/Office of Regulatory Science/Medical 
Products and Tobacco Staff to determine the most appropriate laboratory for this test. 
 
4.2  ANALYSIS 
 
Sterility testing methods should be based on current editions of USP <71> Sterility Tests and the 
Sterility Analytical Manual (SAM). The SAM provides supplemental information to the USP. The SAM 
has the goal of standardizing the performance of testing for pharmaceutical microbiology in FDA 
laboratories. 
 
Bacterial endotoxin testing methods should be based on current editions of USP <85> Bacterial 
Endotoxin Test and the Sterility Analytical Manual (SAM). 
 
Particulate matter testing methods should be based on current editions of USP <78>. 
 
Other microbiological examinations should be based on appropriate sections of USP and the SAM. 
 
[end Part IV] 


===== PAGE 33 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 33 of 38 
 
 
 
 
PART V - REGULATORY/ADMINISTRATIVE STRATEGY 
 
 
A recommendation for regulatory action should be submitted by the District Office when a judgment is 
made that the firm is not operating in a state of control and management of the firm is unwilling or 
unable to make adequate corrective actions in an appropriate time frame. The therapeutic use of the drug 
product and the potential adverse effect of the CGMP deviations on the finished product must be 
considered in determining the appropriate action needed. 
 
When deciding the type of action to recommend, the initial decision should be based on the seriousness 
of the problem and the most effective way to protect the consumer (i.e., when non-sterile parenterals are 
found, injunction/seizure, recall would be the action(s) of choice). Instructions in the Regulatory 
Procedures Manual (RPM) should be followed. 
 
If the nature of the CGMP deviations is determined to pose minimal risks when considered in relation to 
the intended use of the drug, the primary action should normally be voluntary corrections by the firm. 
The District should require that all commitments for achieving voluntary compliance by firm 
management be submitted in writing and contain a time schedule for completion. The District should 
determine if the schedule is a reasonable time frame and should monitor the progress. 
 
When voluntary action is not accomplished or when the deviations observed pose a serious risk to the 
consumer, regulatory and / or administrative action should be recommended. 
 
NOTE:  Regulatory action is independent of the collection of a violative physical 
sample. The lack of a violative physical sample is not a barrier to pursuing 
regulatory and/or administrative action providing the CGMP deficiencies have 
been well documented. Physical samples found to be in compliance likewise 
are not a barrier to pursuing action under CGMP charges. 
 
The following list of deficiencies represents examples of practices that CDER believes could warrant 
regulatory and/or administrative action (please note the following is not intended to be an inclusive list): 
 
1. 
Contamination with filth, objectionable microorganisms, toxic chemicals or other drug 
chemicals; or a reasonable potential for product contamination, with demonstrated avenues of 
contamination such as poor aseptic methods, contact with unclean equipment, or airborne 
contamination. 
 
2. 
Failure to assure that each batch conforms to label claims or established specifications, such as 
NDA, ANDA, USP monographs, and the firm’s finished product specifications. 
 
3. 
Distribution of product which does not conform to established specifications. 
 
4. 
Lack of adequate validation of critical steps in sterilization processes, including sterilization by 
filtration; sterilization cycles used for drug products; and, for aseptically processed products, 
sterilization processes used to sterilize components (formulation and/or its ingredients, as well as 
containers and closures), or to sterilize equipment surfaces that contact sterile product or any 
elements of the product. 
 
5. 
Lack of adequate validation of aseptic processing operations (media fills). 


===== PAGE 34 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 34 of 38 
 
 
 
 
6. 
Failure to appropriately conduct and document investigations of discrepancies and failures of 
drug products or any of their components to meet specifications, especially inadequate 
investigations of sterility test failures, media fill failures and repeated or significant 
environmental or personnel monitoring results that meet or exceed action levels. 
 
7. 
Facilities and equipment which do not provide adequate protection for aseptically processed 
product while the sterile product or sterile components are exposed to the environment. This 
includes both lack of robustness due to poor design, as well as failure to maintain equipment as 
sterile (e.g., by providing proper barriers as well as assuring adequate sterilization frequency). 
 
8. 
Failure to assure a robust cleanroom disinfection program. This may include the failure to assure 
sufficiently detailed cleaning procedures to assure repeatability in cleaning, or failure to 
demonstrate the suitability and efficacy of the disinfecting agents used for the critical controlled 
areas and production equipment. 
 
9. 
Failure of a WFI system to deliver water that consistently meets chemical, microbiological and 
endotoxin specifications. 
 
10. 
For aseptic processing, poor employee practices that increase the risk of product contamination. 
 
11. 
Failure to provide adequate training to employees who work in critical operations, such as 
operators on aseptic processing lines, operators responsible for initiating and checking 
sterilization cycles and those who perform the 100% inspection of filled injectable products. 
 
12. 
Failure to perform adequate 100% inspections of injectable products for particulate matter and 
other defects. 
 
13. 
Failure of batch records to include complete information related to the production and control of 
each batch, including documentation that assures environmental and personnel monitoring data 
and data related to the support systems, and assure quality unit review of these records prior to 
approval of a lot for distribution and release. For aseptically processed product, batch 
documentation includes records of purposeful operator interventions into critical (Class 100 / 
ISO 5) areas of the line. Operator intervention should be minimized as much as possible to 
preclude and control contamination. 
 
14. 
Use of test methodology (sterility test, endotoxin test) that is not adequate or validated. 
 
15. 
Lack of an adequate environmental monitoring program, that is, one that does not include 
dynamic monitoring during all production shifts or has not established appropriate alert and 
action levels and, in the case of aseptic processing, does not include representative critical 
surfaces that come in contact with sterile product, containers and closures. 
 
16. 
Lack of an adequate personnel monitoring program for aseptic processing operations. For 
example, the program does not include daily monitoring of operators’ gloves and periodic 
monitoring of gowns; has not established appropriate limits or does not require investigations 
and corrective actions when limits are exceeded. 
 
[end Part V] 


===== PAGE 35 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 35 of 38 
 
 
 
 
PART VI - REFERENCES, ATTACHMENTS, AND PROGRAM CONTACTS 
 
 
6.1  REFERENCES 
 
All of the references listed below, with the exception of number 17 through 26, are available on FDA’s 
internet website. 
 
1. 
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 210 and 211 as revised, including the preamble. 
 
2. 
Guidance for Industry Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Processing – Current Good 
Manufacturing Practice; FDA; September 2004. 
 
3. 
Guidance for Industry for the Submission Documentation for Sterilization Process Validation in 
Applications for Human and Veterinary Drug Products; FDA; November 1994. 
 
4. 
Guidance for Industry Process Validation: General Principles and Practices of Process; FDA; 
January 2011. 
 
5. 
Guide to Inspections of Lyophilization of Parenterals; FDA; July 1993. 
 
6. 
Guide to Inspections of Microbiology Pharmaceutical Quality Control Laboratories: FDA; July 
1993. 
 
7. 
Guide to Inspections of High Purity Water Systems, FDA; July 1993. 
 
8. 
Guide to Inspections of Sterile Drug Substance Manufacturers; FDA; July 1994. 
 
9. 
Guide to Inspection of Dosage Form Drug Manufacturers; FDA; Oct. 1993. 
 
10. 
Compliance Policy Guide 7132a.13, Parametric Release – Drug Products Terminally Sterilized 
by Heat; FDA. 
 
11. 
Compliance Program 7356.002, Drug Manufacturing Inspections. 
 
12. 
Compliance Program 7356.002C, Radioactive Drugs. 
 
13. 
Compliance Program 7356.002M, Inspection of Licensed Biological Therapeutic Drug Products. 
 
14. 
Investigations Operations Manual 
 
15. 
Guide to the International Inspections and Travel 
 
16. 
Regulatory Procedures Manual 
 
17. 
Restricted Access Barrier Systems (RABS) for Aseptic Processing ISPE Definition; ISPE; August 
16 2005.; 
 
18. 
ISO 17665 Moist Heat Sterilization. 
 
19. 
ISO 14644 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments. 
 
20. 
ISO 14698 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments- Biocontamination Control. 
 
21. 
PDA Technical Report No. 1 (Revised 2007) Validation of Moist Heat Sterilization Processes: 
Cycle Design, Development, Qualification and Ongoing Control. 


===== PAGE 36 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 36 of 38 
 
 
 
 
22. 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology; Vol. 49, No. 6; November – December 
1995 Performance of Blow/Fill/Seal Equipment under Controlled Airborne Microbial 
Challenge. 
 
23. 
PDA Technical Report 51 (2010) Biological Indicators for Gas and Vapor-Phase 
Decontamination Processes: Specifications, Manufacture, Control and Use. 
 
24. 
PDA Technical Report No. 22, revised 2011, Process Simulation for Aseptically Filled Products. 
 
25. 
PDA Technical Report No. 28, revised 2006, Process Simulation Testing for Sterile Bulk 
Pharmaceutical Chemicals. 
 
26. 
PDA Technical Report #26, 2008, Sterilizing Filtration of Liquids. 
 
27. 
Bacterial endotoxins – Test Methodologies, Routine Monitoring, and Alternatives to Batch 
Testing. ANSI/AAMI ST 72:2002/ (R) 2010, Association for the Advancement of Medical 
Instrumentation. 
 
28. 
CGMP Q&As. FDA website. 
 
29. 
Sterility Analytical Manual (SAM); FDA May 2012. 
 
 
6.2  ATTACHMENTS 
 
A  “Inspections: Points to Consider” This attachment includes a list of questions intended to be an aid 
in conducting inspections and obtaining information needed to assess a firm’s operations. This list of 
questions and/or considerations is not intended to be an all inclusive or an exhaustive list of 
concerns. They are intended to assist focusing of the inspection and include areas worthy of 
consideration and evaluation during an inspection. The answers do not have to be reported in the 
EIR unless they are relevant. The list of questions covers: Moist Heat Sterilization; Dry Heat 
Sterilization / Depyrogenation; Aseptic Filling; Lyophilization; Isolators; Environmental 
Monitoring; and Biological Indicators. CDER welcomes feedback and any additional questions to 
this list. 
 
6.3  CONTACTS 
 
Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA) 
 
For technical questions concerning inspections contact: 
Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA) 
Office of Medical Products and Tobacco Operations (OMPTO) 
Division of Medical Products and Tobacco Program Operations (DMPTPO) 
Telephone number: 301-796-0358 
Email: ORAHQDrugInspectionPOC@fda.hhs.gov 
 
For questions concerning particulate matter in injectables analysis and appropriate testing laboratory 
contact: 
 
Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA) 
Office of Regulatory Science (ORS) 
Medical Products and Tobacco Scientific Staff (MPTSS) 


===== PAGE 37 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 37 of 38 
 
 
 
 
Bruce Harris 
Telephone number: 301-796-3030 
E-mail: Bruce.Harris@fda.hhs.gov 
 
For questions concerning microbiological analysis, sterility issues and related sampling concerns 
contact: 
 
Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA) 
Office of Regulatory Science (ORS) 
Medical Products and Tobacco Scientific Staff (MPTSS) 
Angele Smith 
Telephone number: 301-796- 4200 
E-mail:   Angele.smith@fda.hhs.gov 
 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) 
 
CGMP or any Quality-Related Policy Questions 
For CGMP or any quality-related policy question, technical or scientific questions or 
information needs, including questions about this program, please send an email to the 
following address and it will be handled as a top priority: 
 
CDER-OPQ-Inquiries@fda.hhs.gov 
 
Enforcement-Related Guidance or Policy 
For enforcement-related guidance or policy, including evidence need and sufficiency, 
citations, and case evaluation/recommendation advice, please send an email 
to the following address and it will be handled as a top priority: 
 
CDER OMQ Compliance Policy: CDEROMQCompliance@fda.hhs.gov 
 
Labeling Requirements and Policies 
 
Office of Unapproved Drugs and Labeling Compliance, see intranet home page for 
contacts 
[CDER | Office of Compliance | Office of Unapproved Drugs and Labeling Compliance] 
 
Registration and Drug Listing Requirements 
CDER Office of Compliance, see “CDER: Who’s the Lead” intranet page for contacts 
[CDER | Office of Communications | CDER: Who’s the Lead] 
 
 
[end Part VI] 


===== PAGE 38 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
PAGE 38 of 38 
 
 
 
 
PART VII - CENTER RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
A. COMPLIANCE 
 
The CDER Office of Product Quality (OPQ), Office of Surveillance (OS) will evaluate the operations 
under this Compliance Program. Reports of these evaluations will be shared with the ORA 
Headquarters offices, field offices and CDER headquarters offices. 
 
The Center reviews enforcement recommendations and provides the agency’s technical decisions in 
coordination with District Offices and Office of Chief Counsel 
 
B. DRUG SHORTAGES 
 
If a violative conditions are identified that may result in a shortage, field staff should notify CDER drug 
shortage staff at DrugShortages@CDER.fda.gov and ensure the company also contacts this staff. This 
notification should occur as soon as the District becomes aware of a possible shortage or through 
communication with the firm. 
 
CGMPs are a preventive system intended to preclude to the occurrence of critical product defects and 
loss of assurance of quality. A warning letter is an advisory action meant to notify a manufacturer that 
significant violative conditions compromising the assurance of quality, safety, and/or efficacy were 
observed and must be promptly corrected by an appropriate and timely action plan. In situations where 
the firm’s corrective actions may reduce the supply of medically necessary products, the agency will 
work closely with the firm to assure the medically necessary drugs remain available and the CGMP 
deficiencies are corrected in a timely manner. 
 
[end Part VII] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 39 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 1 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspections: Points to Consider 
Below is an extensive list of questions provided as an aid in conducting inspections and obtaining 
information needed to assess a firm’s operations. 
o This list of questions and/or considerations is not intended to be an all inclusive or an 
exhaustive list of concerns. They are intended to assist focusing of the inspection and include 
areas worthy of consideration and evaluation during an inspection. 
o The answers do not have to be reported in the EIR unless they are relevant. 
 
TOPICS: 
 
Moist Heat Sterilization 
Dry Heat Sterilization / Depyrogenation 
Aseptic Filling 
Lyophilization 
Isolator Barrier Technology 
Environmental Monitoring (Non-viable) 
Environmental and Personnel Monitoring – Microbiology 
Biological Indicators. 
 
CDER welcomes feedback and any additional questions to this list. 
 
 
MOIST HEAT STERILIZATION 
 
Reference:  PDA Technical Report No. 1 Revised 2007 Validation of Moist Heat Sterilization Processes: 
Cycle Design, Development, Qualification and Ongoing Control; and 
 
General. 
 
1. Who is the manufacturer of the steam sterilizer (autoclave)? 
 
2. What is the model number, age, and internal volume of the autoclave? 
 
3. What is the sterilizing agent? (e.g., steam, air over pressure, superheated water, gamma irradiation)? 
 
4. If jacketed, what pressure/temperature is maintained in the jacket as opposed to the chamber? 
 
5. What types of vent filters are used and how often are they integrity tested? 
 
6. Are vent filters hydrophobic? Are the vent filter housings heated to prevent condensation? 
 
7. Are cycles controlled manually or automatically? 
 
8. What type of monitoring and controlling sensors are used (e.g., mercury-in-glass thermometer, 
thermocouple, RTD, pressure gauge)? 
 
9. How are these sensors calibrated? Are the standards NIST traceable (or traceable to a National 
standards for foreign firms), where appropriate? 
 
10.  Is the autoclave equipped with a steam spreader (more than one steam entry line would be 
considered in this category)? 
 
11.  If more than one autoclave is used by the firm, what is the system's capacity for steam production in 
relation to all autoclaves being in operation at the same time? 


===== PAGE 40 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 2 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
12.  What are the sterilization cycle parameters? (Compare Master Process Record / SOP specifications 
against processing records completed for selected drug products) 
 
13.  What are the firm's specifications and observed parameters for: 
 
• Time 
 
• Temperature 
 
• Pressure (psi, in. Hg) 
 
14.  Where is the cycle controller sensor located? 
 
15.  How are each of the sterilization (#13) parameters monitored?  Are the come-up times for chamber 
temperature during sterilization reproducible when compared to the come-up time achieved in 
validation studies? 
 
16.  Is the slowest to heat spot ("cold spot") in each load monitored during each autoclave cycle? 
 
17.  Have any changes in the steam sterilization system occurred since the last EI? Have these changes 
been evaluated for the need for re-validation? 
 
18.  Is clean steam being used (control of bacterial endotoxin)? 
 
Validation. 
 
19.  Does the firm have written procedures for validation that include 
 
• Design  Objectives 
• Installation qualification (IQ) of equipment 
• Operational qualification (OQ) of equipment 
• Performance qualification (PQ) with product (maximum and minimum load submitted in the 
application, and any changes after) 
• Description of circumstances requiring revalidation of the system 
• Procedures for revalidation 
 
20.  Does validation documentation include the following? 
 
A.   Empty chamber / loaded chamber heat distribution studies: 
o Number of runs? 
o Was cold spot determined? 
o Allowable variation? 
o Actual variation found? 
o What is the worst-case load? 
 
B. Heat penetration studies 
o For each type of loading pattern/for each container size utilized? 


===== PAGE 41 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 3 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
o Number of runs per pattern? 
o Was the "cold spot" determined for each pattern? 
o Is the established load configuration submitted in the application followed and/or 
reportable changes submitted as appropriate? 
 
21.  What type of temperature measurement system was used? Does it provide a separate printed reading 
for each thermocouple? 
 
22.  What type of temperature sensors were used, and were they calibrated before and after each run? 
 
23.  If biological indicators were used during validation runs: 
 
• Type of indicator (spore strip, inoculated product, ampule) 
• Source of indicator 
• Microorganism used, including concentration and D value 
• Were BIs used in an "end point" or "count reductions" mode? If any positive BIs were found 
(when not expected), what was the firm's response? 
 
23.  In the event a heat distribution or penetration variance was disclosed during the studies, how did the 
firm correct or allow for it? 
 
24.  Has the firm determined lag times for all container sizes/mass, product viscosities, etc. and adjusted 
their cycles accordingly? 
 
 
DRY HEAT STERILIZATION / DEPYROGENATION 
 
Dry heat sterilizers are used, primarily, to sterilize and depyrogenate glass containers for injectable drug 
products. Both dry heat ovens and dry heat tunnels are used. An oven is a batch process and, at the end 
of the cycle, the sterile vials are manually removed from the oven, transported and then manually loaded 
onto the filling line. A dry heat tunnel uses a continuous, integrated process. In a tunnel, the vials move 
on a belt from the wash processing through a heating zone where the vials are sterilized and 
depyrogenated to a cooling zone and then directly into the Class 100 area of a filling line. Typically, 
firms validate the depyrogenation of the glassware rather than the sterilization cycle. This is based on 
the fact that it is generally more difficult to remove or denature pyrogenic substances than 
microorganisms. Components that have undergone heat depyrogenation are rendered sterile. 
 
General. 
 
25.  Determine what types of dry heat sterilizers are used (ovens, tunnels)? 
 
26.  Determine the location of the heat source. The heating element/device that generates the 
depyrogenation temperature can affect the HEPA filters and their ability to provide the desired 
filtration for non-viable particles. For example, the high temperatures create expansion and 
contraction of the HEPA filters and filter housing, which can compromise the integrity and 
functionality of the HEPA filters. 
 
27.  How is the heat distributed in the oven or tunnel (fan or convection)? 


===== PAGE 42 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 4 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
28.  Where are the HEPA filters located in the oven or tunnel?  What zones in a tunnel are supplied with 
HEPA filtered air (supply, heating, cooling zones)?  Does the cool down section of the tunnel 
provide a Class 100 conditions to ensure the sterility of the containers are maintained? What zones 
are controlled as Class 100 areas? 
 
29.  Due to thermal dynamics (high temperature of >360 degree C leads to the expansion and contraction 
of the filter housing), the HEPA filter normally undergoes integrity testing every 6 months. 
However, depending on the amount of usage of the depyrogenation tunnel and data obtained from 
particle monitoring in the vicinity outside the heat tunnel, integrity testings may need to be 
conducted on a more frequent basis. How does the firm assure integrity of the HEPA filters? How 
often are HEPA filters changed? 
 
30.  Are non-viable particle counts taken in hot air tunnel? Non-viable particle measurement for the 
Class 100/ ISO-5 zone of the depyrogenation tunnel are not done during routine operation because 
of high temperature. However, periodic measurement of non-viable in ISO 5 area should be verified 
and they are normally measured prior to and subsequent to the manufacture of a batch/campaign 
and at ambient temperature. 
 
31.  Are the sterilization / depyrogenation cycles controlled manual or automatically? 
 
32.  What type of monitoring and controlling sensors are used (e.g., thermocouple, RTD, pressure 
gauge, belt speed indicators)? How often are they calibrated? 
 
Parameters. 
 
33.  What are the sterilization / depyrogenation cycle parameters or equipment settings?  Compare 
master production record / SOP specifications and processing records for specific representative 
products. 
 
34.  What are the firm's specifications for time, temperature, belt speed, and pressures if applicable? 
 
35.  What are the critical parameters? How were they established? How does the firm assure the critical 
parameters are met for each lot or cycle? 
 
36.  Where are the sensors for the cycle controllers located? 
 
37.  How are each of the above parameters monitored? Are any of the parameters not monitored?  Are 
the critical parameters alarmed in continuous systems, such as those used in tunnels?   What is done 
when there is an alarm? 
 
38.  How does the firm assure that all critical parameters are met for each cycle in an oven or for the 
continuous run of the tunnel? 
 
39.  Do dry heat tunnels have alarms to alert operators if critical parameters (heat, belt speed, pressure) 
are not met?  Are the alarms documented?  Did the conditions that caused the alarm require the 
implementation of change controls and did they impact the validated process? 


===== PAGE 43 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 5 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
40.  Have any changes in the dry heat sterilization / depyrogenation system occurred since the last 
inspection?  Have these changes been evaluated for the need for revalidation? 
 
Validation. 
 
41.  Does the firm have written procedures for qualifying the dry heat sterilizers that include: 
 
• Design Objectives 
• Installation qualification of equipment 
• Operational qualification of equipment 
• Performance qualification with product 
• Description of circumstances requiring re-validation and procedures 
 
42.  Does validation documentation include heat distribution / penetration studies? 
 
• What is the firm's allowable temperature variation and the actual variation found in 
production? 
• What type of temperature measurement system was used? 
• Was calibration performed before and after the validation? 
• If dry heat sterilizer is an oven, was the slowest to heat area determined? 
 
43.  How was the depyrogenation cycle validated? 
 
• Was a known amount of endotoxin added to vials? 
• Was the endotoxin allowed to dry on the vials? 
• Was validation conducted with recovery tests to assure the spiked endotoxin can be recovered? 
Were the vials challenged with enough endotoxin to allow calculation of a 3-log reduction? 
• What cycle or equipment settings were used in the validation runs? 
• Was a 3 log reduction of endotoxin achieved? 
 
44.  Are the depyrogenation cycles for all vials validated or does the firm use a matrix approach?  If a 
matrix approach (vial sizes/mass) is used, what criteria are used to select the worst case challenges 
to the system? Are all vials types and sizes bracketed? 
 
45.  Have the dry heat sterilizer cycles or equipment settings changed since the validation studies were 
completed?   Compare validation studies, current SOPs and processing records for recent batches. 
 
 
ASEPTIC FILLING 
 
46.  When observing personnel during production, do operators practice proper cleanroom behaviors as 
specified in established cleanroom SOPs? 
 
47.  Can you observe the aseptic filling processes without going into the clean room (i.e., through 
window or TV monitor)? 


===== PAGE 44 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 6 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
A.   If yes, watch / observe the aseptic filling processes from preparation of bulk liquid product 
to filling and sealing of final dosage form, including the environmental monitoring 
performed in critical areas during actual production. 
 
B. If not, consider observing the aseptic filling inside the clean room, for example, via a Class 
10,000 (ISO-7) area. Prior to entry, consult the District. 
o Do personnel enter and perform interventions at the critical Class 100 (ISO 5) areas of 
the filling lines?  If so, how are such entries recorded? 
 
o How is this done (full body entry, hands only)? 
 
o Why? 
 
o Is this done routinely or infrequently? 
 
o Are proper aseptic techniques used?  [Reference: FDA 2004 Aseptic Processing 
Guidance, Section V.A.] 
 
o Do hands or arms go over open vials for sterile components?  If yes, are the vials 
discarded? 
 
48.  Does the firm have written procedures describing aseptic filling of drug products?  Does it include 
discussions of proper aseptic techniques and acceptable techniques for performing interventions 
into the Class 100 areas? 
 
49.  Review trend reports of the non-viable, viable and personnel monitoring data. 
 
• Have any trends been identified by the firm? If yes, what is done? 
 
• Are investigations done of out of limit results? 
 
Aseptic Filling Validation. 
 
Reference:  FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance, Section IX 
 
50.  How does the process used for media fill compare to the aseptic filling of commercial drug 
products?  Does the firm accurately evaluate the production operation on a routine basis (changes 
over time) against the media fill design?  Does the firm have detailed procedures that describe the 
media fill process, including frequency, challenge conditions, personnel participation, container / 
closures, interventions, duration of fill, reconciliation of vials, acceptance criteria, incubation, 
examination after incubation, actions to take if positive growth is found, etc? 
 
51.  Request a summary of all media fills conducted since last inspection, including lot identification, 
fill dates, production lines, number of units filled, number of units incubated, number of vials with 
no growth, number of vials with positive growth, microbial identification for any containers with 
growth, disposition of media fill units, etc. 
 
• Have media fills been done at the frequency described in the procedure? 
 
• Have any media fills showed positive growth? 
 
• Have any media fills failed to meet acceptance criteria? 


===== PAGE 45 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 7 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
52.  Are procedures followed when positive growth is found in media filled vials? Are investigations 
conducted of all positive growth found in media filled vials?  What is done when a media fill fails 
to meet acceptance criteria? Review investigations of any positive growth. 
 
53.  Are media fills performed on all shifts (e.g., representative of shift operations in a campaign)?  Do 
media fills include shift changes and breaks that occur during routine production? 
 
54.  When can media fills be aborted or units not incubated?  Would production lots be rejected if the 
same conditions existed during filling? 
 
55.  Are all personnel included in the media fill program?  Does this include set up personnel and 
mechanics who work on the aseptic filling lines?  What system does the firm have for assuring all 
personnel are included? 
 
56.  If end-line filters are used in actual manufacture, are they also used during media fills? 
 
57.  What size vials or ampules are used for media fills?  Evaluate justification for selecting worst case 
challenge if firm does not perform media fills using all the container / closure configurations filled 
on the line. 
 
58.  Are vials inverted before incubation to assure media touches all inner surfaces? 
 
59.  How does the firm conduct media fills for products that are filled into amber or opaque containers? 
 
60.  How does the firm assure that all integral vials are incubated?  How does the firm handle filled vials 
removed during the run because of interventions? 
 
61.  Do media fills include interventions that occur during routine production?  Are there written 
procedures specifying removal of media fill units (type of intervention and number of units 
removed) corresponding to the practice of a routine production run?  Did you observe any 
interventions during the filling of routine production lots that are not included in media fills? 
 
62.  Does the duration of a media fill approximate the duration of a routine production lot?  If not, 
evaluate firm’s justification for running shorter media fills? 
 
63.  What is the microbial growth medium? 
 
64.  Are growth promotion studies performed on each type of medium used? 
 
65.  Are growth promotion studies conducted every time a media fill is done? 
 
66.  When are the growth promotion studies performed (before/after filling; after incubation; etc.)? 
 
67.  What organisms are used to perform the growth promotion tests?  Are any environmental organisms 
used? 
 
68.  What temperatures and incubation times are used to incubate media filled vials? 


===== PAGE 46 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 8 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
69.  Are microorganisms from positive vials identified to genus and species? Are such microorganisms 
correlated to those found during environmental monitoring? 
 
70.  Is an investigation done when cracked vials are found after incubation begins? 
 
71.  When and where are the media filled vials examined? 
 
72.  Who performs the examination of media filled vials?  If production employees perform the 
examination, have they been trained to recognize all types of microbial growth. Is a microbiologist 
present when the examination is done? 
 
73.  What incubators are used to incubate media filled vials?  How is the temperature controlled and 
monitored?  Have tests been done to determine if the temperature is uniform throughout the 
incubator? 
 
 
LYOPHILIZATION (FREEZE-DRYING) 
 
Reference: Guide to Inspections of Lyophilization of Parenterals; FDA; July 1993 
 
General. 
 
74.  Who is the manufacturer of the lyophilizer? 
 
75.  Describe the heating and cooling systems used in the lyophilizer; the vacuum system; gas that is 
used to break the vacuum and whether it is sterile; and the temperature controlling system. 
 
76.  How are the vials transported from the filling line to the lyophilizer?  How are Class 100 (ISO 5) 
conditions maintained during transport, loading, and unloading of the lyophilizer? 
 
77.  Are the loading and unloading of the vials automated or manual? 
 
78.  How is the sealing of vials (final seating of stoppers) performed? 
 
79.  If the stoppering is performed automatically in the chamber at the end of the cycle, is it under 
vacuum? If not under vacuum, what gas is used and how is it sterilized? 
 
80.  If the vials are stoppered outside of the chamber, how is the lyophilized product protected from 
contamination during transport to the stoppering station and during the stoppering operation? 
 
81.  Describe the chamber clean-up procedures between batches of the same product and between 
different products (including sterilant / cleaning agents used, monitoring for sterilant residue where 
appropriate, and exposure cycle). 
 
82.  Past history has shown that the lyophilizer condenser can be a source of contamination and an 
assessment of the lyophilization process should include an inspection of the condenser. How is 
lyophilization cycle monitored/ documented and reviewed? 


===== PAGE 47 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 9 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
Lyophilization Validation – Sterilization of Chamber. 
 
81.  How is the lyophilization chamber sterilized?  How are all surfaces, such as all surfaces of moving 
shelves, exposed to steam? 
 
82.  When is the lyophilization chamber sterilized? What is explanation / justification if it is not done 
between each batch? 
 
83.  How are sterilization cycles controlled (manual, programmed)?  How are cycles monitored during 
production? 
 
84.  Has the sterilization of the lyophilization chamber been validated? Have the slowest to heat surfaces 
in the chamber been determined and challenged in the validation runs? 
 
85.  Review current procedures and sterilization records for production lots. Are the cycle parameters 
the same as those used during validation?  Do production cycles meet the validated cycle 
parameters? 
 
Lyophilization Validation – Aseptic Handling. 
 
86.  Is the aseptic handling of lyophilized products validated by media fills? 
 
87.  In the aseptic process, is lyophilization simulation performed during media fill? 
 
88.  Is the maximum amount of time the vials are held prior to lyophilization simulated during media 
fills? If vials are not sealed in lyophilization chamber, is the maximum hold time prior to stoppering 
simulated in media fills? 
 
89.  During validation, what level of vacuum is pulled on the lyophilization chamber? 
 
90.  How long do media fill vials remain in the lyophilization chamber under vacuum? How does this 
compare to commercial lots? 
 
91.  Does the process simulation result in freezing of the media? Note that this process simulation 
should not include freezing of the media. 
 
92.  Is environmental monitoring performed during loading of the lyophilizer both during production 
and as well as during validation? 
 
93.  Does the firm have data on growth promotion of the media?  Are growth promotion tests done on 
vials after incubation is completed? 
 
94.  Is environmental monitoring performed during unloading of the chamber during production as well 
as during media fill validation? 
 
95.  What is used to break the vacuum during media fills (nitrogen, air, other gas)? 


===== PAGE 48 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 10 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
Lyophilization Validation – Process. 
 
98.  Has the firm validated the lyophilization cycle (e.g., time, rate of heat input, temperatures, eutectic 
melting point) for each product? Review validation records for selected drug products with different 
physical and chemical characteristics. 
 
99.  Review lyophilization production records for the same products. Are the cycle parameters and 
observed results within the validated cycles? 
 
100.  What are the firm’s criteria for acceptable vs. unacceptable runs, including general appearance, 
cake appearance, meltback, reconstitution time, moisture, etc.? 
 
101.  Has the firm performed equipment qualification, preventative maintenance, critical instrument 
calibration, and cleaning validation? 
 
Lyophilization of sterile API: The aseptic process may include either a manual or automated transferring 
process, or a combination of both, to transfer the lyophilized API out of the lyophilizer and into an SIP 
holding vessel or transfer tank. It is equally important to observe and assess the manual operations of the 
aseptic lyophilization process and assure that similar operations are performed during the media fill 
processing steps for the API. 
 
 
ISOLATOR BARRIER TECHNOLOGY 
 
Reference: Appendix 1 of FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance 
 
NOTE: Methods (e.g., hydrogen peroxide, peracetic acid) used to decontaminate isolator 
barriers are capable of rendering surfaces free of viable organisms, but lack the 
capabilities of steam sterilization. While these agents do not effectively penetrate 
obstructed or protected surfaces, validated systems are highly effective at assuring 
contamination-free internal isolator surfaces. 
 
102.  Determine: 
 
•  Model of isolator or barrier, and materials of construction 
 
•  Type of isolator (open or closed)? 
 
•  Airflow (turbulent, unidirectional)? 
 
•  Classification of surrounding room environment 
 
•  Number and location of gloves or half-suits 
 
•  Attire worn by operators (e.g., are sterile gloves worn under isolator gloves?) 
 
•  Operating parameters (pressures, air velocities, temperature, humidity) 
 
103.  Is a written maintenance program in place which requires routine documented checks or tests of 
gloves, half-suits, door seals, etc. for integrity?  What type of tests/checks are done and how 
frequently? 


===== PAGE 49 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 11 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
104.  Do written procedures specify glove replacement frequency? If so, what is the frequency and is 
the SOP followed? 
 
105.  Does the isolator maintain continuous positive pressure and at sufficient levels? 
 
106.  How are materials transferred into and out of the isolator?  How robust are the transfer 
mechanisms? 
 
107.  Are the equipment and surfaces that have direct contact with sterile products and components 
sterilized by heat. Does it achieve a minimum of a six-log reduction of the BI spores? 
 
108.  What method is used to decontaminate the inner surface of the isolator barrier (e.g., vapor 
hydrogen peroxide, steam hydrogen peroxide, chlorine dioxide, etc.)?  Determine decontamination 
parameters. 
 
109.  Did the surface decontamination validation study sufficiently address the ability of the sterilant to 
disperse throughout the chamber and reach all surfaces?  Did the decontamination process include 
the use of Chemical Indicators (CI) to determine the presence or absence of the VHP on the work 
surfaces and/or the worst case locations to decontaminate?  The CI can assists in the evaluation 
process by providing useful qualitative data. Were replicate BIs placed throughout the isolator, 
including the most difficult to reach locations (e.g., underneath any items remaining in isolator 
during sterilization). Are the most difficult to sterilize materials evaluated? 
 
110.  What is the isolator decontamination frequency and is it justified by validation data? 
 
111.  Is a decontamination cycle performed after a power failure or pressure reversal or other 
unanticipated breach of system integrity? 
 
112.  How often is the isolator decontamination cycle revalidated? 
 
113.  Does the written environmental monitoring program include routine tests for nonviable particles, 
as well as an appropriate number of microbial tests (e.g., active air and surface samples; gloves 
samples) during each campaign?  Evaluate the tests performed and the testing frequencies. 
 
Testing Isolators (Sterility test). 
 
114.  Have any false positives been identified in the laboratory isolator barrier (this should be an 
exceedingly rare occurrence)?  Were the false positive investigated to determine and correct the 
cause. 
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING – Non-viable 
 
Reference: FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance, Section IV. 
 
115.  Is the air supplied to critical areas (exposed product / filling areas) filtered through HEPA filters 
under positive pressure? 


===== PAGE 50 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 12 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
116.  Is the air flow in critical areas unidirectional when delivered to the point of use? At what velocity? 
Is velocity determined at the critical work height and at the filter face? Air flow pattern 
evaluations (smoke studies) under dynamic conditions are performed to visualize and demonstrate 
unidirectional air flow within a designated area/room [e.g., Class 100 & 10,000 (ISO5 & ISO7)]. 
The smoke studies may also reveal air turbulences and air eddies that could be a vector assisting 
the dissemination of microbial and/or non-viable contamination within critical manufacturing 
areas. 
 
117.  How is the air filtered that is supplied to critical areas (where unsterilized product, in-process 
materials, and container/closures are prepared)? 
 
118.  What are the firm's air quality classifications for the following areas: 
 
•  Compounding 
•  Equipment preparation 
•  Any area where product or sterilized components are exposed 
•  Areas where aseptic connections are made 
•  Filling lines 
•  Room surrounding filling lines 
•  Capping (crimping) area 
 
119.  How often are HEPA filters integrity tested? What test method is used? What is done if leaks are 
found?  If done by an outside firm, are results reviewed by on-site personnel including the quality 
unit? 
 
120.  How often are air flow velocities checked for each HEPA filter?  What are the air velocity 
specifications?  What is done if velocity readings are out of specification? 
 
121.  Does the firm have a written monitoring program for classified areas that includes scientifically 
sound sampling schedules; descriptions of sampling locations and frequency of sampling?   How 
were the locations selected? 
 
122.  What type of instrument is used to check non-viable particle counts in the classified areas?  Is the 
air sampled continuously? If continuous, is there an alarm when counts exceed pre-set limits or 
detects cleanroom doors open for an extended time?  What is done in response to the alarms?  Is 
there an alarm log? Are permanently installed sensors used or portable units that are taken into 
and out of the critical areas?  What is done if counts meet or exceed alert and action limits? 
 
123.  What are the pressure differential requirements in the sterile core area?  Does this assure an air 
cascade from most clean area to least clean air (by air classification)? 
 
124.  How are pressure differentials monitored?  Is a continuous monitoring system used? If yes, does it 
include alarms so operators are aware of excursions?  Are alarm conditions documented (alarm 
log)? What is done in response to an alarm?  How long must a condition exist before an alarm 
sounded? 


===== PAGE 51 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 13 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
125.  How are temperature and humidity monitored?  What is the acceptable range?  What is done if the 
reading is outside of the range? 
 
126.  How are environmental excursions (readings that meet or exceed alert and action levels) handled? 
Are the excursions investigated to determine impact on product, root cause and needed corrective 
actions? 
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND PERSONNEL MONITORING – Microbiology 
 
Reference:  FDA’s 2004 Aseptic Processing Guidance, Sections V and X.A 
 
Air. 
 
127.  Does the firm have an effective Environmental Monitoring (EM) Program in place?  What is the 
purpose and scope of the EM Program? Are EM sampling locations strategic, based on product 
contamination risk of the process and operation? Are the microbial alert and action levels based on 
the historical EM data derived from the manufacturing operations, support utilities and personnel 
practices performed at the manufacturing site?  What is the frequency of microbiological sampling 
of air using "active" samplers (systems that sample a known volume of air) in various locations, 
such as: 
• Areas where product or sterile components are exposed to the environment 
• Filling areas 
• Loading areas for lypohilizers 
• Surrounding areas 
 
128.  What are the established microbial alert and action levels or limits for quantitative air samples? 
What is the length of the sampling period? Is sampling done during production or at rest? 
 
129.  What type of active air sampling equipment is used (centrifugal, impaction, membrane)?  Is the 
sampling equipment calibrated? What is the efficiency of the active air sampler? 
 
130.  Does the firm have data on the ability of these samplers to recover organisms without deleterious 
effect on survivability such as through impact or desiccation of the media? 
 
131.  What is the actual volume of air sampled per location? 
 
132.  Are settling plates used?  What is the length of exposure period?  Sampling frequency? Locations 
(including proximity to critical operations)?  Microbial limits? 
 
Surfaces. 
 
133.  Are there written procedures that describe the monitoring of surfaces in the clean rooms?  Does it 
describe locations, frequency and sampling techniques? 
 
134.  What surfaces are sampled in the critical (Class 100 / ISO 5) areas?  Are critical surfaces included 
(those that touch the sterile product or sterile components)? 


===== PAGE 52 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 14 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
135.  When are surface samples taken?  Are critical surfaces only sampled at the end of the operation? 
 
136.  What is the frequency of sampling surfaces? 
 
137.  What types of samples are collected at each location (RODAC plate, swab samples)? 
 
138.  What are the alert and action levels / limits for the microbial sampling of critical surfaces, surfaces 
in Class 100 areas and surfaces in other classified areas?  How were the levels / limits established? 
What is done when the samples meet or exceed alert and action levels? 
 
Personnel. 
 
139.  Are there specific programs for training personnel who work in classified and aseptic processing 
areas?  Does the program include microbiological testing or qualifying employees before they are 
allowed to work in these areas?  Does the program include prequalification requirements? 
 
140.  How often is monitoring performed on filling room personnel?   Is it done at least upon existing 
the cleanroom (e.g., per shift)?  How often are gloves (hands) sampled?  How often are gowns 
sampled?  Is any sampling done after interventions are performed? 
 
141.  Who performs the sampling of personnel?  Is it self-sampling? Is the sampling performed by 
another production employee, a microbiologist, technician or other quality control employee? 
 
142.  What are the firm's alert and action levels / limits for personnel monitoring?  How were the levels 
/ limits established?  What is done if the sample results reach or exceed the alert and action limits? 
 
143.  Do employees spray their hands with sanitizer or disinfectant before the sample is taken? 
 
General. 
 
144.  What are the microbiological growth media used for environmental and personnel monitoring 
samples? 
 
145.  Are the media used in the viable monitoring program shown to be capable of detecting molds and 
yeasts as well as bacteria by means of growth promotion tests? 
 
146.  Is anaerobic monitoring ever performed?  When? 
 
147.  Are inactivators used for antibiotics or other bactericidal / bacteriostatic substances? Has the firm 
shown that these are effective?  Are records available? 
 
148.  When are recovered microorganisms identified? To what level (genus, species)? 
 
149.  What are the incubation times and temperatures? 
 
150.  How are environmental and personnel monitoring data trended?  How often are trend reports 
prepared?  How often are they reviewed?  Who reviews the trend reports?  What type of action is 
taken based on review of trend reports? 


===== PAGE 53 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 15 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
151.  Are environmental and personnel monitoring samples that exceed action levels investigated to 
determine product impact, cause and needed corrective actions?  What is done when an alert level 
is exceeded? 
 
Review and assess the EM trending data, which will provide a good indication if the viable and non- 
viable particles are maintained within the established levels or drifting out of control. What are the 
causes of the aberrant events? Were corrective actions and preventive measures taken to preclude the 
reoccurrence of the viable and non-viable particle anomalies? 
 
 
BIOLOGICAL INDICATORS (BIs) 
 
In sterile drug manufacturing, BIs are typically used to validate the cycles used for terminal sterilization, 
sterilization of equipment and components. BIs are also used to validate SIP systems used to sterilize 
lyophilizers, processing tanks, sterilizing filters, and product lines and systems used to decontaminate 
surfaces in isolators. 
 
152.  What type of indicator is used (e.g., inoculated carrier, inoculated product, inoculated simulated 
product, etc.)?  Are BIs inoculated into the components (i.e., stoppers) used whenever possible? 
What are their corresponding D values?  Is the sterilization cycle adequate corresponding to the D 
value of the BI? 
 
153.  If the source of the indicator is commercial, what is the brand name and manufacturer?  What 
labeling is received with the BI?  If the BI is prepared in-house, determine the supplier of the 
organism, how the BI is propagated and stored, and the method of preparation? 
 
154.  What organism is used (Genus, species)? Is it the appropriate microorganism used for 
sterilization? 
 
155.  What is the challenge level of the biological indicator prior to exposure to sterilant? 
 
156.  Does the firm verify viable spore count on each lot of BIs before use in validation? 
 
157.  Does the firm or the BI labeling claim to meet USP performance criteria for steam or ETO 
biological indicators? 
 
158.  Does the firm perform USP testing on each lot of BIs received? 
 
159.  What is the approximate D-value of the biological indicator?  Is this verified prior to validation? 
 
160.  How many BIs are used per sterilizer load? 
 
161.  What procedure is used to assay the indicators after exposure? What growth media is used? What 
are the optimal and actual incubation time and temperature for the BI (compare to COA received 
with the BI)? 
 
162.  How are the BIs prepared for sterilization? 


===== PAGE 54 =====
PROGRAM 
7356.002A 
ATTACHMENT A 
2012–CPGM-CDER-001 
ATT. A 
PAGE 16 of 16 
TRANSMITTAL # 
FORM FDA 2438g (electronic-02/2003) 
 
 
 
 
163.  Are biological indicators located in the most difficult to sterilize product sites (explain)? How are 
these locations determined? 
 
164.  Is there a diagram of the distribution of biological indicators in the loading pattern(s) used? 
 
165.  What is the elapsed time (hrs.) between removing indicators from the sterilizer and testing? Are 
there time limits established for this period? What happens if they are exceeded? 
 
166.  What is done if positive BIs are found after sterilization? 
 
167.  Describe biological indicator storage conditions: 
 
A.   Type of room, cabinet, etc. (if stored in freezer or refrigerator, state if frost-free) 
B. Temperature 
C. Relative humidity (if known) 
 
D.   Compare to literature received with BI or written procedures 
 
168.  Does the firm use chemical process monitor(s) to indicate cycle exposure or to measure one or 
more cycle parameters? 
