=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-May-2024
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-C4739029-5BE7-4717-A2DD-E872411AF89F_7_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7198_07_01
DOI Ref:
o3tel
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈1790〉 VISUAL INSPECTION OF INJECTIONS
1. SCOPE
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Related Chapters
1.3 Defect Prevention
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Inspection Process Capability
2.2 Patient Risk
3. TYPICAL INSPECTION PROCESS FLOW
3.1 100% Inspection
3.2 Acceptance Sampling and Testing
3.3 Remediation and Alternative Practices
4. INSPECTION LIFE CYCLE
4.1 Extrinsic, Intrinsic, or Inherent Particles
4.2 Prevention of Particulates
4.3 Recommendations for Specific Components and Processes
4.4 Trending
5. INTERPRETATION OF INSPECTION RESULTS
5.1 Defect Classification
5.2 Unique Product and Container Considerations
5.3 Alternate Inspection Strategies for Supplemental Testing
6. INSPECTION METHODS AND TECHNOLOGIES
6.1 Manual Visual Inspection
6.2 Semi-Automated Visual Inspection
6.3 Automated Visual Inspection
7. QUALIFICATION AND VALIDATION OF INSPECTION PROCESSES
7.1 Standards
7.2 Preparing Defect Standards
7.3 Particle Types
7.4 Rejection Probability Determination
7.5 Test Sets
7.6 Types of Test Sets
7.7 Training and Qualification of Human Inspectors
7.8 Inspector Qualification Requirements
7.9 Requalification
8. PRODUCTS IN DISTRIBUTION
9. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 2 ===
1. SCOPE
1.1 Introduction
This chapter provides guidance on the inspection of injections for visible par ticles. The terms "par ticle,
" "par ticulates,
" and "par ticulate
matter" are equivalent and do not have different meanings when used in this chapter. Par ticulate matter is de«ned in Par ticulate Matter in
Injections 〈788〉 as “extraneous mobile undissolved par ticles, other than gas bubbles, unintentionally present in the solutions.
” Visual
inspection is a probabilistic process, and the speci«c detection probability observed for a given product for visible par ticles will vary with
differences in dosage form, par ticle characteristics (such as size, shape, color, and density), and container design. Some products and
packages limit the ability to inspect for par ticles when compared to clear solutions in transparent containers. Additional guidance when
inspecting these di­cult-to-inspect products (DIP) are provided later within this chapter.
The requirement for injections to be “true solutions” appeared in USP IX in 1915, and the «rst appearance of “solution clarity” for parenteral
products occurred in 1936 in NF IV. Since then, there have been numerous modi«cations to the compendia in this regard. A comprehensive
history of compendial inspection standards is available in the Pharmacopeial Forum (1).
The practices discussed in this chapter are also applicable to the detection of other visible defects that are not the subject of Visible
Par ticulates in Injections 〈790〉 but are critical to a quali«ed, comprehensive inspection process. These include, but are not limited to,
container–closure integrity defects such as cracks, misplaced closures, or incomplete seals, any of which may compromise the sterility of
the product. Additional container system defects (2–3), as well as other product characteristics such as «ll level, discoloration, or clarity, may
also be detected during visual inspection, and nonconforming units should be rejected using the methods described in this chapter.
Inspection for these container–closure quality attributes often occurs at the same time as the inspection for par ticles using a speci«cally
designed and quali«ed inspection sequence.
The reference method described in this chapter and in 〈790〉 is a manual inspection of a single container for par ticulate matter. However,
multiple-container manual inspection, semi-automated, and automated inspection methods are also discussed and permitted by the
Pharmacopeia. These alternate inspection methods must be quali«ed to demonstrate equivalent or better defect detection when compared
to the reference manual inspection described in 〈790〉.
Change to read:
1.2 Related Chapters
Injections and Implanted Drug Products 〈1〉 provides an overview of injectable dosage forms and the quality tests associated with them.
Another chapter, 〈790〉, has been added to the USP–NF to provide a clear de«nition of routine inspection procedures for injectable products;
the goal is to comply with the expectation that products be essentially free of visible par ticulate matter. Additionally, information on the
detection of subvisible par ticulates and par ticulates in speci«c dosage forms is provided in Ophthalmic Products—Quality Tests 〈771〉,
Subvisible Par ticulate Matter in Therapeutic Protein Injections 〈787〉, 〈788〉, and ▲
Subvisible Par ticulate Matter in Intraocular Solutions 〈789〉▲
(CN 1-May-2024)
. Measurement of Subvisible Par ticulate Matter in Therapeutic Protein Injections 〈1787〉 and Methods for the Determination of
Subvisible Par ticulate Matter 〈1788〉 provide additional suppor ting information on measurement methods for subvisible par ticles.
1.3 Defect Prevention
Although this chapter focuses on the detection and removal of product units that show evidence of visible par ticles, the need for
preventing such contamination should not be overlooked. No inspection process, manual or automated, can guarantee complete removal of
all visible par ticulate matter or other visible defects; thus, prevention of such defects is an impor tant consideration. Good process and
product design, along with environmental control, are necessary to ensure the reliable production of products with a low par ticle burden. To
ensure the control of defects throughout the process, manufacturers should consider an inspection life-cycle approach (4). This approach
begins with developing quality attributes based on incoming component speci«cations, followed by component-level acceptance testing. It
extends to component preparation and product-«lling procedures, followed by 100% in-process inspection of «lled product, and concluding
with «nal acceptance sampling and testing of the «nished product. The life-cycle approach must encompass purchased, ready-to-use (RTU)
components such as primary containers or closures, where there is no oppor tunity for fur ther par ticle removal before use. Single-use
systems (SUS) and consumable cleanroom materials such as wipes, should also be considered as potential sources of par ticulates. Stability
and retention sample inspection, customer complaint evaluation, and in-house investigative procedures suppor t this integrated approach.
The inspection life cycle is composed of and suppor ted by sub-cycles involving defect detection method development, quali«cation of
methods and personnel, maintenance, and personnel training. Categorization and identi«cation of product-contact par ticles found during
inspection are useful to suppor t source identi«cation. Forensic analytical methods and the use of libraries containing visual standards (e.g.,
photographs and/or drawings) and characterized defect samples fur ther suppor t these objectives. The «nal element of the life cycle is a
feedback loop of trending and data review from each of these process areas, resulting in a quality system that suppor ts continuous process
improvement.
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Inspection Process Capability
Visual inspection of injections is necessary to ensure ar ticles for administration consistently exhibit a high-quality level and minimize the
introduction of unintended par ticles to patients during the delivery of injectable medications. Such inspection also offers the oppor tunity to
reject containers whose integrity has been compromised, such as those with cracks or incomplete seals, which pose a risk to the sterility of
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 3 ===
the product. The desire to detect these defects, despite their very low frequency and the randomness of their occurrence, has resulted in the
longstanding expectation that each «nished unit will be inspected (100% inspection). Although having zero defects is the goal and this
should drive continuous process improvement, zero defects is not a feasible speci«cation for visible par ticles given current packaging
components, processing capability, and the probabilistic nature of the inspection process.
The visible par ticulate detection process is probabilistic: the likelihood of detection is a cumulative function of visible attributes such as
par ticle quantity, size, shape, color, density, and re¬ectivity as well as optical characteristics of the surrounding product and package.
Understanding human performance is therefore critical to establishing visual inspection criteria. Analysis of inspection results pooled from
several studies (5–7) conducted with standards prepared with single spherical par ticles shows that the probability of detection (PoD) for a
seeded sample with a single 50-µm par ticle in a clear solution contained in a clear 10-mL vial utilizing diffuse illumination between 2000 and
3000 lux is only slightly greater than 0%. The detection probability increases to approximately 40%-60% for a seeded standard with a 100-µm
par ticle, and the threshold for routine, reliable detection (≥70% PoD) of individual visible par ticles is often near 150 µm in diameter. Par ticles
200 µm and larger are often necessary to achieve greater than 95% PoD (5). The PoD for «bers is often less than that discussed for similarly
sized spherical par ticles above, with reliable detection often commencing at or above 500 µm (7). Thus, in a quali«ed visual inspection
system, the vast majority of non«brous par ticles that might go undetected and be introduced into the pharmaceutical supply chain will be
smaller than 200 µm. Some injectable products are more di­cult to inspect due to the nature of the primary container (8) (e.g., increasing
size, color, and opacity), as well as dosage form characteristics (e.g., «ll level; solution color, clarity, or opalescence; and suspensions,
lyophilized powders, emulsions, and implants). Par ticle characteristics beyond size (e.g., color, shape, and density) will also affect the PoD
that can be achieved for a speci«c product and container system (7).
2.2 Patient Risk
A complete review of the medical literature is beyond the scope of this chapter, but the effect of par ticles on the patient must be
considered. Several reviews on this subject are available (9–15). The clinical implications of par ticulate matter in injections are determined
by many factors, including the size and number of par ticles, the composition of the material, the potential for microbiological contamination,
the route of administration, the intended patient population, and the clinical condition of the patient. For example, an otherwise healthy
individual receiving a subcutaneous or intramuscular injection containing sterile, iner t par ticulates would likely experience no adverse
effects, or at worst would develop a small granuloma. On the other hand, a critically ill premature infant receiving a par ticle-laden infusion
directly through an umbilical catheter might suffer considerable pathophysiologic injury (16–17).
Numerous animal studies have been conducted to determine the fate of intravenous par ticles with different sizes and compositions (18–
21). Most studies have focused on subvisible par ticles with a diameter <50 µm. In these studies, a massive infusion of par ticles has been
accompanied by histologic evidence of injury to pulmonary capillary endothelial cells (22), microscopic thrombi in the pulmonary capillaries
(23), pulmonary microscopic granulomata (24), and hepatic in¬ammatory effects (25). Although useful for understanding the
pathophysiologic response to par ticulate matter, the large number of par ticles used in these studies (e.g., 10
9
 par ticles/kg per injection)
provides little insight into the risk to humans posed by small numbers of visible par ticles.
Garvin and Gunner were among the «rst to repor t a concern about the effects of par ticles in human patients (26–27). For obvious ethical
reasons, there is a lack of controlled clinical studies on the effects of par ticles purposely infused into human patients. Some anecdotal
information about human patient safety may be obtained by examining case repor ts of intravenous drug abusers (28–30). In these cases,
solid oral dosages are often ground up and injected as a slurry; pulmonary foreign-body emboli and granulomas were observed in these
patients (31). Unfor tunately, the clinical risks to human patients posed by small numbers of par ticles are di­cult to infer from these
observations due to the extreme number of insoluble par ticles and the uncontrolled conditions in which they were administered.
Ar terial embolization using materials such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), collagen-coated acrylic microspheres, and gelatin spheres also
provides some insight into the potential human pathophysiologic implications of non-target embolization of extraneous-par ticle intravenous
infusions. In these cases, massive par ticle loads moving from the ar terial injection site into the venous circulation were also repor ted (32–
36). In addition, case repor ts have documented injury associated with the infusion of signi«cant quantities of precipitated admixtures or
therapeutic use of par ticles for embolization (16–17,37). Finally, recent studies evaluating the utility of in-line «ltration (0.2- and 1.2-µm-rated
«lters) of intravenous ¬uids administered in a pediatric intensive care unit setting suggest that reducing the par ticulate burden associated
with high volume infusions and multiple infused medications through bedside «ltration may provide a reduction in morbidity in select patient
populations (38).
Ultimately, the safety considerations related to par ticulate matter in injections must be assessed for each drug product, intended patient
population, and method of administration. No single set of inspection criteria can adequately anticipate all potential risks to the patient.
Despite the administration of an estimated 15 billion doses of injectable medicines each year (39), no repor ts of adverse events associated
with the injection of individual visible par ticles have been found. The methods outlined in 〈790〉 should serve as essential requirements when
assessing the adequacy of the visual inspection procedure, but alternative acceptance criteria (e.g., the use of tightened sampling plans)
should be implemented when the patient population and intended use of the product warrant these additional measures.
3. TYPICAL INSPECTION PROCESS FLOW
3.1 100% Inspection
Chapter 〈790〉 establishes the expectation that each «nished unit of injectable product will be inspected as par t of the routine
manufacturing process. This inspection should take place at a point when and where defects are most easily detected, for example, prior to
labeling or inser tion into a device or combination product. Each unit should be examined with the unaided eye under conditions appropriate
for the container system (manual inspection) or by using a conveyor to transpor t and present the containers to a human inspector (semi-
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 4 ===
automated inspection), or by means of light obscuration or electronic image analysis (automated inspection). Manual and semi-automated
inspection should be performed only by trained, quali«ed inspectors. Inspection may be conducted by means of a device that holds more
than a single unit at one time for examination. This inspection may be performed at-line or in-line with «lling or packaging or in a separate,
off-line inspection. The intent of this inspection is the detection and removal of any observed defective unit. When in doubt, units should be
removed. Figure 1 shows a simpli«ed process ¬ow where solid boxes indicate required process operations, and those with dotted lines
(supplemental testing) may be required for DIPs as discussed in 5.2 Unique Product and Container Considerations. Alternative strategies,
such as reinspection or two-stage inspection, may be required and are discussed in 3.3 Remediation and Alternative Practices.
Figure 1. Typical process ¬ow char t.
[Note—100% inspection refers to the complete non-destructive inspection of the container–closure system and its contents. Inspection may be
accomplished in a single operation with speci«cally designed sequences for detecting visible par ticulate and/or container system defects or in
multiple steps using a combination of technologies. See additional discussion in 3.3 Remediation and Alternative Practices and 6. Inspection
Methods and Technologies.]
[Note—Supplemental destructive testing is required when the nature of the product or container limits visual inspection of the contents (e.g.,
with a lyophilized cake or powder, or with an amber glass or opaque container). See additional discussion in 5.2 Unique Product and Container
Considerations. Representative samples should be taken throughout the batch for supplemental testing from any point in the process after
100% inspection.]
During 100% inspection, limits on typical rejection rates should be established to identify atypical lots (40). These limits may be
established for categories of defects (e.g., critical, major, and minor) or for speci«c types of defects (e.g., par ticles). A review of historical
performance is useful in establishing these limits, and the review may include grouping products similar in appearance and manufacture.
Periodic reassessment of these limits is recommended to account for expected process improvements and/or normal ¬uctuations in the
process baseline (41). If a limit is exceeded, it should trigger an investigation. The investigation may include an additional inspection, or it
may determine whether additional inspection is necessary.
3.2 Acceptance Sampling and Testing
After 100% inspection, a statistically valid sample is taken from the units accepted by the inspection process. These sampled units should
be manually inspected under controlled conditions by trained inspectors. Chapter 〈790〉 provides reference inspection conditions for this
purpose. The sample may be a random or a representative sample (e.g., at «xed time intervals or a «xed number per tray). Defects may not
be distributed equally over the lot, and therefore a sampling process that represents the whole lot is required. Typical sampling plans used
for this purpose can be found in ANSI/ASQ Z1.4 (42). Equivalent plans may also be found in ISO 2859 (43) or JIS Z9015 (44). These plans
were historically developed for larger lot sizes and thus oversampled smaller batches (45). Alternative sampling plans may be justi«ed for
smaller batch sizes resulting in a smaller sample size. For batch release, the sampling plans listed as Normal II are typically used. Tightened
sampling plans may be appropriate when an atypical result is observed, or reinspection is performed. All sampling plans specify a sample
size for a range of batch sizes and require selection of an acceptable quality limit (AQL) to establish the sensitivity of the plan. The AQL is the
defect rate at which 95% of the lots examined will be accepted and is a measure of falsely rejecting good batches. Critical defects (those
that pose the greatest risk to the patient) should be assigned an AQL with a very low value. Often, the accept number (the number of
defective units allowed in the sample) for a critical defect is zero. Major and minor defects, which pose less risk to the patient, will have
increasing (less stringent) AQL values and accept numbers greater than zero. Fur ther de«nition and discussion on defect categories are
found in 5.1 Defect Classi«cation. Table 1 shows the range of AQL values typically used for visual inspection processes (46).
T
able 1. Typical AQL Values for Visual Inspection Processes.
Defect Category
AQL Range
(%)
Critical
0.010–0.10
Major
0.10–0.65
Minor
1.0–4.0
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 5 ===
Defect Category
AQL Range
(%)
[Note—When selecting a sampling plan for AQL testing after 100% inspection using ANSI/ASQ Z1.4, ISO 2859, or JIS Z9015, choose the
sample size to satisfy the AQL value for the most critical category (e.g., critical) of defects being evaluated. Then use the accept numbers
for this sample size for the AQL values chosen for the other defect categories (e.g., major and minor). This assures that the sample size
will produce a statistically valid result for all defect categories examined. The defect categories shown here represent a common basic
approach to grouping defects by risk; however, additional categories may be added to these for more detailed analysis.]
While the standards referenced in the paragraph above are indexed by AQL, it is impor tant to also know the unacceptable quality limit
(UQL) for the sampling plan(s) used. These can be found in the operational characteristic (OC) curve data supplied for each plan found in
these standards or calculated independently using quali«ed software. The UQL is the defect rate at which 90% of the lots examined will be
rejected and is a better measure of the customer or patient risk. The protection afforded by any sampling plan is represented by its OC curve.
This is a plot of the probability of lot acceptance versus the defect rate in the lot. The AQL and UQL are two points on this curve. Sampled
units should be manually inspected under controlled conditions by trained inspectors. Inspection conditions should be aligned with the 100%
inspection process.
Manual acceptance sampling should be performed after any type of 100% inspection process, including manual, semi-automated, and
automated inspection processes. It provides a measure of the performance of the overall inspection process and the quality of a speci«c lot,
compared with prede«ned acceptance criteria. Although automated systems are validated before use and are routinely challenged to ensure
acceptable performance, the use of manual acceptance sampling inspection detects unexpected defects that were not included in the
development and training of the automated system by the manual inspection process.
Acceptance criteria are comprised of the product speci«cations and acceptance/rejection criteria, such as the AQL and UQL values, with
an associated sampling plan that is necessary for deciding to accept or reject a lot or batch (or any other convenient subgroups of
manufactured units) as described in 21 CFR 210.3 (47). If the acceptance criteria of the sampling plan are not met, an investigation should
be conducted. Depending on the nature of the failure, this investigation should include forensic classi«cation/identi«cation of the par ticle(s),
and examinations of the manufacturing process, the raw materials, and the packaging materials, as well as the inspection process. If, after
investigation, the inspection process is deemed capable of detecting the defect(s) in question, the batch may be reinspected. An alternative
inspection process better suited to detection of a speci«c defect may also be chosen for reinspection.
After reinspection (performing a second 100% inspection of the batch), a new statistically valid sample of the accepted units is taken and
compared against established acceptance criteria. It is a good practice to use a tightened sampling plan and acceptance criteria under these
circumstances because of the atypical nature of this process step.
Typical sampling plans for supplemental testing can be found in the special sampling plans S-3 and S-4 in ANSI/ASQ Z1.4 (42). These
higher sensitivity S-plans offer a practical compromise between sample size and statistical power. For batch sizes between 200 and 100,000
they suggest a sample size of 20 with an accept number of 0 (based on an AQL of 0.65%). Sample sizes larger than 20, as found in these
sampling plans, may be appropriate for larger batch sizes or when additional sensitivity to suppor t reduced AQL values or a more
conservative defect classi«cation is desired. Refer to Table 2.
T
able 2. Typical 0.65% AQL sampling schemes for normal, single-pass inspection using S-3 and S-4 levels, dependent upon lot size.
Lot Size
(Sampling Letter Code)
Accept Number
, Reject Number/Sample Size
Inspection Level S-3
Inspection Level S-4
200–10,000
(F) 0,1/20
(G) 0,1/20
10,001–500,000
(G) 0,1/20
(J) 1,2/80
>500,000
(H) 1,2/80
(K) 2,3/125
Alternative plans are acceptable, but care should be taken to examine the UQL of such plans to assess their sensitivity.
3.3 Remediation and Alternative Practices
reinspection
As discussed in the preceding section, reinspection (repeating the 100% inspection followed by acceptance sampling inspection) may be
appropriate if the initial 100% inspection is not successful in meeting in-process control levels or the initial acceptance sampling inspection
criteria. This includes instances when the established 100% inspection failure rate(s) and/or the accept/reject number(s) associated with
the chosen AQL values have been exceeded. Reinspection should only be conducted using a procedure that has been approved by the
quality organization and addresses key parameters such as the inspection conditions (e.g., same as primary inspection or modi«ed to
enhance detection of a speci«c defect type), the number of times reinspection may be performed (this should be limited and justi«ed), and
the acceptance criteria (e.g., same as primary inspection or tightened). If reinspection is required often, consideration should be given to
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 6 ===
improving the sensitivity of the primary inspection process or of the manufacturing controls to prevent defects in the upstream process as
determined by root cause analysis.
two-stage inspection
In cases where an assignable cause, such as the formation of air bubbles or speci«c container or closure variation, results in a high false-
rejection rate (rejection of acceptable units), the use of a second inspection step may be considered. Figure 2 shows a typical process ¬ow
for a two-stage inspection. Such an inspection strategy is more common with automated inspection systems, where there is less ability to
tolerate normal variation in the product or container.
Figure 2. Two-stage inspection process ¬ow char t.
Under these circumstances, the inspection system is adjusted to ensure acceptance of good units. Those not accepted during the
primary inspection are considered of uncer tain disposition until inspected by another means (e.g., enhanced manual inspection) to provide
con«rmation of acceptance or rejection. Inspection conditions may be adjusted to provide greater sensitivity in this second inspection step
(e.g., additional inspection time) to ensure a higher probability that true defective units will be rejected. The limitations of the «rst inspection
and the reason for conducting a second stage of inspection should be clearly de«ned and documented. The second inspection of these
units by the same method and conditions (e.g., automated inspection with the same parameters after an initial automated inspection) is
generally not recommended because the same limitation in inspection method is present for both inspections unless enhanced manual or
more sensitive automated inspection parameters are employed for the second stage inspection. However, it may be suitable when the root
cause is speci«cally related to air bubbles in the solution, and a study has been performed to establish an appropriate holding time to allow
the bubbles to dissipate before performing the second inspection. It is recommended that each inspection stream (those accepted by the
«rst stage and those accepted by the second stage) be sampled separately and evaluated against the sampling plan acceptance criteria
before they are con«rmed as accepted and recombined into a single batch. If a two-stage inspection strategy is used, it must be validated
as intended for use. Defective containers with less than a 100% PoD will have the PoD reduced fur ther with each stage of inspection; thus,
the PoD should be determined after inspection through both stages to ensure that acceptable sensitivity is maintained.
4. INSPECTION LIFE CYCLE
4.1 Extrinsic, Intrinsic, or Inherent Par ticles
Par ticles may originate from many sources. These are discussed here, as well as in other chapters in the USP (e.g., 〈1787〉). Those that are
foreign to the manufacturing process are exogenous or “extrinsic” in origin; these include hair, non-process-related «bers, starch, minerals,
insect par ts, and similar inorganic and organic materials. Extrinsic material is generally a one-time occurrence and should result in the
rejection of the affected container in which it is seen; however, elevated levels in the lot may implicate a broader contribution from the same
source. These par ticles may carry an increased risk of microbiological or extractable contamination because less is known about their path
prior to deposition in the product container or their interaction with the product.
A second category of undesired par ticles is considered “intrinsic” or from within the process. The determination of whether the par ticulate
is extrinsic or intrinsic to the process is based upon appropriate characterization of the par ticle's physicochemical proper ties. Process-
related intrinsic par ticles may come from production equipment or primary packaging materials that were either added during processing or
not removed during container or closure cleaning and preparation. These primary product-contact materials may include stainless steel,
elastomers from seals and gaskets, container glass or plastic, ¬uid transpor t tubing, and silicone lubricant. Such par ticles still pose the risk
of a foreign body, but they generally come from sterile or sanitized materials, and more is known about their interactions when in contact
with the product. Any process-related intrinsic par ticles should have controls established based on the use of a life-cycle approach, as
outlined in 1.3 Defect Prevention. Another group of par ticles considered intrinsic is interrelated with the stability of the product. These
product-stability-indicating par ticles arise from container or closure interaction (glass delamination, component erosion, and elemental
extraction), changes to the drug preparation (insoluble degradation products), recrystallization, or temperature sensitivity over time. Stability-
indicating intrinsic par ticles should be identi«ed and addressed as early in the product development process as possible.
A third category is that of an inherent par ticle type that varies with dosage form and includes solutions, suspensions, emulsions, and other
drug delivery systems that are designed as par ticle assemblies (agglomerates, aggregates). Such dosage-form-related par ticulates should
be studied in the development phase and in samples placed on stability to determine the normal characteristics and time-based changes
that can occur. Measurement of par ticle size distribution or characterization by image analysis in the subvisible (for par ticle sizes ≥2 µm)
and visible ranges (≥100 µm) may be required to fully characterize inherent dosage-form-related par ticles. In biologics, protein par ticles are
generally considered inherent and may be accepted when their presence is measured, characterized, and determined to be par t of the clinical
pro«le. Aggregation or agglomeration of proteins associated with a change in preparation constituents or other causative agents like
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 7 ===
excessive siliconization should be minimized. The manufacturer may allow inherent par ticles if the product appearance speci«cation allows
their presence or if the product is an emulsion, suspension, or implant.
An evaluation of the potential impact of par ticles identi«ed from any of these sources may be enhanced by incorporating a clinical risk
assessment (15). This assessment may include factors such as the intended patient population, route of administration, source and type of
par ticles, and implications for product sterility. For intrinsic or inherent par ticulate matter sources, a risk assessment may be useful in
developing product-speci«c control strategies. Given the probabilistic nature of par ticle detection, it is impor tant to assess the possible
implications of par ticles identi«ed through the product life cycle to better ensure the product's safe use.
4.2 Prevention of Par ticulates
The manufacturing process is designed to keep the «nal container and its contents clean within the control parameters established for
process-related par ticulates. Once the container is «lled, the stability of the product needs to be maintained throughout its shelf life. Changes
that occur as the product ages during its normal shelf life must be characterized. Avoidance of intrinsic par ticle sources that may affect «nal
product stability depends on careful consideration of the entire product and packaging system. If these intrinsically sourced changes occur,
and they affect stability, par ticles ranging from subvisible to visible may develop. Typically, these par ticles result from change mechanisms
that slowly affect the on-shelf product.
robust design during development
To anticipate potential sources of instability that yield intrinsic par ticles, the product design should be evaluated from many perspectives,
beginning with a literature review of similar preparations and packages. Points to consider include the repor ted sensitivities of the active
ingredient, the dosage form type, and the «nal container–closure system needed for delivery. Knowledge of how glass containers are
fabricated, controlled, sterilized, and tested is impor tant as this may affect the tendency to form glass lamellae as discussed in Evaluation
of the Inner Surface Durability of Glass Containers 〈1660〉 and by the FDA (48).
Obtaining fur ther information on possible extracts and leachates, metals, or solubility limits is impor tant as these factors may promote
formation of solid material in the aging solution. Several additional factors for successful product design include the product concentration,
solution pH, associated buffers, critical micelle concentration, oligomerization content/potential, package effects (large surface area,
product volume, headspace, light/oxygen transmission), and compatibility of the speci«c preparation with the package. Fur thermore,
shock/vibration sensitivity at the air/liquid interface can be a signi«cant contributor to par ticle formation that requires investigation during
product development. Some key dosage form design factors include the formula components chosen and their purity, the solubilities of the
active ingredient(s) and excipients, and consideration of potential salt forms. Finally, to maximize product stability, consider the «nal
product preparation for delivery, product dilutions, and shelf stability of the commercial product or its therapeutic preparations.
To examine the appropriateness of the product design for maintaining product stability, there are two levels of evaluation. Both levels
examine retained containers for visible changes using methods described in this chapter, but neither level dwells on low percentage
defects.
For the «rst level of stability study, visual inspection and testing of trial containers will show general compatibility of the chosen
components over time with regard to clarity, color, and both subvisible and visible par ticle formation. Careful product assembly in clean
containers, with consideration of the container type, headspace, and sealing, will yield a bene«cial «rst-pass trial of stability over several
months' time. The nature of par ticles detected, and the investigation of type and frequency, is essential to differentiate additive types from
instability or package interaction. Pursuit of extrinsic par ticles at this stage of development is generally not signi«cant, as the par ticles do
not re¬ect on the suitability of the speci«c preparation or expected manufacturing process under development but rather the way these
study samples were prepared.
The second, more re«ned level of stability study involves conducting visual inspections of the injection in de«ned, International Council
for Harmonisation (ICH)-relevant trials (49). This may include periodic inspection of the same containers over time if the product does not
require reconstitution or is not affected by frequent temperature changes. Detection of minor or subtle differences in these containers is not
the goal at this stage of development. Catastrophic change and the occurrence of intrinsic product-related visible par ticles should be the
focus. Typically, a set of containers is carefully prepared to exclude extrinsic par ticles and is then inspected to cull out any units with visible
defects. Next, a numbered set of containers appropriate for the batch size is placed on stability and visually inspected periodically for
changes due to degradation or any sign of instability. It is impor tant to be able to analyze the par ticulate matter or condition (change in
color, turbidity, opalescence) to identify the cause of events due to instability. A typical sample size is 80–100 units. This quantity should be
su­cient to assess package and preparation interaction. Additional sets of containers stored at selected extremes of ICH temperatures can
be followed to aid discovery of solubility-edge phenomena. When unwanted changes are detected—such as par ticle formation, solution
color change, solution haze, and package changes—the process of isolation, characterization, and identi«cation can commence.
Identi«cation of the material comprising these changes aids in the determination of the cause of formation as well as development of
improvements for future use.
common sources of particulates
Process-related intrinsic par ticles originating from product-contact materials tend to be stable and unchanging (e.g., glass, elastomers, or
metal). In contrast, there may also be par ticles resulting from product-stability-related change mechanisms within the «nal product. It is
very impor tant to understand that these changes only need be slight in cer tain cases, far below the detection limit of most release or
stability assays, to result in visible changes to the product. The threshold levels for the formation of visible change for cer tain substances
may be as low as 10–100 ppm (0.001%–0.01%) based on the ability to detect a single 100-µm par ticle or many sub-10-µm par ticles
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 8 ===
creating a hazy or cloudy appearance. However, if all this insoluble material were contained in a single par ticle, it likely would not cause
rejection of the container.
dosage form components
The active ingredient may also contribute to the presence of stability-indicating intrinsic par ticles. For example, signi«cant haze and
par ticles have been observed in aqueous dosage forms due to extraction of plasticizers from «ltration media during bulk drug production
(6). Metal content in the active ingredient has contributed to organometallic salt formation and has also been observed as precipitated
inorganic salts, blooming long after product release. The active ingredient and related degradation products may also be relatively insoluble
and may grow to form visible par ticles. Isolated par ticulate material must be analyzed to determine its chemical nature and possible
source.
Monomers or single molecules may join through chemical processes to form dimers, trimers, and oligomers (a limited assemblage of
monomers, shor t of polymerization). Such changes are not unexpected (50). In high-concentration and/or saturated preparations, and
especially for micellar drug associations, the solubility of related forms is signi«cant when the aging preparations contain progressively
higher concentrations of these substances. Larger molecules may have a greater effect on solution integrity due to their inherent
insolubility, especially if the active drug is in a micellar preparation.
Polymorphs are unique crystalline forms of identical chemical entities. Although uncommon in solutions that have been mixed
homogeneously and «ltered, small seed crystals of a relatively stable polymorph may form over time, especially at nucleation sites such as
container-surface defects. More common than formation of polymorphs is the formation of a modi«ed crystal lattice containing an integral
liquid, typically water or a solvent. The lattice may form slowly, promoted by evaporation, nucleation, and temperature extremes (51–52).
packaging components
"Extractables" and "leachables" are terms commonly used to describe the potential for primary packaging materials to contribute
unwanted agents to the product. Extractables represent all the materials that could be contributed, and leachables represent the practical
contribution upon contact between packaging components and drug preparation as discussed in Assessment of Extractables Associated
with Pharmaceutical Packaging/Delivery Systems 〈1663〉 and Assessment of Drug Product Leachables Associated with Pharmaceutical
Packaging/Delivery Systems 〈1664〉 as well as in other references (53). These substances can also contribute to the formation of subvisible
and visible par ticles. All product contact materials should be evaluated for extractables and leachables or product reactivity.
Product preparation attack of the container is a dramatic change and most often occurs in glass container systems. Glass containers
undergo corrosion that is 25 times greater at pH 8 than at pH 4 (54, 〈1660〉). A preparation with a pH above 7, especially with high-ionic
strength solutions, promotes attack of the inner glass surface, resulting in glass delamination and/or siliceous par ticle generation.
Silicone oil is added to stoppers and pre«lled syringe systems to enhance lubricity for stopper or plunger inser tion and its movement
within the syringe barrel. Silicone may also come from tubing used for ¬uid transfer and a variety of polymeric «ttings and seals that are
used in the processing equipment. All these components must be compatible with the preparation to minimize leachates. Although
silicones are processed to be sterile and are widely used, their use must still be strictly controlled, in other words, minimized. Silicone can
cause container sidewall droplets and a variety of visible semisolid forms. No more than the minimum quantity should be used during
processing to achieve acceptable machineability. Silicone and other hydrophobic substances have the capacity to coalesce and
agglomerate with proteinaceous drug substances (55) or other par ticles, eventually reaching a visible size over time.
Residual tungsten from the manufacture of syringes has been known to increase protein aggregation (56).
4.3 Recommendations for Speci«c Components and Processes
glass containers
Each step of the glass-container washing and rinsing process performed internally or by an external supplier, should be evaluated for
par ticle-reduction capability. Incoming glassware may have signi«cant par ticle load. The washer validation studies should demonstrate a
reduction in naturally occurring par ticles (par ticle burden) or should use seeded containers to demonstrate such reduction capability. The
use of statistical sampling plans with light obscuration (LO) for subvisible par ticle levels and membrane-microscope par ticle-counting
method for the enumeration of visible par ticles can provide a means to demonstrate reduction of both subvisible and visible par ticles
during washing cycle development and validation. The membrane «ltration microscopic method is superior to the LO method for capturing
and characterizing larger foreign par ticles in the visible range (>100 µm) during validation or monitoring activities. During process
development, validation, and routine use, container-washing procedures should include periodic visual operational checks. This routine
veri«cation ensures that effective draining of all containers is occurring during all washing and rinsing steps. Review the wash-water
recirculating «lter maintenance procedures to ensure that par ticle overloading or breakthrough is being prevented.
Glass breakage that occurs during the component washing process could affect surrounding containers, and the washing cycle should be
evaluated for possible glass par ticle generation and distribution. Written procedures describing container-clearance following glass
breakage in the washer, in the depyrogenation tunnel, or on the «lling line should specify the number of containers to be removed from the
affected por tion of the line. Removing units around the immediate area where the breakage occurred aids in minimizing par ticle transfer to
the downstream process.
Processes that use racks or trays for transpor ting and holding samples, as are typically used in batch ovens, should be monitored for
metal par ticle generation. The racks or trays should have a formal maintenance program associated with their routine use. Trays should be
inspected for wear and scoring, which can be sources of par ticulates. Periodic cleaning, polishing, and/or resurfacing may be warranted to
control par ticles effectively. Tunnels used for depyrogenation should also have a routine maintenance program for periodic cleaning,
inspection, and replacement of par ts that may wear and generate par ticles. Glass-to-glass and glass-to-metal contact should be minimized
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 9 ===
where possible to reduce weakening of the glass surface resulting in increased risk of subsequent fracture. The use of polymeric facing on
guides can help to reduce such damage; however, coatings on metal surfaces must be monitored for degradation or par ticle generation by
frictional wearing over time.
elastomeric closures
Each step of the elastomeric-component washing and rinsing process should be evaluated for par ticle-reduction oppor tunities. Utilize
statistically valid sampling plans to collect meaningful test units. The use of LO (for subvisible par ticles) or other automated par ticle
counting or membrane-microscopic par ticle-counting methods may be used to demonstrate reduction of both subvisible and visible
par ticles during washing validation. As stated above for glass containers, the membrane «ltration microscopic method is superior to LO
methods for capturing and characterizing larger foreign par ticles in the visible range (>100 µm) during validation or monitoring activities
with elastomeric closures. During process development and validation and in routine use, container-washing procedures should include
visual checks to ensure that stoppers are not routinely sticking together. Such sticking surfaces reduce cleaning e­cacy and entrap
par ticles or cause reduced sterilization and depyrogenation effectiveness. Periodic assessment of component cleanliness and supplier
washing capabilities should be included as par t of the supplier quali«cation program when using ready-to-sterilize (RTS) or RTU
components.
Evaluate siliconization processes, whether in-house or by the supplier, to minimize excess silicone levels while maintaining machinability
of the stoppers. LO or other automated par ticle-counting methods may be used to compare overall par ticle level reduction (subvisible
background silicone oil droplets) during process development or validation. The level of residual silicone oil will affect the par ticulate quality
of the «nal «lled product, observed as dispersed droplets and par ticle-forming matrices.
equipment preparation
It is impor tant to minimize redeposition of par ticles on product contact surfaces after cleaning. Cleaned and sterilized equipment should
be protected by HEPA-«ltered, unidirectional air¬ow until transferred to, and installed on, the «lling line. For cleaned equipment that needs to
be wrapped or bagged prior to sterilization, utilize low-shedding, noncellulosic (synthetic) wrapping materials. Cellulose «bers are one of the
most common par ticles found in the injections-manufacturing environment, and injectable products and their source will be a prime
concern (46).
Personnel are a concern for the introduction of extrinsic par ticle types such as facial hair and skin cells. The equipment preparation staff
should be adequately gowned with hair covers, facial hair covers, and goggles to prevent contaminating cleaned process equipment. During
validation and monitoring activities of clean- and/or steam-in-place (CIP-SIP) systems (vessels, «lters, tubing, and other product contact
equipment), foreign par ticle burden should be evaluated after cleaning. Membrane «ltration/microscopic-par ticle-capture and -counting
methods provide a useful tool to assess and document performance.
filling line
The transfer of open containers should be evaluated and reviewed to mitigate par ticle contamination. For example, for aseptically «lled
products, the transfer should be conducted in Grade A (ISO 5, Class 100), unidirectional air¬ow to minimize par ticle contamination. The air
in critical zones should be monitored continuously during operation to con«rm compliance. Routine checks to detect par ticles and potential
par ticle-generation locations should be explained in the procedures. Effective, written container-clearance procedures to be used after glass
breakage should specify the number of containers to remove from the affected por tion of the line. Note that improper setup and adjustment
of the «ller can lead to “needle strikes,
” where the «lling needles contact the container being «lled. This can generate either stainless steel or
glass par ticles.
Filling pump design and the pump's compatibility with the product are impor tant considerations. Metal-on-metal piston pumps have the
potential for generating metal par ticles. Pump maintenance is essential and includes a requirement to resurface the cylinders and pistons
periodically. Peristaltic-action pumps must be monitored for generation of silicone tubing par ticles, especially with aggressive, near-
saturated solutions or suspensions. Friction in the peristaltic roller area can break down the tubing, resulting in the generation of par ticles
(spallation). Diaphragm pumps must have speci«c maintenance cycles to replace the pump lining.
Stopper bowl surfaces should have a formal maintenance program, and stopper handling or replenishment by operators should be
speci«cally designed to minimize par ticle transfer to the stoppers. Proper operator positioning and avoidance of open containers is
impor tant in good aseptic-«lling practices to avoid microbial contamination. These same principles help reduce par ticle transfer to the open
containers and exposed elastomeric closures.
Careful selection of cleaning and gowning materials will help reduce contamination from extrinsic par ticles and «bers. These clean-room
materials (typically polyester or Tyvek) should be selected for their superior non-shedding and low-par ticle proper ties.
4.4 Trending
Data obtained from the in-process 100% inspection followed by AQL inspection are used for batch release. Both 100% and AQL inspection
data should also be analyzed for adverse trends on a periodic basis, typically at least annually. Data from the 100% inspection provides the
best source of typical defect types and rates during normal production. High-volume products may generate enough data to allow quar terly
analysis, whereas a longer period may be necessary to accumulate data for products that are produced infrequently. Data from component
inspection, production 100% inspection, and the AQL inspections should be evaluated based upon sound statistical principles to determine
whether the current action levels accurately re¬ect current process capability. Aler t and/or action levels may be established and/or adjusted
if the statistical analyses indicate that lower defect levels are being observed consistently. When establishing new action or aler t levels, a
preliminary target value may be used until enough production experience is obtained. Consideration should be given to planned
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 10 ===
improvements in the manufacturing and inspection processes. If signi«cant improvements are planned, the reduction of the action/aler t level
should not be instituted until the impact of the improvement is measured over enough time to establish the validity of the new value.
5. INTERPRETATION OF INSPECTION RESUL
TS
5.1 Defect Classi«cation
Defects are commonly grouped into classi«cations based on patient and compliance risk (2). The most common system uses three
groups: critical, major, and minor. Critical defects are those that may cause serious adverse reactions or death of the patient if the product is
used. This classi«cation includes any nonconformity that compromises the integrity of the container and thereby risks microbiological
contamination of the sterile product. It may also include anomalous extrinsic par ticle types such as insects or other «lth or adulteration.
Major defects carry the risk of temporary impairment or medically reversible reactions or involve a remote probability of a serious adverse
reaction. Visible intrinsic par ticulate matter typically falls into the major defect category. This classi«cation is also assigned to any defect
that impairs or makes the product unusable. Minor defects do not impact product performance or compliance; they are often cosmetic in
nature, affecting only product appearance or pharmaceutical elegance.
Upon 100% inspection, visible extrinsic and intrinsic par ticles should be reliably removed. Par ticle motion aids in detection, and stationary
par ticles (due to neutral buoyancy or «ll viscosity) are di­cult to detect, exhibiting a signi«cantly reduced PoD. The test method allows
inherent par ticles to be accepted if the product appearance speci«cation allows inherent par ticle types. PoD for all par ticles is dependent on
the container characteristics (e.g., size, «ll level, shape, and transparency), inspection conditions (lighting and duration), preparation
characteristics (color and clarity), and par ticle characteristics (size, shape, color, and density). The PoD at 70% or greater is known as the
“reject zone” described in Knapp's methodology (57–58), which is used worldwide as a common industry practice for rejecting par ticle
defects. Test sets characterized by repeated inspections, as described in 7.4 Rejection Probability Determination, are used to “calibrate” the
inspection method's PoD, inspector performance, or automated inspection systems, and to demonstrate the sensitivity to threshold par ticle
size at the reject zone of >70% PoD. The limitation of the reject zone at 70% detection is that threshold par ticles at this size may routinely be
missed or go undetected up to 30% of the time. These undetected units may contain some level of threshold-sized par ticles or subvisible
par ticles at a lower PoD. Therefore, it is impor tant to characterize and size any par ticles recovered from AQL testing, retention sample
inspection, and product returned from distribution to understand how they could have gone undetected during the initial 100% in-process
inspection.
5.2 Unique Product and Container Considerations
difficul
t to inspect products (dosage forms, containers, and delivery systems)
As discussed throughout this chapter, 100% visual inspection is required as a «nal control mechanism for par ticulate and other container
and closure defects in injectable products. This unit-level inspection allows for the «nal removal of any visually detectable and undesirable
nonconforming units to ensure that batch-quality acceptance criteria are met. There are dosage forms for which the sensitivity of direct
examination is signi«cantly reduced. Often referred to as DIPs, the products hinder or block the inspectors’ ability to reliably detect visible
par ticulate matter. This is attributable to interference from the characteristics of the dosage form and/or the container or delivery system. A
DIP
, unlike a clear solution in a transparent container, is not as amenable to defect reduction even by an optimized 100% inspection process.
Thus, there is a higher probability after the 100% inspection of such products, that undetected visible par ticulates may remain in the batch.
Supplemental testing, as brie¬y described in 3.1 100% Inspection, is required to better assess residual defects in the DIP
. Because fewer
par ticles can be detected and removed during 100% inspection, there is an increased risk that the statistical sampling for the supplemental
destructive testing may not reliably meet the acceptance criteria stated in 〈790〉. Increased preventative measures can help to compensate
for the reduced detectability in DIPs. Such measures should be par t of a life-cycle approach to trend and identify sources of par ticulate
matter and use this information to reduce or eliminate their entry into «nished product.
Examples of DIPs include those having opaque or deeply colored solutions, lyophilized cakes, powders, concentrated suspensions,
emulsions, and ointments. Examples of DIP container types include translucent and opaque plastic; blow-«ll-seal and ¬exible bags; foiled
containers; plastic syringes; and specialty containers such as car tridges and combination products. The following sections provide
additional recommendations for visual inspection and supplemental testing of DIP examples. Test methods for DIP products are discussed
in 5.3 Alternate Inspection Strategies for Supplemental Testing. Expanded information on these and additional test methods for DIP products
have been published separately (8).
l
yophilized products
Lyophilized products should receive 100% inspection after the freeze-drying and sealing of each unit. However, the solid, lyophilized cake
can mask the presence of visible par ticles because they cannot be seen within the solid matrix. The cake surfaces (top, bottom, side) are
visible during inspection but account for only a small fraction of the cake volume. Because of these challenges in evaluating acceptability, a
small sample of units is reconstituted and inspected for visible par ticles in addition to the 100% inspection of the cakes for visible par ticles.
When reconstituted, the sample has a par ticle detection probability like that of solutions. Care must be taken during reconstitution to avoid
contamination that can lead to false-positive results. Sample preparation should be done in a clean environment with appropriate par ticle-
control measures. Reconstituted samples should be inspected using the same quali«ed methods as those for routine detection of visible
par ticles. The destructive nature of this test limits the size of the test sample.
Once inspection of these reconstituted samples has been performed, they may be used for other required testing, such as that for
subvisible par ticles, potency, impurities, or other speci«ed tests. If par ticles are detected in this relatively small sample, additional units may
be reconstituted as par t of an investigation to assess the compliance of the entire batch. The size of the additional sample should be based
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 11 ===
on the total combined sample size (initial plus additional sample) required to have an accept number greater than 0 for a sampling plan
with an AQL of 0.65% or less. This will be based on the batch size. The results from the initial and second sample must be combined, rather
than resampling and repeating the test and basing the accept decision on the results of the second sample only. The following is an
example of a two-stage test plan as described above: Using an S-3 plan for a batch size of 100,000 units, the initial sample size is 20, with
accept on 0 and reject on 1. If 1 unit is found with one or more visible par ticles, the S-4 (stricter) plan may be selected, and the new sample
size of 80 may be used. An additional 60 samples are then tested and, if no fur ther evidence of visible par ticles is detected, the batch meets
the acceptance criterion.
Alternatives to reconstitution testing can be considered, such as collection of liquid samples from the «lling line after stopper inser tion
and prior to the lyophilization process. Such samples represent the majority of par ticle exposure risk. This is a typical evaluation during
development activity to provide a system check for unwanted par ticulate matter. These risks should be assessed and documented to justify
this approach. Additional process information may be suppor ted by inspection of media «ll or water «ll trials for visible par ticle types and
frequencies.
powder products
Sterile powders are di­cult to inspect for par ticles due to powder ¬ow and the occlusion of white or light-colored par ticles by the drug
product itself. Sterile powders should be reconstituted and inspected for visible foreign par ticles using an approach like that for lyophilized
products, as discussed above.
emulsion and suspension products
The manufacturer may not be able to detect all extrinsic and intrinsic par ticle types due to the inherent characteristics of an emulsion or
suspension. A test dissolving the suspension or disrupting the emulsion to provide for extrinsic and intrinsic par ticle detection, either by
visual inspection or by «ltration/microscopic exam, is also recommended as par t of destructive supplemental testing of a small sample, as
described above for lyophilized products.
cell and gene therapy products
Cell and gene therapies present unique challenges to the normal inspection strategies employed for par ticulate control and assessment.
Par ticles may be introduced from the external environment, during the manufacturing process or because of cellular or protein degradation.
As cell therapies do not undergo «nal «ltration steps, par ticulates must be controlled and assessed during production with visual inspection
at release and prior to administration. Because the cells are the intended «nal product, there is an inherent limitation to the product’s
puri«cation, limiting par ticulate removal from the ultimate formulated material. Testing is often fur ther complicated by the small batch
sizes, thus making more extensive destructive testing undesirable. Establishing acceptance limits should be based on process and
inspection capability along with clinical risk assessment following similar exposure in pivotal clinical trial materials.
amber containers
Inspecting amber containers is challenging because selected glass component elements have been added to mask UV light penetration
into the Type I glass container. Light transmission is blocked below 500 nm, thus increased light intensity (e.g., 8000–10,000 lux or higher)
may be required to observe visible par ticles during inspection. Directional lighting from below or behind the container may also be
bene«cial. At the extreme, solutions «lled in practically opaque containers may be audited via sampling and transferred to clear, clean
containers. The membrane «ltration microscopic method is also suitable for capturing and characterizing larger foreign par ticles in the
visible range (>100 µm).
plastic containers
Transparent plastic containers (e.g., vials, syringes, and larger containers) should be inspected by procedures similar to those for
products in clear glass, as described throughout this chapter. The only differences may be speci«c consideration for the unique proper ties
of plastic molding and physical design.
Translucent plastic containers (e.g., plastic syringes, blow-«ll-seal [BFS]) are chosen for break resistance or other proper ties that glass
cannot offer, such as the ability to be injection molded into shapes that minimize hold-up volume or that can be used in a combination
product. Plastic containers may have optical proper ties that require signi«cantly increased light (e.g., 8000–10,000 lux) to illuminate any
visible par ticles against black and white backgrounds. Directional lighting from behind the container or from the bottom (Tyndall light) may
also be bene«cial.
Opaque plastic containers are utilized for break resistance or other proper ties such as metered dispensing commonly used in topical
ophthalmic container systems. The expectation for 100% inspection in process for par ticulates during manufacture is not feasible and
necessitates alternate inspection strategies (8). The acceptance limits for visible par ticles should be based on process capability as
established during product development. The expectation is that this capability is judged according to industry standards and product
benchmarking. The risk pro«le for topical ophthalmic products is reduced relative to parenteral injectable products; therefore, application of
an AQL value of <0.65% for par ticulate matter may not be appropriate for these topical dosage forms. The recommendation is to study and
trend the par ticle burden of the product solution and the container–closure contribution, develop a reasonable life-cycle control strategy,
and establish limits based on risk assessment.
large-volume containers
Large-volume containers (>100 mL) may require additional time for a thorough inspection to be completed. For ¬exible containers, in
addition to solution opacity, container material choices may range from clear to semitransparent with potential changes to container clarity
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 12 ===
following sterilization. Oppor tunities to inspect the empty container prior to printing or labeling, or the «lled container prior to pouching or
overwrapping, may be preferred to «nished-package inspection. The point of inspection may be determined based upon the last oppor tunity
for the introduction of the defect of concern and where the probability of detection is greatest. The use of higher illumination intensities
along with directional lighting combinations (e.g., from behind the container), as discussed above for translucent plastic containers, should
be considered to enhance the visibility of par ticles. The manipulation sequence for inspection should be established and may differ from
traditional small-volume containers. Increased inspection time may be considered for larger «ll-volume container systems.
combination products
When inspecting the unlabeled primary drug container for a combination product, the inspection considerations should be the same as
those speci«ed for a conventional drug product in a conventional package such as a vial or syringe. Sensitivity may be improved by
performing inspection before assembly into the device. Where there are critical attributes that are only visible after assembly (such as
alignment with a «ll-level window), a second inspection after assembly may also be required.
5.3 Alternate Inspection Strategies for Supplemental Testing
transfer
When the container limits thorough inspection, transfer to a clear and readily inspectable container is recommended. Using veri«ed clean
and clear containers, the sample is opened, transferred to the receiving container, stoppered, and then visually inspected.
fil
tration
Membrane «ltration methods, such as in 〈788〉, Method 2 Microscopic Par ticle Count Test focusing on par ticles >100 um, collect all solid
par ticles from the «lled unit(s) onto a membrane. Samples may be individual or pooled for analysis. This method will reveal all solid
par ticles (visible and subvisible), which may be sized microscopically, and permits qualitative categorization of these retained solids.
clarification
In the case of suspensions, there is a wide range of active ingredient par ticle sizes, from submicron (<1 µm) to tens of micrometers. In
many cases, the solids may be clari«ed/dissolved in the original container with an appropriate «ltered solvent to allow subsequent visual
inspection or membrane «ltration/microscopic exam. Dissolution solvent compatibility with the formula or package and «ltration
membrane, if used, must be demonstrated.
sieving
As above, if the solid par ticle suspension is small enough to allow selective sieving, this may be used as an alternative to membrane
«ltration. The very small solids pass through the sieve, and larger par ticles (>100 µm) are retained, counted, and categorized.
6. INSPECTION METHODS AND TECHNOLOGIES
6.1 Manual Visual Inspection
Manual visual inspection (MVI) is the reference inspection method described in all major pharmacopeias (59–60). It consists of viewing
«lled and sealed containers under controlled conditions. This process may be aided using a tool to allow consistent examination of more
than one container at a time.
The quality decision, to either accept or reject the container, is made by a trained person. Inspection is a probabilistic process, and
detection rates less than 100% are to be expected, especially for smaller or low-contrast defects.
critical process parameters in mvi
Light intensity:
The results of the manual inspection process are in¬uenced by the intensity of the light in the inspection zone. In general,
increasing the intensity of the light that illuminates the container being inspected will improve inspection performance; chapter 〈790〉
recommends that the minimum light levels be not less than 2000–3750 lux at the point of inspection for routine inspection of clear glass
containers. This range was chosen to harmonize with current European Pharmacopoeia requirements (59) and is fur ther suppor ted by recent
studies performed in Japan (61) as par t of a review of the current Japanese Pharmacopoeia requirements (60). Special attention should be
given to ensure that inspection is not performed below the lower limit of 2000 lux. Increased light levels are recommended for translucent
plastic containers or those made from amber glass. Under these circumstances, light levels as high as 10,000 lux may prove bene«cial.
Care should be taken to avoid glare and direct viewing of the light source at these high intensities, as this may result in eye strain and
fatigue. The «nal quali«ed inspection conditions of minimum light level will depend on measured performance using visual standards to
ensure appropriate par ticle size detection sensitivity.
Light should be diffuse and even across the inspection zone, and it is a good practice to clearly identify this zone within the inspection
station where the intensity meets the required levels. Fluorescent lamps have often been used as the light source for inspection. When
¬uorescent lamps are used, high-frequency ballasts are recommended to reduce visible ¬icker (and associated inspector fatigue).
Incandescent lamps have also been used successfully for this purpose, but they generate signi«cant heat during use. Light-emitting diodes
(LED) offer an energy-e­cient, stable source of light without the added heat of incandescent lamps.
Light intensity in each inspection station should be measured periodically to ensure continued compliance within the speci«ed range. The
frequency of monitoring should be based on historical experience with the type of light source in use. A lower light-intensity action limit
should be established to trigger corrective action before inspection is performed below the lower limit of the range.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 13 ===
Background and contrast:
Contrast between the defect of interest and the surrounding background is required for detection. Increased
contrast improves detection. The use of both black and white backgrounds is described in 〈790〉, as well as other global pharmacopeias.
Matte/nonglossy backgrounds are recommended to avoid interference from re¬ection. The use of both backgrounds provides good
contrast for a wide range of par ticulate and container defects, which can be light or dark in appearance.
Inspection rate:
Enough time must be provided to allow for thorough inspection of each container; 〈790〉 speci«es a reference time of 10
s/container (5 s each against both black and white backgrounds). Larger or more complex containers may require additional time for
inspecting all attributes. Increased time may facilitate detection of defects near the threshold of detection, but studies by Wolfe et al. (62–
63) suggest that there are diminishing or limited gains with increasing inspection time. Time spent per container is typically a function of
the inspector training or may be controlled using an inspector-triggered pacing device (proximity switch) using an indicator light or tone.
Timing devices that automatically repeat the timing cycle can be distracting to other inspectors; these devices may be used during training,
much as a musician uses a metronome during practice to learn the tempo of a musical piece for later performance. Recording the time
spent inspecting each batch and then calculating a nominal inspection rate is a good way to con«rm that the rate of inspection was within
established limits. Correction can be made for non-inspection activities performed by the inspectors during this time to better document the
nominal inspection rate.
Container handling and movement:
When observing objects, the human eye is very sensitive to movement. Good techniques for manual
inspection include a careful swirl or inversion of the liquid product within the container. This displaces any par ticles from the upper inner
surfaces of the container and the closure and puts them into motion. A technique that minimizes the introduction of air bubbles is
impor tant, as air bubbles can appear as par ticles and interfere with detection of offending par ticles. If multiple containers are quali«ed to be
equivalent to the single-container inspection method per 〈790〉, they may be held during the par ticle detection sequence using a tool that
holds these containers for consistent presentation. Holding many containers by hand at once should be avoided, as it is di­cult to obtain a
complete view of all container surfaces and contents. Full rotation (360°) of the container during the container–closure defect inspection
sequence is recommended for identifying small container defects such as cracks or chips.
Magni«cation:
Some inspection processes use a large magni«er to increase image size and thus increase the probability of detecting and
rejecting containers with defects near the threshold of detection. Although magni«cation can be useful for critical examination of a por tion
of the container, it does not often lead to increased overall detection rates for defects of interest. This may be due, in par t, to the added eye
strain that often results from the use of magni«cation. As such, it is not recommended as par t of the reference inspection method
described in 〈790〉 or in other global pharmacopeias (59–60). Although not recommended for use during routine inspections, magni«cation
can be helpful for critical examination of a small number of units, as may be needed during an investigation.
inspector f
atigue and ergonomic considerations
Inspecting for extended periods of time can cause inspector fatigue and a decrease in inspection performance. On the basis of industry
experience (46), it is recommended that inspectors be given a documented break from performing inspection at least every hour. This break
should allow time to rest the eyes and mind and may be achieved with a shor t rest (e.g., 5 min) or a longer meal break. This need for regular
breaks may also be met through rotation to a non-inspection function, such as material handling or documentation.
Inspection stations should be designed and operated in a manner that minimizes the inspector's risk of repetitive-motion injury.
Adjustable chairs and careful positioning of light sources as well as incoming and inspected product can reduce the risk of such injury.
These adjustments can also reduce inspector fatigue and discomfor t, both of which can be distracting and thus can decrease performance.
The inspection room environment should also be considered. Temperature and humidity should be controlled for inspector comfor t.
Reduced ambient lighting is recommended to focus the inspection process and to reduce distraction from extraneous re¬ections. Special
care should be given to inspection rooms with exterior windows that allow daylight into the room, thereby changing ambient lighting
throughout the day and with the seasons.
6.2 Semi-Automated Visual Inspection
Semi-automated visual inspection combines automated material handling of the containers to be inspected with human vision and
judgment to make the decision to accept or reject. These systems often use a conveyor equipped with rollers to transpor t the containers in
front of the inspector inside an inspection booth or station. For inspection of liquids, the booth can be equipped with a high-speed spin
station to set par ticles in motion. The rollers can also be used to slowly rotate the containers in front of the inspector as they traverse the
inspection zone. These systems offer a means to control the presentation of the vials and can offer additional lighting options, such as
Tyndall lighting, which may enhance the appearance of some defects such as cracks or small par ticles. Mirrors may also be used to provide
a clear view of the top and bottom of each container. Rejected units may be removed from the rollers by hand, whereas some systems are
equipped with a remote rejection system that can be triggered by the inspector. Care should be taken in the quali«cation and operation of
these systems to ensure full rotation of vials in the inspection zone to assure examination of all surfaces. In addition, studies should be
conducted to ensure the detection of heavy par ticles, which may not be lifted from the bottom of the container, and to ensure that the rate of
inspection produces an acceptable detection rate for defects of interest.
With semi-automated visual inspection, performance should be demonstrated to be equivalent or better than that of MVI. Some increase in
throughput may be achieved because the inspector spends all the available time viewing the containers rather than splitting the time
between inspection and material handling.
critical process parameters for semi-automated inspection
Light intensity must be controlled, as with MVI. The rate of inspection is controlled by the speed of the roller/conveyor or some
equipment that allows the inspector to call for a group of containers each time. Spin speed for liquid products and rotation rate for all
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 14 ===
containers should be established during validation/quali«cation and maintained within the validated range for routine inspection. The
background color is controlled by the color of the rollers selected and the color of the background seen through the spaces between the
rollers. Quali«cation of inspectors and validation of the inspection equipment should be based on comparison with the compendial single-
container manual-inspection process with an expectation that alternative methods such as semi-automated inspection demonstrate
equivalent or better performance.
6.3 Automated Visual Inspection
Automated visual inspection (AVI) combines automated material handling of the containers with electronic sensing of product
appearance. Containers that do not meet preprogrammed acceptance criteria are automatically rejected by the machine. Early machines
performed inspection for par ticles and «ll level, but manual or semi-automated inspection was still required for the container and closure
system. Newer models have the capability to inspect all attributes of the containers, along with the contents. As with MVI, machines often
spin the containers to set par ticles in motion and make them easier to detect. Multiple cameras are used to image various regions on the
container in detail. Each camera is coupled with unique lighting to highlight speci«c defects in the region of interest. Light- and dark-«eld
lighting techniques offer the same bene«ts as white and black backgrounds as discussed above, offering contrast for a full range of light-
and dark-colored defects. A defect found by any camera is tracked through the machine to allow accurate ejection by the reject system.
These machines also offer detailed repor ting of defects observed in a speci«c production lot.
AVI offers advantages in the areas of throughput and consistency, compared with MVI (5). AVI may also offer enhanced sensitivity for
some defects, compared with MVI, but may suffer from higher false rejection rates due to the inability to tolerate normal variation in
containers or product. This is especially true for molded glass containers and ¬exible bags.
Validation of the automated inspection equipment should be based on comparison with the compendial manual inspection process with
an expectation that alternative inspection methods demonstrate equivalent or better performance. Signi«cant effor t is required to program
these systems and to test their performance against a range of known defects, as well as acceptable containers. Recent experimentation
with ar ti«cial intelligence (AI) or deep learning (DL) has shown promise in improving the discrimination ability of the AVI system (64). Early
studies show both reduced false reject rates and improved detection performance (65). The use of these tools may also reduce the time to
develop a recipe for a new product or container.
light-obscuration methods
Some systems use an optical sensor to detect the shadow of par ticles in solution products. This LO technique has been used
successfully for detection of both subvisible and visible par ticles. For the detection of visible par ticles, it requires par ticles to be in motion,
typically using a high-speed spin and rapid braking of the container to achieve this motion. Spin conditions must be optimized to provide
sensitivity for heavier par ticles while minimizing false rejections due to bubbles. Some biological products experience shear-induced
agglomeration, so care should be taken to avoid excessive agitation and ¬ow rates with these products.
LO methods are optimized for sensitivity to moving par ticles and can thus be made less sensitive to minor container imperfections.
These methods can be used with both tubing and molded containers. Results are generally robust in detecting single par ticles that are 100
µm in diameter and larger, though detection of smaller par ticles at or below the visible threshold is improved when multiple par ticles are
present.
These systems can also detect «ll height by detecting the shadow of the solution meniscus. Generally, this process is not sensitive
enough to ensure compliance with dose- or «ll-weight speci«cations, but it can provide a secondary check of gross «ll. Sensitivity is a
function of the container shape, with greater sensitivity achieved in small-diameter containers.
imaging methods
Continuing advances in camera technology now allow the rapid capture of high-resolution images for inspection. When coupled with
high-speed processors that have ever-increasing computational capability, a powerful inspection tool can result. Images are divided into
inspection windows, and an array of tools such as image subtraction, pixel counting, intensity analysis, and others are used to assess the
images against programmed quality attributes.
Imaging systems can detect par ticles and «ll level, as well as other container and closure attributes. Inspection in this manner can
provide a comprehensive inspection of visual attributes. These systems can offer high sensitivity but may also have high false-rejection
rates if container and product attributes are not tightly controlled.
X-ray imaging has also been explored to detect par ticles within freeze-dried cakes, powders, or suspensions (66).
These technologies may be used alone or in combination with other inspection methods (e.g., leak detection or container integrity) to
provide a comprehensive assessment of product quality before labeling and packaging.
7. QUALIFICATION AND VALIDATION OF INSPECTION PROCESSES
7.1 Standards
The use of standards for visual inspection has been described by Melchore and Berdovich (67). Development of inspection standards
begins with a description of the defect types that will be represented in the test set(s). This information typically comes from observations
made during product development and the manufacturing area, where naturally occurring defective units can be identi«ed from rejected
product. The defects are categorized as critical, major, or minor. These defects must be fur ther characterized to allow for the selection of
naturally occurring par ticulates and physical or cosmetic production rejects removed from the product lots. Characterization information on
defects should include, where appropriate, the range of sizes typically observed and the speci«c location on the container. If feasible, a
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 15 ===
photograph of the defect should be included. All information that could suppor t consistent re-creation of the defect standards should be
included in the characterization description.
7.2 Preparing Defect Standards
Visual-inspection par ticulate standards should include par ticles identi«ed during product development, acquired from known production
rejects, or created manually with well-characterized par ticulate material. A single par ticle seeded into each container should be used when
fabricating sets to determine detection thresholds. The focus should be to demonstrate single-par ticle detection sensitivity, especially at the
edge of the reject and "gray" zones. The use of multiple par ticles in a container is not recommended in order to avoid skewing the data by
increasing the PoD.
7.3 Par ticle Types
The primary packaging materials that directly contact the product and the potential environmental contaminants can be divided into
speci«c par ticle groups such as glass, stainless steel, elastomeric closure, plastic, and «bers (synthetic or natural). Naturally occurring
visible par ticles from production rejects containing these materials may be used for training and to assess inspection performance.
Physically prepared par ticles can be sieved initially to target a speci«c size, and then the individual par ticles are measured using optical
microscopy prior to seeding into a prepared container. The use of characterized production defects or physically prepared standards is
preferred over standard spherical par ticles for inspector training and quali«cation, as well as machine validation as they better represent
actual inspection challenges and performance.
Spherical standard par ticles may be utilized as surrogates for naturally occurring par ticulates; however, these are best used for routine
machine calibration rather than validation or inspector quali«cation, as they do not move or look like actual production defects.
7.4 Rejection Probability Determination
Once a well-de«ned defect standard is available, it is assigned a detection frequency or PoD by conducting a documented, human-
inspection quali«cation that is accomplished by repeated manual inspection. This repeated inspection is the basis for qualifying the defect
standard. This approach has been described by Knapp and Kushner (57–58). The Knapp methodology recognizes that the detection of
par ticles is probabilistic, and repeated inspections with strict controls on lighting and inspection pacing/sequencing generate the statistical
con«dence to assign a reject probability to each standard unit. A manual, visual inspection PoD of 0.7, or 70% or greater is required to assign
the container to the reject zone for subsequent calculation of the reject zone e­ciency (RZE). The RZE is simply a measure of the probability
or percentage of containers assigned to the reject zone that are detected during inspection. Additional discussion on the calculation and use
of RZE is provided in 7.8 Inspector Quali«cation Requirements. Secure probabilistic data for par ticulate standards can be achieved with 30–50
inspections of each container. This is best achieved with multiple inspectors. Inspection reject probability is calculated for the defect as
follows:
PoD = (Number of times rejected)/(Number of times inspected)
7.5 Test Sets
These quali«ed defect standard units are then assembled into test sets, which may be used to speci«cally challenge the par ticle detection
technique of human inspectors, used as par t of a defect test set (including container–closure defects) for human quali«cation, or used for
comparison of PoD results during automated equipment quali«cation and validation. Acceptance criteria should re¬ect the different risk
categories (i.e., critical, major, and minor) of these defects when combined into a single test set, and a single acceptance criterion should not
be used with a set with multiple defect risk categories. When possible, the test set should be prepared with duplicate product units per
par ticle type and size to ensure that backup units are available if a standard container is broken, or the par ticle is trapped or lost within the
container. Par ticle standard units of the same type or size may not have identical performance due to subtle differences in morphology
leading to different inspection (PoD) results. Therefore, each unit (including duplicates) must be calibrated to determine its average PoD by
manual inspection, see 7.4 Rejection Probability Determination. When using test sets, it is a good practice to verify the presence of par ticles
before and after use, as par ticles may become lodged between the container and the closure. A stereomicroscope with top and bottom
illumination is very helpful for this. When a freely moving par ticle cannot be veri«ed in liquid preparations, the unit should not be used, and
the data should be excluded from subsequent calculations. When this happens, it may be possible to free the par ticle with the use of an
ultrasonic bath. If this is not possible, the unit should be replaced. For dry solid preparations, such as powders or lyophilized cakes, the
appearance of the standards may degrade with repeated handling, requiring frequent replacement and adding to the di­culty in performing
these types of studies. The number of defective units in each test set should be limited to approximately 10% to prevent rejection bias (62).
The accept containers will be identi«ed as having a predetermined manual visual inspection PoD of <0.3 or 30%. The accept zone containers
are used as blank units or may be used to study the false reject rate of the inspection method. Any par ticle standards found to fall within the
acceptable gray zone, indicating a manual inspection rejection probability ≥30% and <70%, may be included as an “acceptable unit” in a test
set, if desired. The true utility of the gray zone units is to study the units from ≥50% and <70% PoD and demonstrate manual detection
frequency of subvisible par ticles just below the reject zone threshold. These data can be used for illustrating the subtle differences between
the manual inspection and alternate inspection methods (semi-automatic or fully automatic) during comparison studies. The human
e­ciency in detecting gray zone containers should be used for information only; formal acceptance criteria is not typically applied to gray
zone containers (68).
It is impor tant to prepare a written procedure for the creation and maintenance of standards. This procedure should de«ne the
quali«cation criteria, appropriate storage conditions, periodic examination and requali«cation, expiration, and sample custody during use.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 16 ===
Test sets should be approved by the quality unit. The container in which the speci«c par ticle set is stored must be clearly labeled with the
test set identi«cation information.
7.6 Types of Test Sets
The par ticle detection threshold can be determined for a speci«c inspection method and product/package combination. For example, it
can be displayed as a standard curve of detection probabilities at various par ticle types and sizes in an approximate range of 100–500 µm
(with recommended increments of 100 µm). Fibers are typically observed in sizes greater than 500 µm. The typical size range of par ticles
used in threshold studies incorporates a variety of par ticle types and densities that are typically found in the manufacturing environment.
Threshold studies are conducted to determine the sensitivity of manual inspection methods, using a range of par ticle sizes, in a blinded
study that yields the par ticle-size detection capabilities of a de«ned group or of an individual inspector. The threshold studies indicate that
the method of inspection is valid and has appropriate detection sensitivity. For example, for clear solutions in 10-mL tubing glass vials, past
threshold studies indicate that par ticles within the range of 150–250 µm (500–2000 µm for «bers) can be detected with a PoD of 70% or
greater. Results can differ due to differences in dosage forms as well as container type and size. Par ticulate threshold studies are also useful
as an assessment tool when evaluating or qualifying visual inspection staff on a speci«c method with «xed testing parameters. Container
and closure defects should also be evaluated for detection performance (PoD) with prepared test sets using the assigned risk categories
(e.g., critical, major, and minor) in a manner similar to that for par ticles. Detection threshold studies are typically the «rst step in evaluating
the performance of any new inspection method.
Depending on the product and/or presentation, rejects in the test set should represent all defect types anticipated for a given container
type or product family. For par ticles, use a bracketed range of types (densities) and sizes, from near the lower limit of the visible range (>100
µm in clear solutions) to the largest sizes routinely observed or expected in the pool of rejects. Separate test sets should be designed to
represent that the unique visual characteristics of DIPs (8), such as lyophilized powders, suspensions, or emulsions or containers such as
those made from amber glass, are inspected. Threshold studies should be used to determine the size and type of par ticles that can be
routinely detected (≥70% PoD) in this DIP
. These data can be used to suppor t risk assessment for an optimized inspection program and help
identify when and where additional upstream controls may be needed.
For an individual manual test set, it is impor tant that all containers and closures are of the same type, and the samples are blinded. UV ink
(invisible to the inspectors) may be used to mark containers. Alternatively, bar codes or other coded labels may be used. Manual test sets
can be used initially to qualify, or periodically to requalify, human inspectors. These test sets may also be used for direct comparison of
manual inspection to semi-automated or automated inspection methods during initial quali«cation or for periodic requali«cation.
A bracketing approach may be used to represent a range of different container sizes when other visual characteristics are similar. Other
specialized test set types may be prepared as needed to be used for daily challenge or suitability checks for automated inspection systems.
7.7 Training and Quali«cation of Human Inspectors
Before training, potential inspectors should be tested for visual acuity (69) and color perception. Near-vision performance should be the
equivalent of 6/6 m (20/20 ft), but not conducted at this distance, and with no impairment of color vision. Both the Snellen and Jaeger char ts
are useful for verifying visual acuity; they test far and near vision, respectively. The use of corrective lenses to achieve the desired visual
acuity is permitted. Training should include a phased approach with a speci«ed number of training hours expected for each segment. Initially,
train the potential inspectors with defect photographs or a video library and clear, written descriptions. Utilize subject matter exper ts to
mentor and provide hands-on training with defect standards for the speci«ed method. Reinforce mental or silent counting and follow the
paced sequence to achieve consistent inspection timing. Stress the impor tance of strict adherence to the inspection process (procedure,
sequence, and timing). Inspector fatigue may be addressed in the quali«cation process by testing under worst-case conditions (e.g., at the
end of a typical inspection shift).
Train all inspectors (QC, QA, and production) with common procedures used for 100% inspection and AQL inspection. All inspection
practices should be standardized and consistently executed by all inspection groups.
Quali«cation should be performed for each product type and package that the inspector will encounter. A bracketed or matrix approach
can be used to simplify quali«cation of products with similar physical or visual characteristics such as container type and size, dosage form,
product viscosity, color, and others (product families or groups). It is common to initially train and qualify personnel on clear solutions in
clear containers (if produced at the facility) and then expand their exper tise to the inspection of more di­cult dosage forms or
presentations.
7.8 Inspector Quali«cation Requirements
The quali«cation of all inspection personnel utilizes a manual test set to be inspected under normal operating conditions and inspection
critical parameters, including inspection timing and sequence, physical environment, and inspection duration. Three successful inspections
of the test set are recommended to demonstrate consistent performance for initial quali«cation of new inspectors. Acceptance criteria for
each defect class should be based on the PoD, or RZE observed during test set quali«cation for the package.
There are generally two basic approaches to establishing quali«cation acceptance criteria for the par ticulate matter detection sequence.
Other quali«cation criteria may be used with sound rationale.
Percent recovery qualification method:
A test set is prepared with bracketing of each par ticle type with a one-seeded unit being
near-threshold (just above 70% PoD) and the other larger with a higher PoD. Typically, not less than 80% or 90% of the units containing visible
par ticles are expected to be detected from the quali«cation test set.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 17 ===
RZE qualification method:
The previously determined test set RZE is used to assess the results obtained by the inspector to be
quali«ed. Each inspector to be quali«ed would then inspect the blinded set, and the RZE (the average PoD for all units containing par ticles
>70% PoD) is calculated for each trial. The acceptance criterion is to achieve an RZE during the quali«cation that is equal to or better than the
RZE originally determined during the threshold study.
%PoD = (Number of times rejected)/(Number of times inspected) × 100
RZE = the average of all PoD values for all units in the test set with an individual %PoD >70%
When assessing inspector performance, a limit is also needed for false rejection. A target of <5% falsely rejected good units in the test
set is recommended.
7.9 Requali«cation
Inspectors should be requali«ed at least annually. Requali«cation includes a test of visual acuity and testing with at least one product/test
set con«guration. A single successful inspection of the test set is su­cient for requali«cation. Requali«cation may also be necessary if poor
performance is observed during routine inspection or if the inspector has been away from the inspection operation for an extended period
(e.g., more than 3 months).
If an inspector fails the requali«cation test, a retraining process should be initiated to identify the root cause and allow the inspector to
receive additional instruction. After this process has been completed, the inspector may attempt to meet the acceptance criteria one
additional time. If the inspector fails, he or she may attempt to qualify again after a speci«ed time period.
8. PRODUCTS IN DISTRIBUTION
Chapter 〈790〉 states, “If it becomes necessary to evaluate product that has been shipped to customers (e.g., because of a complaint or
regulatory concern), sample and inspect 20 units. If no par ticles are observed in the sample, the batch is considered essentially free of
visible par ticulates. If available, additional units may be inspected to gain fur ther information on the risk of par ticulates in the batch.
”
For products in distribution, questions regarding batch quality will occasionally arise from customer complaints, observations in the «eld,
customer use questions, and from the use of nonstandard (sensitive) conditions of inspection. As discussed in this chapter, the detection
process is probabilistic, and the likelihood of detection is a cumulative function of the par ticle's visible attributes, drug product and container
characteristics, and the inspection method used. In an appropriately quali«ed manufacturing process, the batch is presumed to have been
prepared according to robust processes and all containers with package defects and visible par ticles (nonconforming units) removed prior to
labeling. In that regard, the evaluation outlined in 〈790〉, Inspection Procedure, Sampling at Batch Release (After 100% Manufacturing
Inspection) and Product in Distribution is only permissible if both sampling at batch release and a 100% manufacturing inspection has been
successfully completed.
The par ticle detection threshold should be determined for a speci«c inspection method and product/package combination incorporating a
variety of par ticle types and densities that are typically found in the manufacturing environment. For example, the detection threshold for
routine, reliable detection (≥70% probability) of a single spherical par ticle in a clear solution contained in a 10-mL vial utilizing diffuse
illumination between 2000 and 3000 lux is often near 150 µm in diameter (5). Units returned from distribution may be false positive, may
contain par ticle(s) larger than the acceptance threshold that were missed, may contain par ticle(s) in the gray zone (i.e., less than the
detection threshold), or may have suffered a physicochemical change that resulted in a visible change. Ideally, there will be no visible
par ticles in the containers released to market; however, there is always a low probability that this may occur.
Upon receipt, suspect containers should be subjected to the same inspection conditions and methodology used in the release inspection.
Par ticle(s) veri«ed in the returned or re-evaluated supply must be carefully characterized by an analytical forensic process to determine their
source and likely cause. Single par ticles of typical product-contact materials are unlikely to present a concern. Multiple par ticles, large
par ticle sizes, and any par ticles indicative of physical or chemical change are signi«cant events and should be subject to fur ther
investigation. Rare instances of par ticulate material falling into the gray zone should be expected given the probabilistic nature of the
inspection process and should not routinely trigger fur ther evaluation of retention samples. Chapter 〈790〉 provides that zero par ticles found
in the sampling and inspection of 20 units signify that the batch is “essentially free of visible par ticulates.
” If multiple suspect containers
from the same batch are detected, additional units should be inspected, and an appropriate rationale provided to suppor t the batch's
conformance to the registered speci«cations.
Overall batch quality using internal systems to control par ticulate matter and the means to investigate these occurrences is key to the life
cycle approach for modern pharmaceutical production. Evaluation of retention and stability samples provides insight to batch quality, as do
the «eld-use effects for any medication. While the presence of par ticles or product or container defects discovered in retained or returned
product do not necessarily incriminate the quality of the batch, a careful investigation should be conducted to exclude systemic risks.
9. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Visual inspection for par ticles and other visible defects continues to be an impor tant par t of the manufacturing process for injections.
Chapter 〈790〉 provides a useful reference method and acceptance criteria for visible par ticulates in injections. Successful execution of
visual inspection requires an understanding of the inspection process and careful control of inspection conditions. Both visual inspection
procedures and investigative processes for elevated rejects consist of comprehensive and well-documented systems relevant for the
products being manufactured. Inspectors must be trained to ensure consistent, high-quality performance. Alternative inspection methods,
either semi-automated or fully automated, may be used in place of manual inspection methods. Where machine methods are used, the
equipment must be validated to demonstrate equivalent or better performance when compared to manual inspection. The use of test sets
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 18 ===
that contain standard defects is an impor tant element in inspector training and quali«cation as well as machine validation. Good product
development will lead to a stable product with a lower risk of par ticle formation. Identi«cation of the type or types of par ticles found during
product development and routine manufacturing is critical to reducing their occurrence. Inspection results should be trended to fur ther aid in
continuous process improvement with the ultimate goal of defect prevention.
REFERENCES
1. Madsen RE, Cherris RT
, Shabushnig JG, Hunt DG. Visible par ticulates in injections—a history and a proposal to revise USP general
chapter Injections 〈1〉. Pharm Forum. 2009;35(5):1383–1387.
2. Parenteral Drug Association (PDA). Technical Repor t No. 43. Identi«cation and classi«cation of nonconformities in molded and
tubular glass containers for pharmaceutical manufacturing. 2013.
3. Parenteral Drug Association (PDA). Technical Repor t No. 76. Identi«cation and classi«cation of visible nonconformities in elastomeric
components and aluminum seals for parenteral packaging. 2016.
4. Cherris RT
. Visual inspection life cycle of par ticulate and container–closure defect control. PDA Visual Inspection Forum, 2011 Oct 3–
4. Bethesda, MD.
5. Shabushnig JG, Melchore JA, Geiger M, Chrai S, Gerger ME. A proposed working standard for validation of par ticulate inspection in
sterile solutions. PDA Annual Meeting. Philadelphia, PA: 1995.
Ã. Borcher t SJ, Abe A, Aldrich DS, Fox LE, Freeman J, White RD. Par ticulate matter in parenteral products: a review. J Parenter Sci Technol.
1986;40;212.
7. Watson R, Straub J. Manual inspection capability to detect par ticulate in parenterals. PDA Visual Inspection Forum, 2013. Bethesda,
MD.
Ä. Parenteral Drug Association (PDA). Technical Repor t No. 79. Par ticulate Matter Control in Di­cult to Inspect Parenterals. 2018.
9. Thomas WH, Lee YK. Par ticles in intravenous solutions. New Zealand Med J 1974;80:170.
10. Turco S, Davis NM. Clinical signi«cance of par ticulate matter: a review of the literature. Hosp Pharm. 1973;8:137.
11. Groves MJ, deMalka SR. The relevance of pharmacopeial par ticulate matter tests. Drug Dev Comm. 1976;2:285.
12. Groves MJ. Parenteral products: the preparation and quality control of products for injection. London: William Heinemann Medical
Books, 1973.
13. Groves MJ. Par ticulate matter: sources and resources for healthcare manufacturers. Buffalo Grove, IL: Interpharm Press, 1993.
14. Langille SE. Par ticulate matter in injectable drug products. PDA J Pharm Sci Tech. 2013;67(3):186–200.
15. Bukofzer S, Ayres J, Chavez A, Devera M, Miller J, Ross D, et al. Industry perspective on the medical risk of visible par ticles in injectable
drug products. PDA J Parenter Sci Technol. 2015;69;123–139.
1Ã. Parikh MJ, Dumas G, Silvestri A, Bistrian, BR, Driscoll DF
. Physical compatibility of neonatal total parenteral nutrient admixtures
containing organic calcium and inorganic phosphate salts. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2005;62:1177–1183.
17. Newton DW, Driscoll DF
. Calcium and phosphate compatibility: revisited again. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2008;65:73–80.
1Ä. Brewer JH, Dunning JF
. An in vitro and in vivo study of glass par ticles in ampoules. J Amer Pharm Assoc. 1947;36:289–293.
19. Schoenberg MD, Gillman PD, Mumaw V
, Moore RD. Proliferation of the reticuloendothelial system and phagocytosis. Exp Mol Pathol.
1963;2:126.
20. Hozumi K, Kitamura K, Kitade T
, Iwagami S. Localization of glass par ticles in animal organs derived from cutting of glass ampoules
before intravenous injection. Microchem. 1983;28:215.
21. Brekkan A, Lexow PE, Woxholt G. Glass fragments and other par ticles contaminating contrast media. Acta Radiol. 1975;16:600.
22. Liu JF
, Su ZK, Ding WX. Quantitation of par ticulate microemboli during cardiopulmonary bypass: experimental and clinical studies. Ann
Thorac Surg. 1992;54(6):1196–1202.
23. Walpot H, Franke WP
, Burchard WG, Agternkamp C, Muller FG, Mittermayer C, et al. Par ticulate contamination of infusion solutions and
drug additives in the framework of long-term intensive therapy. 2. An animal model. Anaesthesist [in German]. 1989;38(11):617–621.
24. Jones ML, Warren JS. Monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 in a rat model of pulmonary granulomatosis. Lab Invest. 1992;66(4):498–
503.
25. Bautista AP
, Schuller A, Spolarics Z, Spitzer JJ. In vivo latex phagocytosis primes the Kupffer cells and hepatic neutrophils to generate
superoxide anion. J Leukocyte Biol. 1992;51(1):39–45.
2Ã. Garvin JM, Gunner BW. Intravenous ¬uids: a solution containing such par ticles must not be used. Med J Austr. 1963;2:140.
27. Garvin JM, Gunner BW. The harmful effects of par ticles in intravenous ¬uids. Med J Austr. 1964;2:1.
2Ä. Bur ton JF
, Zawadzki ES, Wetherell HR, Moy TW. Mainliners and blue velvet. J Forensic Sci. 1965;10:466.
29. Richman S, Harris RD. Acute pulmonary edema associated with librium abuse. Radiology. 1972;103:57.
30. Douglas FG. Foreign par ticle embolism in drug addicts: respiratory pathophysiology. Ann Intern Med. 1971;75:865.
31. Jones BS, Brancaccio F
A, Rodriguez GA. Dyspnea and bilateral interstitial pulmonary in«ltrates in an intravenous drug user. BUMC
Proceedings. 2002;15:430–432.
32. Gentile F
, Curcio A, Indol« C, Ferrari M, Decuzzi P
. The margination propensity of spherical par ticles for vascular targeting in the
microcirculation. J Nanobiotech. 2008;6:9.
33. Repa I, Moradian GP
, Dehner LP
, Tadavar thy SM, Hunter DW, Castaneda-Zuniga WR, et al. Mor talities associated with use of a
commercial suspension of polyvinyl alcohol. Radiology. 1989;170:395–399.
34. Brown KT
. Fatal pulmonary complications after ar terial embolization with 40–120 µm tris-acryl gelatin microspheres. J Vascu Intervent
Radiol. 2004;15(2):197–200.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 19 ===
35. Siskin GP
, Englander M, Strainken BF
, Ahn J, Dowling K, Dolen EG. Embolic agents used for uterine «broid embolization. Am J of
Roentgen. 2000;175(3):767–773.
3Ã. Wijeyaratne SM, Ubayasiri RA, Weerasinghe C. Fatal pulmonary embolism of polyvinyl alcohol par ticles following therapeutic
embolisation of a peripheral ar teriovenous malformation. BMJ Case Repor ts, 2009.
37. Reedy JS, Kuhlman JE, Voytovich M. Microvascular pulmonary emboli secondary to precipitated crystals in a patient receiving total
parenteral nutrition. Chest. 1999;115:892–895.
3Ä. Jack T
, Boehne M, Brent BE et al. In-line «ltration reduces severe complications and length of stay on pediatric intensive care unit: a
prospective, randomized, controlled Trial. Intensive Care Med (2012) 38:1008–1016 DOI 10.1007/s00134-012-2539-7.
39. Injectable drug delivery: probing the route of growth. Datamonitor. London. January 2004.
40. FDA. Sterile drug process inspections. Compliance Program Guidance Manual, Program 7356.002A. 2012.
http:/
/www.fda.gov/downloads/ICECI/ComplianceManuals/ComplianceProgramManual/ucm125409.pdf.
41. ICH. International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. ICH
Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System (PQS). 2008. http:/
/www.ich.org/page/quality-guidelines.
42. ANSI/ASQ. Z1.4 sampling procedures and tables for inspection of attributes. Milwaukee, WI: American Society for Quality; 2013.
43. International Organization for Standardization. Sampling procedures for inspection by attributes—Par t 1: sampling schemes indexed
by acceptance quality limit (AQL) for lot-by-lot inspection. Geneva, Switzerland: ISO; 1999.
44. Japanese Industrial Standard. JIS Z 9015–1, Sampling procedures for inspection by attributes—Par t 1: sampling schemes indexed by
acceptance quality limit (AQL) for lot-by-lot inspection. Tokyo: Japanese Standards Association; 2006.
45. Burdick RK, Hare LB and Wal«sh SL. Acceptance Sampling Strategies Applied to USP 〈790〉 Visible Par ticulates in Injections, Pharm
Forum. 2018;44(5).
4Ã. Shabushnig JG. PDA Survey: 2014 Visual Inspection. Parenteral Drug Association; 2015.
47. Code of Federal Regulations Title 21 Food and Drugs, 21 CFR 210.3 De«nitions (2014).
4Ä. FDA. Advisory to drug manufacturers: formation of glass lamellae in cer tain injectable drugs. 2011.
https:/
/www.fda.gov/drugs/pharmaceutical-quality-resources/summary-recent-«ndings-related-glass-
delamination#:~:text=In%202011%2C%20FDA%20issued%20an,2011%20due%20to%20the%20problem.
49. ICH. International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. ICH
Q8 Pharmaceutical Development. 2008. https:/
/www.ich.org/page/quality-guidelines.
50. Chang BS, Hershenson S. Practical approaches to protein formulation development. In: Carpenter JF
, Manning MC, eds. Rational
design of stable protein formulations—theory and practice. New York: Kluwer Academic Press/Plenum; 2002:1–25.
51. Barber TA. Pharmaceutical par ticulate matter: analysis and control. Buffalo Grove, IL: Interpharm Press; 1993:243–246.
52. Haleblian JK. Characterization of habits and crystalline modi«cation of solids and their pharmaceutical implications. J Pharm Sci.
1975;65(8):1269–1286.
53. Jenke D. An extractables/leachables strategy facilitated by collaboration between drug product vendors and plastic material/system
suppliers. Pharm Sci Tech. 1986;61(1):17–33.
54. Dimbleby V
. Glass for pharmaceutical purposes. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1953;5:969.
55. Thirumangalathu R, Krishnan S, Speed Richi M, Brems DN, Randolph TW, Carpenter JF
. Silicone Oil- and Agitation-Induced Aggregation
of a Monoclonal Antibody in Aqueous Solution. J Pharm Sci. 2009;98(9):3167–3181.
5Ã. Liu W, Swift R, Torraca G, Nashed-Samuel Y
, Wen ZQ, Jiang Y
, Vance A, Mire-Sluis A, Freund E, Davis J, Narhi L. Root Cause Analysis of
Tungsten-Induced Protein Aggregation in Pre-«lled Syringes. PDA J Pharm Sci Technol. 2010 Jan-Feb;64(1):11–9.
57. Knapp JZ, Kushner HR. Generalized methodology for evaluation of parenteral inspection procedures. J Parenter Sci Technol.
1980;34(1):14–61.
5Ä. Knapp JZ, Kushner HR. Implementation and automation of a par ticle detection system for parenteral products. J Parenter Sci Technol.
1980;34(5):369–393.
59. European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & Healthcare. European Pharmacopoeia 8.2/Ph. Eur. chapter 2.9.20 Par ticulate
contamination: visible par ticles. Strasbourg, France: EDQM; 2014.
Ã0. Japanese Pharmacopoeia. 6.06 Foreign insoluble matter test. 16th ed. Tokyo, Japan; 2014.
Ã1. Kikuchi T
, Gotanda K, Noguchi M, Okano S, Morichi A, Katayama H. Study on foreign insoluble matter test for injections, effects of
inspection conditions on detection ratio. Pharmaceutical and Medical Device Regulatory Science. 2013;44(4):362–370.
Ã2. Wolfe JM, Horowitz TS, Van Wer t MJ, Kenner NM, Place SS, Kibbi N. Low target prevalence is a stubborn source of errors in visual
search tasks. J Exper Psych. 2007;136(4):623–638.
Ã3. Rich AN, Kunar MA, Van Wer t MJ, Hidalgo-Sotelo B, Horowitz TS, Wolfe JM. Why do we miss rare targets? Exploring the boundaries of
the low prevalence effect. J Vision. 2008;8(15):1–17.
Ã4. Khan J. Everything you need to know about Visual Inspection with AI. June 2019. https:/
/nanonets.com/blog/ai-visual-inspection.
Ã5. Delgado J. Deep Learning Development and Quali«cation in Automated Vision Inspection Technology for Parenteral Pharmaceutical
Drug Products. PDA Visual Inspection Forum. 2019 Apr 23-24; Washington, DC.
ÃÃ. Prinz H. Par ticle detection in freeze dried and suspension products: new technology. PDA Visual Inspection Forum. 2011 Oct 3–4;
Bethesda, MD.
Ã7. Melchore JA, Berdovich D. Considerations for design and use of container challenge sets for quali«cation and validation of visible
par ticulate inspection. PDA J Pharm Sci Technol. 2012;66(3):273–284.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections


=== PAGE 20 ===
ÃÄ. Aldrich D, Cherris R, Shabushnig J. Visual Inspection and Par ticulate Control. Bethesda, MD: Davis Healthcare International Publishing,
LLC;2016:157–226.
Ã9. Houf JW. Understanding near vision eye tests. The NDT Technician. 2009;8(4):1.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<1790> VISUAL INSPECTION OF INJECTIONS
Desmond G. Hunt
Principal Scienti«c Liaison
GCDF2020
General Chapters - Dosage Forms
2020
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. 46(6)
Current DocID: GUID-C4739029-5BE7-4717-A2DD-E872411AF89F_7_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7198_07_01
DOI ref: o3tel
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 5:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1790〉 Visual Inspection of Injections
