1.0 
Introduction
PDA Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023): Identification and Classification of Nonconformities in 
Moulded and Tubular Glass Containers for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing provides an updated ap-
proach to a quality decision-making process and represents best practices for the identification and 
classification of visual nonconformities for glass containers.
This technical report was originally published in 2007 and applied only to moulded bottles and tubular 
vials. The document was revised in 2013 to address industry feedback; that revision expanded to include 
other tubular container types and increased the focus on container quality by the industry as a whole. 
The 2023 revision is issued to address evolving standards and container types, including:
• 
Reduced reliance on limit samples that require visual consensus and are difficult to maintain in a 
manufacturing environment. Instead, additional guidance is provided on minimum sizes identi-
fied for nonconformities.
• 
Harmonized risk levels assigned to defects associated with glass particles based on contemporary risk 
assessment information that address the use of containers by the majority of drug manufacturers.
• 
Broader concepts on ready-to-use (RTU) vials and cartridges covering steps previously complet-
ed by pharmaceutical manufacturers that some glass suppliers are now performing. Due to their 
introduction directly into the pharmaceutical filling environment, RTU formats require differ-
ent standards for particular types of defect.
• 
Minor changes in descriptions throughout the lexicons to help improve the precise identification 
of nonconformities.
• 
Additional information in the lexicons to include locations and possible sources of defects.
• 
Standardized terminology for defect classifications, replacing the term “N/A” with “acceptable 
imperfection.”
• 
Condensed lexicons that removed some defects or combined similar defects; for example, “Residual 
Stress” defects were eliminated as they were considered out of scope for this visual defect reference.
1.1	
Purpose
The standardized quality criteria in TR-43 are intended as guidance for container manufacturers and 
for incoming container acceptance inspection at pharmaceutical companies. The attributes identified 
in this lexicon are not intended to represent the defect after a theoretical extrapolation of further dam-
age during processing, rather just the defect when discovered. While defect identification remains the 
same, the quality criteria used for filled containers will likely differ. Five detailed lexicons have been 
updated which visually illustrate glass nonconformities—one for moulded glass bottles and vials, and 
four for tubular glass vials, ampoules, cartridges, and syringes (see Section 8.0 (Appendix)). Addition-
ally, defects specific to RTU containers and their categorization are included for use as applicable. 
Consulting with the appropriate regulatory authorities for agreement on the strategies employed for 
identification and classification of visual nonconformities of glass containers is always advisable. 
The identification and classification of glass imperfections represents only a part of the overall ac-
ceptance criteria for glass utilized for pharmaceutical products. Other aspects include adherence to 
dimensional standards, visual nonconformance inspection programs, acceptable quality limits, and 
reinspection. This technical report provides some of the building blocks for developing overall speci-
fications for glass containers.
1.2	
Scope
These guidelines are not intended to establish mandatory standards for the classification and identifi-
cation of glass nonconformities but, instead, are intended to provide an overview that complements 
existing guidelines, standards, and referenced materials. Additional reading (See Section 7.0) has been 
suggested that can provide greater detail on the various topics discussed in this technical report. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 6 ---
2
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023)
TR-43 applies solely to empty glass containers. It does not address drug product interaction with con-
tainers, quality attributes introduced by interactions with pharmaceutical manufacturing processes, 
container design dimensions or tolerances, or nonconformities in glass container secondary packaging 
materials. Pharmaceutical manufacturers are responsible for ensuring that container quality attributes 
are compatible with drug products and the subsequent processing of the containers such that finished 
drug product specifications are met.
2.0 
Glossary and Abbreviations
Wherever appropriate, terms listed in this Glossary are derived from current definitions of the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Internation-
al Organization for Standardization (ISO), and other regulatory or standards-setting organizations. 
When applicable, two official definitions are used (and cited). Other regulatory guidance may offer 
alternative definitions that should be considered.
Terms often differ from company to company, and some may be subject to change in the future. How-
ever, the terms used in a quality decision-making process must be clearly defined and well understood 
within the company. Those terms need to be clearly defined in internal standard operating procedures, 
specifications, and regulatory filings. The following terms and definitions are used in this technical report.
Acceptance Quality Limit (AQL)
The quality level that is the worst-tolerable pro-
cess average when a continuing series of lots are 
submitted for acceptance sampling (1).
Annealing 
Controlled heating process used to remove re-
sidual thermal stress from glass containers after 
glass-forming (synonymous with “Lehred”).
Attribute Sampling
An inspection where either a single container is 
classified as conforming or nonconforming, or the 
number of nonconformities in the unit of prod-
ucts is counted with respect to a given requirement 
or set of requirements (synonymous with “Inspec-
tion by Attributes”) (1).
Container Closure Integrity (CCI)
The ability of a closed container to prevent drug 
product loss, to block microorganism ingress, and 
to prevent ingress of detrimental gases or other sub-
stances, thus ensuring that the container–closure 
system meets all safety and quality requirements. 
Incoming Inspection
A preventive program in which glass containers 
are subjected to evaluation upon receipt.
Defect/Nonconformity (ANSI/ASQ 
Z1.4 2003 (R2018))
Defect: A departure of a quality characteris-
tic from its intended level or state that occurs 
with a severity sufficient to cause an associ-
ated product or service not to satisfy intended 
normal, or foreseeable, usage requirements.
Nonconformity: A departure of a quality 
characteristic from its intended level or state 
that occurs with severity sufficient to cause an 
associated product or service not to meet a 
specification requirement.
Limit Sample
An optional actual physical unit, reference pho-
to, or written description of a defect or noncon-
formity established between a drug manufac-
turer and a glass manufacturer. The limit sample 
defines the approximate maximum degree of ac-
ceptability for an “acceptable imperfection,” that 
is, an imperfection that is considered acceptable 
based on the size or other criteria noted in the 
requirements.
Online Observations
Observations or findings that are found during 
the processing of a drug product or products.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 7 ---
3
Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Operating Characteristic Curves
The operating characteristic curve shows the prob-
ability of acceptance (Pa) for any level of lot quality.
Post-Fill Inspections
Inspections of glass containers after drug product 
filling.
Product Stream
The process flow in which a product is manufactured.
Quality Risk Management
A systematic process for the assessment, control, 
communication, and review of risk to the quality of 
the drug product across the product’s lifecycle (2).
Quality Specification System
A system that outlines the nonconformities, clas-
sifications, and AQLs for a glass container.
Ready-to-Use (RTU) Containers 
Glass containers that meet the cleanliness, micro-
biological, and nonconformity level requirements 
required by the pharmaceutical filling operation. 
These containers are processed beyond the typical 
bulk glass supply operations including washing, 
depyrogenation, sterilization (ETO or autoclave), 
and packaging suitable for introduction directly into 
a pharmaceutical manufacturer’s filling process. 
Sampling Plan
The sampling plan indicates the number of units of 
containers from each lot or batch which need to be 
inspected (sample size or series of sample sizes) and 
the criteria for determining the acceptability of the 
lot or batch (acceptance and rejection numbers) (1).
Visual Inspection
Inspection of an article under agreed-upon values 
of illumination, background color(s), inspection 
time, and distance. Routine visual inspection 
is not typically performed using magnification, 
rather it relies on the inspector’s naked eye, cor-
rected if necessary.
3.0 
Glass Container Specification Development Process
Pharmaceutical/biopharmaceutical manufacturers should collaborate with their glass manufacturing 
vendors to develop a quality agreement that defines the responsibilities of both parties and includes a 
glass container conformance specification. Both parties should establish a container product(s) quality 
specification based on patient safety, product requirements, and process capabilities and create a suit-
able agreement that:
• 
Develops the dimensional design of glass containers
• 
Establishes sampling plan supplier uses for manufacturing control and release of finished lots of 
containers
• 
Defines glass container lots and acceptable quality limits (AQLs)
• 
Determines the classification and disposition of nonconformities and the criteria for rework/
reinspection
• 
Decides on the criteria for documentation and training
3.1	
Glass Container Dimensional Development 
Published standards are the foundation for the design and control of dimensional product quality 
for manufacturing moulded and tubular glass containers. The principal focus of these standards is to 
establish uniform dimensional design for glass containers to ensure product safety and efficacy as a 
prerequisite to development of packaging specifications for drug products.
ISO establishes stringent dimensional requirements in its standards for glass containers (3-9). These 
references provide universal dimensional standards for glass manufacturers to produce uniform mould-
ed and tubular glass containers that are supplied to pharmaceutical manufacturers. These standards 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 8 ---
4
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023)
only cover the dimensional aspect and handling of glass containers, however, not the visual imperfec-
tions or nonconformities that can occur during glass manufacturing.
3.2	
Glass Container Sampling
The responsibility for glass container quality rests primarily with glass manufacturers. However, regula-
tory agencies hold pharmaceutical manufacturers responsible for ensuring the suitability of glass con-
tainers for their drug products. It also provides a manufacturer with a random check that could prevent 
final product rejects due to glass container nonconformities. Therefore, pharmaceutical manufacturers 
should have a process in place to confirm that containers meet specified requirements. This process 
may include sampling of incoming glass container lots or other procedures to verify their acceptability 
according to a predetermined quality specification. Acceptance sampling may include different types 
of sampling plans or certified supply, where the manufacturer has demonstrated reliable performance 
or has validated, well documented process controls in place that assures a high level of quality (e.g., 
lot-to-lot or continuous process), depending on the quality needs of the drug product and how the 
glass container is manufactured. Glass container sampling is typically performed using either the most 
current revision of ASQ/ANSI Z1.4 or ISO 2859-1 (1,10). 
Expecting defect-free glass containers from a supplier does not eliminate the need for some degree 
of incoming and online inspection, as well as post-fill inspection. Transportation, handling, or 
even the pharmaceutical company’s process can create nonconformities in glass containers that 
require inspection. Acceptance sampling of incoming lots of glass containers by pharmaceutical 
manufacturers has its limitations. Care should be taken to understand the risks of the sampling 
plan. Every sampling plan contains the possibility of accepting a lot that is “bad” or rejecting a lot 
that is “good.” The real value of testing incoming lots is alerting the manufacturer when the lot 
deviates from previously defined nonconformance acceptance limits. Such testing, however, can-
not be relied on to deliver an accurate measure of the actual incoming nonconformance rate for a 
single batch.
Whether the pharmaceutical manufacturer uses a sampling plan or defective parts per million (dPPM) 
limits, both parties should have an agreement as to the identification of nonconformities, their defini-
tions, and appropriate AQLs or dPPM limits.
3.2.1	 Definition of Lots
One of the most important aspects of developing a sampling plan is defining lots. A glass container 
production lot is usually assumed to have a connotation of completeness and separateness. As noted 
in ASQ/ANSI Z1.4:
• 
The product shall be assembled into identifiable lots, sub-lots, batches or in such other manner as 
may be prescribed. Each lot or batch shall, as far as is practicable, consist of units of product of a 
single type, grade, class, size, and composition, manufactured under essentially the same condi-
tions, and at essentially the same time (1).
This definition does not specifically require that a production lot be a physically distinct creation, how-
ever. Many glass containers are manufactured in long runs, frequently measured in days and weeks, 
that result in very large supplier batches. In that regard, they may resemble continuously manufactured 
items, and typical lot identification practices may not be applicable, as Shilling’s observed:
• 
In the sampling of some processes, lots are not clearly defined…Sometimes in such situations, it 
is possible to artificially define a lot, such as the production of an hour, a shift, a day, or a week. 
However, this is often quite arbitrary (11).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 9 ---
5
Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Incoming lots from large supplier batches are typically defined by pharmaceutical and biotechnology 
companies for the convenience of logistics and shipping, not based on uniqueness. Thus, an incoming 
lot can be any defined portion of the product stream from the larger supplier batch (e.g., a group of 
pallets, individual pallets, individual boxes, or other means of division). Since an incoming lot for a 
pharmaceutical or biotechnology company may not be the same as that of a glass manufacturer, it is 
important to establish an agreement on the definition of a lot.
Some portions of the product stream can be outside acceptance limits, while adjacent portions can 
be within those limits. This condition may be referred to as having “pocket conditions.” Rejection of 
a portion does not indicate that the whole stream is unacceptable, just that the specified portion may 
not be acceptable and should be removed. Glass suppliers and pharmaceutical manufacturers should 
have a plan in place to react to such conditions when identified.
3.2.2	 Sampling Plans
Regulations, such as CFR, require sampling and testing of each lot before use (12-13). Sampling plans are 
commonly used for the inspection of incoming, in-process, and finished glass containers as one of several 
methods of quality control. There are typically two types of sampling plans—variable and attribute.
Variable sampling plans are used to inspect quantitative attributes, such as actual weight, height, and 
finish diameter.
Attribute sampling plans are used to inspect product and dimensional characteristics against the specifica-
tion using “yes/no,” “go/no-go,” or “pass/fail” criteria, indicating whether or not nonconformances exist.
Drug manufacturers may use either type of plan for glass inspection. For example, attribute sampling plans 
may be used for dimensional characteristics when evaluated using pass/fail or go/no-go criteria. Tools are 
available, for example, statistical process controls, that can be used to chart variations in production runs.
3.2.2.1	 Continuous Sampling
Continuous sampling plans are ideally used to inspect glass-container attributes throughout the course 
of glass manufacturing. Continuous sampling plans developed by Dodge (14), Wald and Wolfowitz 
(15), and Girschick (16) are commonly used. These plans are designed and intended for the manufac-
turer to use at the time of production, as noted by Duncan:
• 
…special sampling-inspection plans have been developed for application to continuous production. 
These are commonly called continuous-sampling plans in contrast to “lot-to-lot” plans (17).
These plans make several assumptions, according to De Feo and Juran:
The following are prerequisites for application of the single-level continuous sampling plans:
• 
The inspection must involve “moving product,” i.e., product which is flowing past the inspection 
station, e.g., on a conveyer belt.
• 
Rapid 100 percent inspection must be feasible.
• 
The inspection must be relatively easy.
• 
The product must be homogeneous (18).
The assumption of a homogeneous glass product batch is often incorrect. Large-batch processes that 
run over long periods of time should be reviewed regularly and adjusted, if necessary, during produc-
tion. If production continues during adjustment of the glass manufacturing process, nonconforming 
products should be identified and removed. The product stream may then be considered homoge-
neous for the purpose of sampling. Otherwise, the product stream could contain periods in which 
nonconformities may exceed acceptable limits.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 10 ---
6
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023)
If a glass manufacturing company cannot meet the requirements of a continuous process sampling 
plan, then inspection of incoming materials as a series of lots from the continuous process (i.e., a lot-
to-lot sampling plan) is conducted by the pharmaceutical company.
3.2.2.2	 Lot-to-Lot Sampling
Lot-to-lot sampling plans are used to identify glass nonconformities during the incoming inspection 
of glass containers and have the following characteristics:
• 
Each lot is considered on its own merit
• 
Each lot is sampled
• 
Each lot is accepted or rejected based on mutually accepted quality limits
When designing and implementing a lot-to-lot sampling plan for incoming inspection of glass con-
tainers produced in a continuous process, the following should be considered:
• 
Incoming lots are not discrete and complete within themselves but rather are a defined portion of 
a long stream of product from the glass manufacturer’s larger batch.
• 
Continuous sampling plans are not feasible for pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Lot-to-lot sampling plans, such as those described in ASQ/ANSI Z1.4, are a reasonable alternative to 
the continuous sampling plan for pharmaceutical manufacturers.
3.2.2.3	 Defective Parts Per Million (dPPM)
Another alternative to ASQ/ANSI Z1.4 sampling plans is to set dPPM limits for each nonconfor-
mance classification. A dPPM limit is an agreed-upon acceptance criterion between the drug company 
and the glass manufacturer, which can save a significant amount of work for both parties.
The dPPM plan assumes the pharmaceutical manufacturer has a high level of confidence in the glass 
manufacturer’s capability to consistently deliver a high-quality product; it should not be used until 
that has been achieved. The glass manufacturer must demonstrate the ability to consistently produce 
acceptable product quality.
In continuous or lot-to-lot sampling plans, like those described in Sections 3.2.2.1-3.2.2.2, finding non-
conformities after incoming inspection and acceptance of the lot may require investigation of the source of 
the nonconformity. The dPPM limits provide an unambiguous understanding at the incoming inspection, 
in-process observations, or post-fill inspection of glass container lots. To calculate the dPPM:
• 
Divide the total number of unacceptable glass containers detected during the pharmaceutical 
manufacturing processes by the number of the glass containers in the lot
• 
Each lot is calculated separately using the size of that lot
The pharmaceutical company and the glass manufacturer should determine a minimum lot size to 
calculate dPPM limits.
The quality agreement between the glass manufacturer and pharmaceutical company should also in-
clude the use of consistent metrics based on the glass manufacturer’s production capability and the 
pharmaceutical company’s reasonable expectations.
3.2.3	 AQLs 
Separating the philosophy and goal of zero defects from the practical reality of real-world manufactur-
ing processes is important. Sampling plans generally enumerate nonconformities, their description 
and, based on severity, the corresponding AQLs. Classification of glass nonconformities as critical, 
major A, major B, or minor (with associated AQLs) does not necessarily signify that this level of 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 11 ---
7
Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
nonconformance would be considered acceptable as an outgoing quality level in pharmaceutical or 
diagnostic products. However, using those classifications of glass nonconformities does allow for a 
distinction based on their potential impact on product quality and patient safety.
Often, the agreed-upon AQLs for glass containers are a compromise between the needs of the phar-
maceutical producer and the process capability of the glass manufacturer. Thus, setting AQL specifica-
tions for glass nonconformities requires a supplier quality agreement between the pharmaceutical and 
glass manufacturing companies to minimize risk. Thus, providing assurance that the incoming glass 
quality is high, provides a higher assurance that the final drug product will meet its critical quality 
attributes. The drug company and glass manufacturer need to establish the classifications and AQLs 
based on the drug product and process requirements. 
This compromise also balances the glass manufacturer’s production capability with the drug company’s 
inspection efficiency. Documentation that clearly describes and defines glass nonconformities supports 
this overall balance. Since it is impractical to expect glass container lots to be free of imperfections, it is 
important that drug and glass manufacturers consistently define visual glass attributes. A nonconfor-
mance lexicon, such as this technical report, can help provide such consistency. 
AQL percentages may be established for each nonconformance classification. However, each com-
pany’s process or product may have unique glass quality requirements that should be established, 
negotiated, and communicated with the glass manufacturer as part of the supplier quality agreement. 
This should be done using an approved quality specification agreement and based on patient safety, 
product and process requirements, and the glass manufacturer’s production capability. For example, a 
bottom nonconformance limit for a lyophilized product may be significantly different than that for a 
nonlyophilized product. In one case, the nonconformity may have a functional impact, whereas the 
other may be a cosmetic nonconformance. Glass container quality requirements should be aligned 
with the product and their intended use, not universally applied. 
Some nonconformities are exceptionally severe or reflect a loss of process or material control of the 
supplier. Pharmaceutical manufacturers may want to specify AQL = 0.0% for such critical noncon-
formities. By definition, an acceptance sampling plan evaluates a sample of the batch and makes a 
statistical assessment of the percent defective in the entire batch. Finding zero nonconformities in the 
sample does not ensure zero nonconformities in the batch. Such a result can provide only a statistical 
upper bound on the percentage of nonconforming items in the batch. Consequently, it is not statisti-
cally possible to define AQL = 0.0%. Therefore, for nonconformities or errors that are unacceptable at 
any level, “None Allowed” is the appropriate classification.
4.0 
Glass Nonconformity Risk Levels
Sharing a common terminology of glass nonconformities between glass manufacturers and pharma-
ceutical manufacturers is recommended in order to identify and classify nonconformance attributes.
Nonconformities should be reviewed and classified (with rationale) using a quality risk management 
approach. Verification of nonconformity classifications may warrant additional testing to establish their 
rationale. The following list provides the rationale for each classification of nonconformance risk level:
• 
Critical: A nonconformity that is likely to result in personal injury or potential hazard. This 
classification includes any nonconformity that compromises the integrity of the container, as 
well as risks of microbiological contamination of a sterile product.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 12 ---
8
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023)
• 
Major A: A nonconformity leading to serious impairments, for example, a malfunction that 
makes the packaging unusable.
• 
Major B: A nonconformity leading to impairments of a lesser degree, for example, reduced ef-
ficiency in production.
• 
Minor: A nonconformity that does not impact product quality or process capability.
• 
Acceptable Imperfection: An imperfection that is less than the minimum nonconformity 
size or limit sample, magnitude, and impact of a nonconformity is considered not applicable. 
Therefore, an imperfection that is considered to be nonapplicable is acceptable.
5.0 
Conclusion
Acceptance or rejection of moulded and tubular glass containers is more than just the identification 
and classification of glass nonconformities. A larger process is involved that requires the drug manu-
facturer and glass manufacturer to create a glass-container quality specification together. These agreed-
upon specifications are accomplished by employing existing standards for the dimensional require-
ments and creating quality criteria that include AQLs, nonconformity definitions, and reinspection.
Though not all-inclusive, the most common types of nonconformities have been included in the TR-
43 lexicons (Section 8.0 (Appendix)). They need to be updated periodically to remain current with the 
ever-changing quality landscape for the inspection of visible glass container attributes.
This technical report team is providing these lexicons as a guide for the most commonly found non-
conformities in moulded and tubular glass containers. The use of these lexicons should result in:
• 
Minimizing confusion about quality terms by establishing a consensus lexicon created by glass 
and pharmaceutical/biopharmaceutical manufacturers
• 
Identifying nonconformity classifications by severity that are based on the potential impact the 
attribute may have on its eventual application as a container for a pharmaceutical or biopharma-
ceutical product
• 
Creating a common nomenclature that can be used throughout the industry for the definition 
and classification of glass container attributes
• 
This technical report serves as an important supplement to existing guidance documents in the 
evaluation and classification of nonconforming glass containers throughout the industry.
6.0 
References
1.	 American Society for Quality. ASQ/ANSI 
Z1.4-2003 (R2018): Sampling Procedures 
and Tables for Inspection by Attributes; ASQ: 
Milwaukee, Wisc., 2018.
2.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Manage-
ment; ICH: Geneva, 2005.
3.	 International Organization for Standardiza-
tion. ISO 8362-1:2018 Injection Containers 
and Accessories — Part 1: Injection Vials 
Made of Glass Tubing; ISO: Geneva, 2018.
4.	 International Organization for Standardiza-
tion. ISO 8362-4:2011. Injection Contain-
ers and Accessories — Part 4: Injection Vials 
Made of Moulded Glass; ISO: Geneva, 2011.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 13 ---
9
Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.	 International Organization for Standardiza-
tion. ISO 9187-1:2010 Injection Equipment 
for Medical Use — Part 1: Ampoules for 
Injectables; ISO: Geneva, 2010.
6.	 Standarization, I O f. ISO 9187-2:2010 
Injection Equipment for Medical Use — Part 
2: One-Point-Cut (OPC) Ampoules; ISO: 
Geneva, 2010.
7.	 International Organization for Standard-
ization. ISO 11040-1:2015 Prefilled Sy-
ringes — Part 1: Glass Cylinders for Dental 
Local Anaesthetic Cartridges; ISO: Geneva, 
2015.
8.	 International Organization for Standardiza-
tion. ISO 11040-4:2015 Prefilled Syringes 
— Part 4: Glass Barrels for Injectables and 
Sterilized Subassembled Syringes Ready for 
Filling; ISO: Geneva, 2015.
9.	 International Organization for Standardiza-
tion. ISO 13926-1:2018 Pen Systems — 
Part 1: Glass Cylinders for Pen-Injectors for 
Medical Use; ISO: Geneva, 2018.
10.	 International Organization for Standariza-
tion. ISO 2859-1:1999 Sampling Procedures 
for Inspection by Attributes — Part 1: Sam-
pling Schemes Indexed by Acceptance Quality 
Limit (AQL) for Lot-by-Lot Inspection; ISO: 
Geneva, 1999.
11.	 Schilling, G; Neubauer, D V. Acceptance 
Sampling in Quality Control. Chapman and 
Hall/CRC: London, 2017.
12.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 
CFR 211.84 Testing and Approval or Rejec-
tion of Components, Drug Product Contain-
ers, and Closures; Department of Health and 
Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2008.
13.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 
CFR 211.82 Receipt and Storage of Untested 
Components, Drug Product Containers, and 
Closures.; Department of Health and Hu-
man Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2020.
14.	 Dodge, H F. A Sampling Inspection Plan 
for Continuous Production. Ann Math Stat 
1943, 14 (3), 264-79.
15.	 Wald, A; Wolfowitz, J. Sampling Inspection 
Plans for Continuous Production which 
Insure a Prescribed Limit on the Outgo-
ing Quality. Ann Math Stat 1945, 16 (1), 
30-49.
16.	 Girschick, M A A. Sequential Inspection 
Plan for Quality Control; Applied Math-
ematics and Statistics Laboratory: Stanford, 
Calif., 1954; p 33.
17.	 Duncan, A J. Quality Control and Indus-
trial Statistics, Fifth Ed. Richard D. Irwin: 
Homewood, Il., 1986; p 1123.
18.	 DeFeo, J A; Juran, J M. Juran’s Quality 
Handbook: The Complete Guide to Perfor-
mance Excellence, Seventh Ed. DeFeo, J A, 
Ed. McGraw-Hill Education: New York, 
2016; p 992.
7.0 
Additional Reading
Anschel, J. General Guidelines for the Processing of Glass Containers for Parenteral Products. Bull 
Parenter Drug Assoc 1977, Jan-Feb, 31 (1), 47-52.
Anderson, P R, et al. Effect of Surface Treatments on the Chemical Durability and Surface Composi-
tion of Soda-Lime Glass Bottles. J Non-Crystalline Solids 1975, 19, 251–62.
Harl, M, et al. Defect Evaluation List for Containers Made of Tubular Glass, Vol. 19, Fifth ed.; Editio 
Cantor: Aulendorf, Germany, 2016.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 14 ---
10
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2023)
Jansen, A, et al. Defect Evaluation List for Containers Made of Moulded Glass, Vol. 14. Editio Can-
tor: Aulendorf, Germany, 2018.
Parenteral Drug Association. Glass Containers for Small Volume Parenteral Products: Factors for 
Selection and Test Methods for Identification. 1982.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 85: Enhanced Test Methods for Visible Particle De-
tection and Enumeration on Elastomeric Closures and Glass Containers; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2021.
Rybka, M, et al. Defect Evaluation List for Medical Needles. Editio Cantor: Aulendorf, Germany, 2009.
