5.2 Phase II: Specific Points to Consider
5.2.1 Sterility-Positive Investigations
Should the laboratory confirm that a positive sterility result is valid, and no fault was attributed to the
laboratory and actual testing of samples submitted for analysis, the lot of product or material should be
considered nonsterile, and a comprehensive investigation into the source of contamination is required.
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 31

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Commonly, this is a collaborative effort between the QCU, laboratory, and production along with any
additional SMEs relevant to the manufacturing facilities and ancillary equipment. In order to guide
this step of the investigation, both scientific and regulatory considerations are provided to incorporate
into your investigative strategy.
All sterility test isolates should be identified to the species level, and the data should be reviewed for
any potential linkages to organisms isolated from the production environments, personnel who par-
ticipate in the manufacturing process directly or indirectly by handling of the sampling containers
throughout the process, and any in-process bioburden testing. If the same species of microorganism
was recovered from EM or supporting activities during batch manufacturing or testing, these colonies
should be identified to the strain-type level. Using the same microbial identification platform for both
the sterility test isolate(s) and any isolates recovered from the production areas is advisable to eliminate
potential differences in software databases if using two different microbial identification platforms.
Useful regulatory guidance for conducting a sterility test failure investigation for an aseptically filled
product are the 2004 FDA guidance on sterile drug products and some insightful chapters in the
PDA book Microbial Risk and Investigations (3, 41, 42). Experience has shown that the investigational
approach for aseptically filled sterile products will be significantly more complex than investigating a
sterility test failure associated with terminal modalities. The following table provides a partial list of
suggested questions to consider when evaluating sterility assurance data for a suspect lot of product
under review during a Phase II manufacturing investigation.
Table 5.2.1-1 Questions for Investigating Manufacturing/Process Sources Associated with a Confirmed Sterility Batch Failure
Area of Consideration Questions for Consideration
Are the biological Indicators used to monitor equipment sterilization partially open and improperly stored
in the refrigerator, allowing ingress of moisture to reduce spore resistance?
Sterilization of Components Is equipment not held under sterile conditions after terminal sterilization?
Has a new piece of equipment been added to the production train?
Has there been a change or increase in the equipment pre-sterilization bioburden?
Has there been a change in trend results for in-process control bioburden testing for product?
Has there been a change to bioburden counts or the types of microorganisms recovered for water-for-
In-Process Bioburden
injection?
Testing of Water and
Is (are) the microorganism(s) recovered from the product sterility test capable of growing on the media with
Product
the incubation conditions used for production EM and personnel monitoring? (e.g., Propionibacterium sp.)
Is the on-line sampling portal capable of being sterilized before taking a sample?
Have there been any changes in the viable EM data in lots prior to or during the suspect lot failure?
Has there been any significant increase of nonviable particulate counts in the critical areas within or
Batch Monitoring Data from
adjacent to the filling line?
Setup through Post-Fill
Did any critical locations (for surface or air) within the ISO 5 (Grade A) area exceed the action limit? If so,
was an investigation opened to evaluate the source of contamination?
Was there a new or unusual intervention for the suspect lot that has not been evaluated during the aseptic
process simulation study?
Personnel Interventions and
Glove Monitoring in Critical Do the process simulation studies include the aseptic manner for how to properly obtain in-line process
Zone samples?
Is personnel or room EM actually being performed? [data integrity concern]
Were there any past deviations, problems, or changes to earlier batches that may have passed the sterility
Manufacturing Batch test that could provide an indication of the origin of the current lot sterility test failure?
Records Are the batch records or any associated recording logs incomplete or altered that may indicate possible
data integrity problems that may cover the true cause of the operation/sterility failure?
32 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
(Table 5.2.1-1 Continued)
Area of Consideration Questions for Consideration
Were there any issues with sterilization of equipment (tanks) or change parts that occurred for this batch,
possibly indicating a failure in sterility assurance?
Were validated holding times (e.g., mix to sterilize time) met for products that promote microbial growth?
Were all other critical microbial control parameters (e.g., filter integrity test) met?
For terminal sterilization processes, were all critical parameters met for the sterilization cycle?
Manufacturing Batch Was the calibration of sterilizer-critical instruments (e.g., temperature probes, pressure transducers, etc.)
Records confirmed to be within limits?
Were all terminal sterilization processes in a currently qualified state?
Was the container closure integrity of the sterility test positive units confirmed?
Were heat/sterilization process resistant bacterial spores present in the sterility test positive? If so, what
the resistance value of the the contaminant compared to the biological indicator to assess the likelihood of
contaminant survival after sterilization?
Has the firm had sterility test failures in prior product lots? What were the common factors between these
product lot failures (e.g., same equipment, same personnel, same room)?
Historical Manufacturing
Is the EM sample site map selecting the highest risk locations within the production/filling suite?
Review
Has the firm averaged EM data from critical rooms? Has the facility looked at the individual EM data before
averaging?
Was there any usual maintenance or equipment repairs made to the manufacturing train for the suspect lot?
Do the records for HEPA-filter monitoring or repair (e.g., caulking small leaks) indicate a potential source of
Change Management microbial ingress to critical workspaces?
Did any storms, floods, water main leaks, or plumbing problems occur during the filling time of the suspect
lot that may have been carried to the manufacturing suite?
Do the actual manufacturing operational practices match what is conducted during the aseptic process
Aseptic Process Simulation
simulation?
Was the most recent aseptic process simulation carried out within the required timeframe (i.e., 6 months)?
Key areas for investigations related to personnel are gowning practices, operator behavior, and aseptic
techniques. Personnel conducting manual aseptic operations in open ISO 5/Grade A environments
(e.g. BSCs, LFHs, etc.) are monitored prior to each exit from the Grade A area via touch plates/finger
dab sampling, sleeve sampling and other qualified gown locations using TSA contact and standard
plates (note: sleeves and gloves should be immediately replaced with a new sterile set after each EM
sampling occurs prior to re-entry back into the Grade A environment). Cleanroom operators must
be trained to understand how microbial contamination can be caused by poor personal hygiene, in-
adequate gowning practices, or inappropriate cleanroom behaviors. Operators should be limited to
ingress of hands and forearms only into the ISO 5/Grade A environments.
5.2.2 Determining Sources of Bacterial Endotoxin
The source of bacterial endotoxins within the sterile product manufacturing train may be transient,
related to pharmaceutical ingredients, processing equipment, cleaning deficiencies, packaging compo-
nents, or the pharmaceutical water system.
Areas to be considered during the manufacturing investigation in response to endotoxin contamina-
tion are outlined in Table 5.2.2-1.
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 33

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 5.2.2-1 Endotoxin-Related Investigation Considerations
Focus Area Questions for Consideration
Is the water system operating in a state of control? Have there been any endotoxin excursions with the
water system? Have Gram-negative bacteria been recovered from the water system?
Were there any conditions within the manufacturing facilities that might favor proliferation of Gram-
Water System and Facility
negative bacteria (e.g., standing water, improperly stored process equipment, pumps, hosing, or a spray
bottle of water used for equipment lubrication)?
Have the compressed air or gas lines been checked for the presence of water?
Were pharmaceutical excipients and drug substances properly screened for endotoxin content? Historical
evidence has shown that raw materials, especially those from natural sources (i.e., animal- or plant-
derived materials), may be a potential source of endotoxin.
Raw Materials and
Have changes to starting materials or manufacturing processes been reported by the ingredient vendor
Components
that could impact endotoxin content of pharmaceutical ingredients?
Were all product contact materials, including processing equipment and primary packaging, properly
cleaned, depyrogenated, and stored to ensure they were free of detectable endotoxins?
Were laboratory test samples taken, transported, and stored correctly and following approved methods?
Have any process deviations occurred or manufacturing changes been implemented that could have
contributed to the deviation result (e.g., rinsing aseptic equipment with purified water instead of WFI,
water system filters that have not been replaced on schedule)?
Operations
Was the proper operation verified for any depyrogenation ovens or tunnels or endotoxin-removing
columns or filtration equipment used during product handling?
Were any contract manufacturers contacted regarding any changes to their processes that contact your
firm’s product material?
5.2.3 Pharmaceutical Ingredient-Related Investigations
Pharmaceutical ingredients contaminated by Gram-negative bacteria may result in endotoxin contami-
nation. Mold contamination could potentially lead to mycotoxin contamination. GMP requirements,
including those identified in 21 CFR 210, 21 CFR 211, and ICH Quality Guideline Q7, include
specific definitions as well as requirements for procedures for sampling and testing. Additionally, the
regulations recommend the need for risk-based approaches to pharmaceutical ingredient procurement,
testing, and inclusion in drug products (34, 43, 44).
Representative samples for microbiological testing of a pharmaceutical ingredient are taken from in-
dividual drums of the incoming shipment but the ingredient lots may not be well mixed. Creating
composite samples from the top, middle, and bottom of individual drums, or taking samples from
each individual drum may mask pockets of microbial contamination. Unless the warehouse sampling
occurs in a sampling booth, under controlled conditions, using trained personnel with the appropriate
PPE and sample containers, there is a potential for sample contamination.
With respect to the manufacturing investigation, a pharmaceutical company will probably not be
able to gain full access to details of the ingredient supplier’s manufacturing process or visit the manu-
facturing site to conduct an investigation, unless it is a requirement in the quality agreement. Many
pharmaceutical excipients are viewed as commodities that are supplied to other industries without
GMP compliance. Many excipient suppliers set their specifications based solely on the relevant USP
monograph requirements, which may not include microbial requirements. In addition, excipient sup-
pliers are largely unresponsive to the GMP requirement to exclude objectionable microorganisms from
nonsterile drug products (24, 45, 46). Table 5.2.3-1 provides a list of additional questions to consider
during a manufacturing investigation.
34 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 5.2.3-1 Additional considerations for raw material investigations
Raw Material Component Considerations
What size is the bulk container? Is it sampled top, middle, and bottom?
Is it a synthetic or mineral-, plant-, or animal-derived ingredient?
Is it provided for sterile or nonsterile drug product manufacture?
Format/Storage Is the raw material presented as a powder or liquid?
Does it contain a preservative? If so, are preservative effectiveness tests conducted or is an assay performed?
Was the raw material properly released from quarantine?
Were the temperature and humidity conditions maintained during shipping and storage?
Have there been any recent changes in suppliers or manufacturer?
Was the vendor qualification program followed? Are the audits current and passing?
What is the source/origin? Plant, animal, or biological materials (chemically undefined) are often at a
higher risk for contamination.
Vendor/Source What is the history of the material? Are the results trended? Has a drift from the mean been detected?
Have supplier and manufacturer risk assessments been completed based on the intended use?
Is a skip lot program in place? If so, should it be suspended?
Has the vendor’s certificate of analysis tests been verified on an annual basis?
Are the manufacturer’s specifications in compliance with compendial monographs?
Was the sampling plan followed upon receipt?
Were samples composited? Composited samples can potentially dilute the final results.
Is there a pharmacopeial monograph?
Is the sampling hood or room classified? Or controlled but not classified?
Were the proper sterile sampling devices and containers used?
Sampling For sterile processes:
– How are samples obtained?
– Are there side samples, or is the material sampled aseptically through a septum?
Were the established test frequencies/test-on-expiry maintained?
Are there reserve samples of the material or unused stock materials available for microbiological testing?
Are samples representative of the container/lot or could there be potential pockets of contamination in the
bulk material or hot spots?
As the deviation investigation progresses, answering these or similar questions can be useful in finding
the root cause. These questions can also be used in a product lifecycle approach for new raw materials,
or to build a proactive continuous improvement tool to manage contamination risk.
5.2.4 Evaluation of Confirmed Mycoplasma Contamination
Investigation should be conducted in a timely manner as mycoplasma contamination can interrupt
production and prove costly to the firm.
Common sources of mycoplasma contamination are master and secondary cell lines, raw materi-
als, and growth medium that has not been rendered sterile using a 0.1 µm filtration step. Attention
should be given to investigating these materials. The authentication, acquisition, banking, passage, and
cultivation history of the master cell bank and working cell lines should be reviewed, with particular
emphasis on certificates of analysis, certificates of origin, and the reported mycoplasma test results.
Testing additional samples from the working cell bank may be advisable. Human contact or contami-
nated cell culture media and reagents may contaminate cell banks, and a new working cell bank would
need to be established in order to continue production.
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 35

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Cell culture media is usually made mycoplasma-free by heat treatment, irradiation, antibiotic use, or
0.1 µm retention filtration. That these procedures are fully validated and documented should be verified.
The media, equipment sterilization, and handling of inoculum production must be as well controlled
as large-scale cell culture. The manufacturing batch records should be reviewed thoroughly, especially
noting manufacturing deviations and staffing changes. If available, retained production materials could
be tested using a rapid method to trace the potential source of the mycoplasma contamination (29).
When the mycoplasma are of human origin (Mycoplasma orale, M. fermentans, and M. hominis), human con-
tamination may likely play a role in the failure. Additional consideration should be given to species of myco-
plasma that are of animal or nonanimal origin (Acholeplasma laidlawii, M. hyorhinis, M. synoviae, and Spiroplas-
ma) as they may be indicative of contamination of specific growth media or additive growth components (46).
5.2.5 Component (Container Closure) Investigations
Some of the major causal factors of microbial contamination in primary packaging components that
threaten the sterility assurance of sterile drug products include the container (e.g., vial, cartridge, flex-
ible container, or syringe) and closure (e.g., syringe cap and plunger, stopper, seal). Specific microbial
tests have the potential to fail as a result of a defective container or closure system, such as the biobur-
den test, sterility test, process simulation media fill (turbid vial), container closure/seal integrity test,
and BET. Test failures can occur during initial component validation or revalidation testing, compo-
nent release testing, in-process monitoring, finished-product release testing, or stability testing. The
severity of the microbial test failure may depend on where the container–closure failure occurred. In
every case, a thorough review of the components, filling, and closure operations should be performed.
Involving the supplier early in the investigation is the best plan, as they can help provide data from the
manufacturer. A complete history will be needed that covers manufacture supply, storage, preparation,
sterilization, use, and final finished presentation in order to successfully complete the investigation.
5.2.5.1 Pharmaceutical Containers
Vials, cartridges, and syringes used for sterile products are regarded as primary containers. Each presenta-
tion has unique characteristics that must be considered during a microbial failure investigation. Upon
container receipt, a 100% inspection is not possible, both because of the destructive nature of functional
testing, the size of the incoming shipments, and the general reluctance to return quality samples to inven-
tory. Thus, acceptable quality-level attribute inspection plans are widely used for packaging components.
After the initial testing of packaging components for bioburden, endotoxin, and physical characteristics, a
defect inspection and certificate of analysis review is performed. Dimensional tests are important because
the necks of containers and closures form the barrier or seal that prevents microbiological and other con-
tamination ingress. Containers that are out of round, have seam or form defects, or have cracks can present
paths of ingress. Molded glass can be traced to a specific mold at the factory to identify recurring defects.
The initial concern is the physical state of the shipping containers, so an inspection for gross damage should
be performed. Shrink wrapping trays of containers will stabilize the shipment, prevent damage, and reduce
particulate contamination. Shipping cartons that are received infested, wet, crushed, or torn should be
rejected. Containers used during production of a product with a failed microbial test should be reviewed.
5.2.5.2 Pharmaceutical Closures
The most common closure for a sterile injectable product filled in a glass vial is an elastomeric stopper
and crimped aluminum seal. Syringes most commonly include a shielded needle and are sealed using
the rubber septum in the syringe plunger without a crimp seal. For cartridges, a combination crimp
seal is generally employed. Each presentation has unique challenges but, generally, the investigation
should follow the same path as that for containers. Special consideration should be given to the semi-
permeable nature of elastomers. A review of the sterilization process validation also may be useful.
Containers and closures can be purchased raw and unprocessed, ready-to-sterilize, and ready-to-use.
These different preparations should be considered during an investigation.
36 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.2.5.3 Component Contamination
Post-manufacture microbiological and environmental contamination can include nonviable particles, mi-
croorganisms, and bacterial endotoxins. Viruses are generally not a concern with nonanimal raw material
used to manufacture packaging components. In most cases, the high-heat extrusion process associated
with glass and elastomer manufacture is microbiologically unfavorable; however, environmental controls
in the manufacturing plant are often inadequate to maintain these conditions during sorting and packag-
ing for shipment. Downstream processing is required and must include rigorous processing controls.
5.2.5.4 Container–Closure Integrity
Physical deformation, damage, and out-of-tolerance dimensional specifications of both containers and closures
can result in sterile products becoming nonsterile through microbial ingress. Emphasis should be given to man-
ufacturing set-up, in-process controls, and container–closure testing at release and in stability programs. Failure
of the container–closure system and the inability to maintain microbial integrity should be fully investigated.
5.2.6 Environmental Monitoring
The pharmaceutical industry has many controlled and/or classified environments in which products
are manufactured, and the key to the success of an EM investigation is understanding these require-
ments and the possible sources of contamination. Out-of-level monitoring results can come from the
following types of environments:
• Classified cleanrooms for sterile product manufacturing
• Controlled or classified rooms for nonsterile product manufacturing
• Controlled or classified rooms for low bioburden product manufacturing (e.g., biologics)
• Laminar flow hoods, restrictive access barrier systems (RABS), and isolator systems used for
product manufacturing or finished-product release testing
This section will cover the potential sources of contamination, and points to consider when investigat-
ing out-of-level EM results. Eliminating the potential sources of contamination of the manufacturing
environment must be established by risk assessment during facility and program development. Mea-
sures for control, however, can be implemented based on the following key concepts:
• Minimize the entry of contaminants by incorporating good facility design, proper layout,
efficient material and personnel flow, and sound supplier controls
• Reduce contamination during the manufacturing process using well-developed process and
equipment controls
• Establish and maintain proper hygiene and PPE practices
• Institute appropriate aseptic techniques and cleanroom behaviors
• Assure a state of control through routine EM and analysis
Possible sources of contamination that may enter the manufacturing or testing environment are sum-
marized in Table 5.2.6-1 (48, 49).
Table 5.2.6-1 Potential Sources of Contamination
Source Example
Pharmaceutical Excipients Corn starch, dicalcium biphosphate, purified water
Air Supply Unfiltered air, turbulent air, mixed air
Building Materials Plastic, sheetrock, wood, metal, epoxy
Equipment Parts washers, hoses, air samplers, pallet jacks, transfer carts
Disinfectants Preparation, expiration, sterile (where appropriate)
Containers Storage totes, waste receptacles
Packaging Cardboard, gowning supplies, paper
Supplies Mops, wipes, labels, booties
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 37

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.2.6.1 Historical Data Evaluation
Reviewing historical data for adverse trends can be helpful to the investigation. Trending will consider
sample type, organism type, test type, classified area, operational shift, or seasonal pattern. Trending
can be both quantitative (i.e., count per unit surface area or air volume) or qualitative (i.e., frequency
of exceeding an action limit), as illustrated by these specific examples:
• Predefined number of consecutive alerts, actions, or contamination rates exceeded
• Same microorganism or related microorganisms isolated across multiple locations, monitoring
types, or rooms
• Mold or Gram-negative or Gram-positive spore-forming organisms recovered in the critical loca-
tions associated with a specific manufacturing process
5.2.6.2 Manufacturing Process Evaluation
The purpose of an EM program is to determine the adequacy of the environmental controls and the
aseptic technique of personnel in the manufacturing area. A well-maintained and well-operated facility
requires good facility design, operation, and maintenance; functional HVAC systems; temperature and
humidity control; supply of HEPA-filtered, laminar flow air; proper movement of materials, equip-
ment, and personnel; and a sound facility cleaning and sanitization program. If these requirements
are not maintained, control of the environment will be lost, and an EM excursion will occur. The
microbiologist on the investigation team must be experienced in EM and understand manufacturing
operations. Questions commonly asked during the manufacturing portion of an EM investigation are
outlined in Table 5.1-1.
Loss of environmental control in the cleanroom should be considered a potential source of microbial
contamination. Excursions in temperature, differential pressure gradients, humidity, nonviable par-
ticulate levels, and appropriate cleaning and disinfection activities can contribute to microbial con-
tamination in the cleanroom environment.
Microbial contamination can enter the manufacturing facility, including cleanrooms, in a variety of
ways; in fact, the most common cause of fungal spore and bacterial endospore contamination in clean-
rooms are items that enter the cleanroom. Some customary items include tools, processing equipment,
communication devices, boxes, carts, cleaning and sanitizing equipment, and batch records. Card-
board and other cellulose-based materials known to shed particles should never enter GMP-compliant
manufacturing areas. Items entering critical aseptic processing areas should first be double-wrapped,
unwrapped, and wiped down with a sporicidal agent.
The age and maintenance level of facilities can affect contamination rates in the cleanroom (50). Ceil-
ing tiles, HEPA-filter units, cleanroom flooring, materials of construction, drainage systems, and duct
work are areas of concern in aging facilities that may need to be kept on a routine schedule for repairs.
Drains in manufacturing facilities require routine disinfection with a sporicidal agent to prevent mi-
crobial proliferation.
Examples of CAPAs to remediate microbial contamination in the manufacturing facility are outlined
in Table 5.2.6.2-1
38 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 5.2.6.2-1 Examples of Corrective Actions
System Example of Corrective Action
• Review risk for product or component contact
• Inspect preventive maintenance records
Facility
• Reduce equipment or materials in the location
• Upgrade facility surface finishes, i.e., floors, doors, walls, and ceilings
• Increase the number of air exchanges in the area
• Lower temperature and humidity settings
HVAC System
• Repair or replace HEPA filters or housing grates
• Add low wall air returns to eliminate particles
• Reduce the number of operators in confined areas
• Reduce the number of operator interventions
Personnel
• Interview production staff for area improvement suggestions
• Retrain or requalify operators with improved techniques
5.2.6.3 Resampling or Investigational Monitoring
The need for additional monitoring to determine root cause (to confirm or exclude hypotheses with
regards to the root cause) should be considered early in the investigation to avoid losing time and to
ensure that microbiological results will be representative of the conditions.
Based on the type of manufacturing facility, the frequency for routine environmental monitoring
should be considered and a decision should be made as to whether resampling or investigational moni-
toring is warranted. Scenarios in which resampling may be useful include low frequency monitoring
locations and locations found as important during facility walk-throughs. If the isolate identified as
part of an EM excursion or routine sample is considered a unique microorganism (e.g., first time
recovered in the facility), some investigational monitoring may be warranted. At the discretion of the
QC microbiologist and in conjunction with approval from the QCU, additional locations may be
sampled, or specialized microbiological media may be utilized. For example, recovery of mold from the
wall, but not the floor, may suggest that sampling be conducted of nearby ceiling locations, adjacent
walls, and additional portions of the same wall, in order to determine the extent of the fungal colo-
nization in the room. Specific microbiological medium that may improve recovery and/or detection
of the unique microorganism(s) may be used in addition to the standard monitoring medium (e.g.,
Sabouraud dextrose agar may be useful in response to mold recoveries). SOPs should allow discretion-
ary sampling that may aid the investigation.
5.2.7 Investigation of Confirmed Contamination During A Process Simulation/Media Fill
Microorganisms isolated from turbid vials may originate from cleanroom personnel, equipment sur-
faces, walls and ceilings, floor drains, packaging materials, disinfectants, or materials transported into
the aseptic filling area. They may correspond to microorganisms isolated during EM and product ste-
rility testing. Table 5.2.7-1 contains a sample of representative microorganisms that, from task force
members’ experience, have been found in failing media fills and their possible origins. These microor-
ganisms were benchmarked against a recent review of cleanroom microorganisms (40).
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 39

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 5.2.7-1 Possible Origin of Representative Microorganisms
Possible Origin of Microorganisms Bacteria Yeast and Mold
Micrococcus luteus, M. lylae, Staphylococcus Candidia albicans, C. parapsilosis, Rhodotorula rubra,
epidermidis, S. hominis, Corynebacterium tuberculo- Torulopsis spp., Trichosporon cutaneum, Microsporum
Cleanroom Personnel
stearicum, S. capitis, S. warneri, S. hemolyticus, and gypseum, Trichophyton rubrum, Alternaria spp., Furarium
Cutibacterium acnes spp., Paecilomyces spp., Aspergillus flavus and Penicillium spp.
Laminar Flow Air and Bacillus spp., Paenibacillus spp. Alternaria spp., Aspergillus spp. (A. vesicular, A. niger, A.
Compressed Gases fumigatus), Cladosporium spp., Fusarium spp.
Bacillus spp., Paenibacillus spp. Alternaria spp., Aspergillus spp. (A. vesicular, A. niger, A.
Filling equipment
fumigatus), Cladosporium spp., Fusarium spp.
Bacillus spp., Paenibacillus spp. Alternaria spp., Aspergillus spp. (A. vesicular, A. niger, A.
Facility Curtains, Walls, and Ceilings
fumigatus), Cladosporium spp., Fusarium spp.
Packaging Material Bacillus spp., Paenibacillus spp. Penicillium spp., Aspergillus spp.
Burkholderia cepacia, Pseudomonas putida/ Alternaria spp., Aspergillus spp., and Cladosporium spp.
Improperly Made Disinfectants
fluorescens, and Flavimona oryzihabitans
Materials, Totes, and Carts Transported Bacillus spp., Paenibacillus spp. Alternaria spp., Aspergillus spp., Cladosporium spp., and
into the Aseptic Filling Area Fusarium spp.
The location of the turbid vial(s)within the time sequence of the media fill may aid the investigation.
Was the turbid vial from the beginning, middle, or end of the filling operation? A turbid vial from the
beginning of the fill may be the result of microbial contamination during aseptic assembling of the filling
pistons or needles at the filling station; from the middle of the fill, it may be associated with an operator
intervention, like clearing a conveyer belt of downed vials, conducting a periodic fill-volume check, or
replenishing the stopper hopper; from the end of the fill, it may be associated with poor aseptic practices
or a result of operation fatigue. If filled units are numbered sequentially or time-stamped, it may be pos-
sible to review the video of the media fill and determine if an event or intervention occurred and when
the individual media fill vial was contaminated. If the media fill cannot be videotaped, an observer should
log all events and interventions that occurred to aid an investigation or improve cleanroom practices.
5.2.8 Utilities Monitoring
If the initial laboratory investigation (Section 4.0) does not find a conclusive source of a laboratory er-
ror that explains the deviation, deviations related to pharmaceutical water systems should be examined.
Water is used in many ways in pharmaceutical manufacturing, and the required grade of water varies de-
pending upon how it is used. Compendia define the minimum quality attributes that each grade of water
must meet and may specify its method of preparation. Pharmaceutical water systems consist of several
components, including a water supply, a robust purification system that should consistently produce water
of the intended quality under a range of conditions, and the storage and distribution systems that assure
the water continues to meet all required quality attributes until it is delivered to the process. Together, the
design, installation, and qualification of the water system, as well as the procedures for its operation, use,
and maintenance, ensure the system consistently performs as intended and in a state of control.
The cross-functional team charged with investigating any deviation related to a water system should
be familiar with the potential risks associated with its design, installation, operation, use, and main-
tenance. This team also needs to understand both the value and the limitations of data derived from
system qualification and monitoring.
A monitoring plan should define the locations and frequency of sampling and the attributes for test-
ing. The plan should encompass the entire system, from the water supply to the points of use, and
relevant points in between on the generation, storage, and distribution systems. The sampling plan
should reflect the results of intensive sampling during qualification, recent historical data, risk factors,
40 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
and mitigations. Monitoring points should be carefully selected to ensure they provide the intended
information regarding control of the system, including the information needed to support the initial
investigation of a deviation at that point or at other points on the system.
Routine monitoring of the water generation, storage, and distribution systems verifies that they continue
to operate in a state of control, while monitoring at the points-of-use evaluates the quality of water deliv-
ered to the process. Points-of-use should be regularly sampled and tested (typically off-line) for chemical
attributes. These chemical measures can be a useful reference when conducting an investigation of a devia-
tion. Measurements taken before and after unit operations, such as carbon beds, deionizers, UV lights, and
reverse osmosis system, can provide data to assess whether they continue to function as expected.
Microbiological monitoring typically involves manual sample collection from a storage tank, a site on
the loop, or at a point of use; the transport, storage, and analysis of the sample; and, ultimately, the
recording, interpretation, and reporting of results. Each step should be carefully designed to minimize
potential errors and to ensure the reported result accurately reflects the condition of the material
sampled. In addition, several monitoring systems are available for at-line monitoring of microbial at-
tributes and, as with other instruments for the sampling and measurement of critical attributes, these
should be properly qualified. For additional guidance on monitoring plans, refer to PDA Technical
Report No. 13 Fundamentals of an Environmental Monitoring Program (4).
The approach to investigating the root cause of a deviation on a pharmaceutical water system should be
guided by the location and timing of the sample and by the test involved. If multiple deviations of the
same type and level are observed, a cause that affects the entire system is more likely. If the deviation is
not consistent with results from other contemporaneous samples, causes related to the sample point or
to sampling or testing may be suspected. Each water system deviation is unique, and its investigation
may consider factors related to the design, installation, operation, maintenance, change history, and
use of the system. The monitoring history, including past deviation investigations, related CAPAs, and
typical microbial flora of the system, will provide useful references.
In the case of a deviation for bioburden, the identity of the organism recovered is essential informa-
tion. Recovery of organisms that thrive in water and form biofilms may suggest one set of causes,
whereas recovery organisms that are not compatible with the water system may suggest another set of
causes, possibly related to environmental contamination.
Potable water is the starting ingredient for both purified water and WFI. Standards set by regional
authorities, at minimum, require potable water to be free of coliforms and to contain bioburden at a
specified level (e.g., ≤ 500 CFU/mL per USP <1231>), and they may define additional requirements.
Purified water must meet the compendial limits for conductivity, total organic carbon, and bioburden
(≤ 100 CFU/mL). WFI must meet the same physical and chemical criteria, as well as more stringent
microbiological criteria for bioburden (< 10 CFU/100 mL) and bacterial endotoxin (< 0.25 EU/mL).
The source and method of delivery of potable water can introduce significant risks to control of the water
system. Potable water quality may be affected by seasonal variations due to runoff of melting snow or pe-
riods of low precipitation. Agricultural or industrial runoff may enter surface water sources or aquifers. An
aging infrastructure may increase the chance of contamination entering the water supply via a damaged
water main (50). Likewise, water delivery via truck introduces a variety of risks that may vary from day to
day and truck to truck. The sampling and analysis plan for the potable water supply should consider the
risks related to the source and method of supply and should consider, in advance, the information needed
to investigate a deviation found in a sample from the potable water supply or from the system downstream.
Risks related to the design and installation of the water system should be identified and remediated
prior to qualification testing. System boundaries should provide an effective barrier to microbial con-
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 41

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
tamination, including microbial retentive filters on holding tanks and the use of appropriate elasto-
mers. Dead legs, as well as poor welds and other irregular surfaces, increase the risk of biofilm develop-
ment. Recent design standards specify that pipes branching off the main recirculation loop should not
exceed 1.5 times the pipe diameter, and the use of valves with no dead legs is now common.
Investigation of a deviation should include a review of system operations, including control of physi-
cal parameters, and results of nonmicrobiological monitoring of the system. Operational controls for
storage and distribution systems typically include parameters such as temperature, flow rate, and pres-
sure, and can show whether the system remained flooded or flowing and at the required temperature.
Additional parameters may be defined for pretreatment stages such as carbon beds, deionizers, and re-
verse osmosis systems. On-line, at-line, and off-line measurements of physical and chemical attributes
such as hardness, conductivity, and total organic carbon, provide near continuous data on chemical
attributes. They also allow prompt notification of an unexpected shift in performance, which can be
helpful in investigating deviations. The rate of water usage affects the stagnant time of water in the
system and may be related to the root cause.
The investigation of a deviation may include a review of routine and corrective maintenance records.
Invasive maintenance adds contamination risks, so measures to mitigate these risks and return the
system to service should be prepared in advance, whenever possible. Water system maintenance should
ensure the system remains integral and continues to operate in a state of control. A well-designed
program assures that the system boundaries continue to provide an effective barrier that prevents mi-
crobial contamination. Measures should include periodic replacement of key parts, such as elastomers
and vent filters on holding tanks, as the failure of these elements can open the system to the external
environment. The investigation of a deviation should also consider the potential for wear and damage
to durable parts such as piping. Pipes may thin over time, and damage can occur due to unplanned
events such as hydraulic shock. Water leaks should be repaired promptly to reduce the opportunity for
contamination; however, the investigation of a deviation should recognize that not all leaks, a small
leak of cooling water through a cracked heat exchanger tube, for example, are easily detected.
Practices for operation of the sample or use port should be considered, especially if the deviation is not
consistent with other results. Flushing prior to sampling (and use) is important to physically remove the
opportunistic organisms found on hoses, sampling apparatus, or the sample port. Use procedures should
ensure that dead legs are not created through the use of valves between the water system and points
downstream. Hoses should be removed when not in use and should be stored in a free-draining position.
5.2.8.1 Compressed Gasses
Compressed gasses used during the manufacturing and testing of pharmaceutical products are air, ni-
trogen, oxygen, and carbon dioxide. Inappropriate design and piping for distribution of these gaseous
materials can introduce unwanted microorganisms. Pharmaceutical-grade compressed air is treated
to remove moisture, and chemical residue like lubricants and point-of-use sterilizing-grade filters are
employed. The introduction of uncontrolled water moisture or inadequately filtered compressed gas,
coupled with poorly designed pretreatment and sanitization processes of the gas delivery systems, can
adversely affect the system and lead to product contamination. The types of methodologies used for
testing the microbial presence within these systems are important because when finished pharmaceuti-
cal products are found adulterated, the eventual investigation by the QCU will need to find the source
of the contamination or, at least, eliminate the possibility that it was from a compressed gas.
Even though these utility systems have been qualified to perform as designed, the materials used dur-
ing their construction may contain unexpected component defects (i.e., poor welding or incomplete
passivation), as well as presenting potential ingress of grease and oils used for equipment lubrication.
In addition, the metals and plastics may deteriorate over time, causing breaches or leaks in the plumb-
ing materials or in components connected to the pipes (e.g., gauges, shut-off valves).
42 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
