1.0 Introduction
Microbial data deviations are microbial test results that fall outside the product specification or ac-
ceptance criterion established in a drug application, drug master file, official compendia, good manu-
facturing practice regulations, or internally by the manufacturer. This includes, but is not limited to,
results generated during environmental and water monitoring as well as pharmaceutical ingredient,
in-process, and finished product testing. The validity of the test results is supported by a documented
laboratory and manufacturing investigation, where applicable.
The information presented in this technical report was compiled by a team of experts representing
both industry microbiologists and regulators and reflects current industry best practices. The mem-
bership of personnel from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on the task force does not
imply Agency endorsement. Feedback from industry and regulatory professionals was evaluated and
incorporated into the technical report to ensure that the suggested methods, terminology, and prac-
tices for conducting microbial data deviation investigations reflect sound science and current tech-
nological approaches. This technical report is not intended to establish any mandatory or implied
standards. Published references supporting the recommendations presented are cited in the text and
listed in Section 7.0 References.
Definitions for the terms used throughout this report are provided in the Glossary. When available,
the same or similar technical definitions have been used as those included in the FDA or Interna-
tional Conference on Harmonization (ICH) guidelines. To avoid ambiguity, the task force members
believe that use and definitions of these terms should also be consistent and standardized when incor-
porated into company-specific standard operating procedures, validation protocols, and regulatory
submissions.
1.1 Purpose
The FDA issued a Guidance for Industry: Investigating Out of Specification (OOS) Test Results for Phar-
maceutical Production in 2006 in response to the U.S. versus Barr Laboratories decision, which is
applicable to laboratory testing results for products regulated by the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research (CDER) (1, 2). The FDA guidance does not extend to microbiological failure investigations,
however. Consequently, PDA developed this technical report to provide approaches, specific to the
pharmaceutical industry, for investigating various types of microbial data deviations based on current
scientific knowledge and modern testing technologies. The term “microbial data deviation” is preferred
to “out-of-specification” or “out-of-limit result” in this technical report, as most microbiological tests,
especially in a sterile product manufacturing facility, are in-process tests, not finished- product tests
that must meet a regulatory-approved specification. For simplicity and consistency, the term “devia-
tion” will be used throughout this document.
Technical Report No. 88 presents a holistic approach for performing a microbiological investiga-
tion. It provides a framework to assist with focusing on the investigational areas that may contain or
contribute to the root cause of data deviations, such as sampling, test methodology, and suitability
of the test, as opposed to providing methods for analysis of batch acceptability. (Batch acceptability
determinations and release decisions are made by the quality control unit as required by FDA good
manufacturing practice (GMP) regulations, not by deviation investigation teams.)
1.2 Scope
Each of the three sections of this document focuses on distinct areas where microbial data is collected
and inspected for deviation investigations and with the following designated responsibilities:
Roles and Responsibilities—Focuses on personnel, especially microbiologists, in the labora-
tory investigations and cross-functional teams responsible for manufacturing investigations.
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 1

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Conducting Laboratory Investigations (Phase I)—Provides additional details on how an
investigation may be conducted to determine that the microbial test was valid and what is the root
cause of a failure when the result is deemed invalid. Subsections focus on different microbiologi-
cal tests conducted, with points for consideration in the final determination of the investigation.
Conducting Manufacturing Investigations (Phase II)—Illustrates where a microbiologist,
acting as a subject matter expert (SME), can contribute to the evaluation of personnel activities,
environmental changes, utilities, materials, and process-related events and can assist in determin-
ing the probable cause of the deviation and the most appropriate corrective and preventive actions
(CAPA).
If needed and when appropriate, Phase I and Phase II investigation activities can be conducted in
parallel.
The roles of other contributors to deviation investigations required for effective root cause analysis,
such as representatives from manufacturing, process engineering, and quality assurance, will also be
briefly described. The composition of the investigation team will depend on the nature of the inves-
tigation.
This technical report promotes a lifecycle approach, but greater emphasis is placed on laboratory and
manufacturing investigations of marketed drug products. The approaches described may be suitable
during research and product development and the manufacture of clinical supplies, as well as the
manufacture and testing of regulatory-approved products. The microbial tests discussed in this techni-
cal report include microbial attribute testing of nonsterile products, components, sterility testing, bac-
terial endotoxin assay, mycoplasma testing, environmental and personnel monitoring, and microbial
monitoring of utilities including pharmaceutical-grade water and compressed gases.
Microbial assays of antibiotics and vitamins and the detection and enumeration of protozoans, vi-
ruses, and prions are not included in the scope of this report. Additionally, batch disposition is
separate from the outcome of a microbial investigation report. This document is directed specifically
to pharmaceutical manufacturing; however, the industry practices may be suitable for deviation in-
vestigations in the biological, consumer health, medical devices, and cosmetic industries. In addition,
these can be extended to contract manufacturing and testing organizations supporting pharmaceuti-
cal companies.
While this document provides a framework illustrating how deviations and the resulting investigations
might be conducted, each company is responsible for developing their internal policies and procedures
suitable for its specific needs that also meets current GMPs.
2.0 Glossary of Terms
Action Limit Alert Level
A microbial or total airborne particulate limit An established value that when exceeded, provides
that, when exceeded, indicates a process is out- an early warning of potential drift from normal
side of its normal operating range. A response to operating conditions and validated state, which
such an excursion should involve a documented does not necessarily give grounds for corrective ac-
investigation and corrective actions based on the tion but triggers appropriate scrutiny and follow-
results of that investigation (3-6). up to address the potential problem (3,4,7).
2 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Adverse Trend Drug Product
An increase in the frequency of alert level or ac- A finished dosage form, for example, tablet, cap-
tion limit excursions or repeated recovery of low sule, or solution, that contains a drug substance,
levels of microorganisms below the alert level generally, but not necessarily, in association with
during microbial monitoring or of pharmaceuti- one or more other ingredients (9).
cal ingredient or finished product failure that is
indicative of a loss of process control. Environmental Monitoring Excursion
Monitoring for nonviable particulates and/or
Batch Record Review microorganisms where the result meets or ex-
Review by the quality control unit of the batch ceeds the alert level or action limit.
manufacturing record for accuracy and com-
pleteness and for absence of derivation from the Excipients
approved manufacturing and testing processes. Inactive pharmaceutical ingredients in a drug
The batch record is inclusive of all in-process product responsible for its manufacturability
testing and release records for a batch. and physicochemical attributes.
Continuous Improvement Impact Analysis
Ongoing activities to evaluate and positively Determination of how a product failure may
change products, processes, and the quality sys- extend an investigation “to other batches of the
tem to increase effectiveness. same drug product and other drug products that
may have been associated with the specific failure
Correction or discrepancy” (10).
Repair, rework, or adjustment relating to the dis-
position of an existing deviation. Invalid Result
Laboratory test result confirmed to be invalid as
Corrective Action determined by a laboratory investigation.
Action taken to eliminate the causes of an exist-
ing deviation or other undesirable situation to Invalid Test
prevent recurrence. Laboratory test that, as a result of the laboratory
(Phase I) investigation, did not meet the test
Corrective and Preventive Actions (CAPA) method requirements and whose results would
A subsystem used to collect and analyze information, not be deemed valid. This may also apply to a
identify and investigate product and quality prob- test which was aborted (e.g. breakdown of isola-
lems, and take appropriate and effective measures to tor during sterility testing).
prevent recurrence of the identified problem (8).
Error, Laboratory
Cross-Functional Team A self-evident documented mistake that will bring
An investigatory team, comprising representa- the validity of a laboratory test into question.
tives including QCU microbiologists, manufac-
turing, engineering, and maintenance personnel, Error, Manufacturing
and other appropriate SMEs, with the purpose A self-evident documented mistake that will
of conducting a manufacturing investigation. bring the manufacturing process into question.
Deviation Microbial Data Deviation
Data or a result outside of the expected range or A microbial test result that deviates from ap-
an unfulfilled requirement; it may be called non- proved specifications or in-process limits.
conformity, defect, discrepancy, out-of-specifica-
tion, out-of-limit, or adverse trend. Out-of-Level Result (Out-of-Limit
Result)
Drug Substance Any unexplained deviation or result that failed
Active pharmaceutical ingredient in a drug prod- to meet set levels for environmental monitoring
uct responsible for its therapeutic activity. and other utilities.
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 3

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Out-of-Specification Result Right First Time
Any unexplained deviation or the failure of a The percentage of the time that a manufactur-
pharmaceutical ingredient, drug substance, or ing process step, batch record, or in-process or
drug product batch to meet any of its regulatory- laboratory test is successfully completed on the
release and shelf-life specifications. first attempt.
Quality Control Unit Risk
An organizational element within a pharmaceu- The combination of the probability of the occur-
tical company with the authority and responsi- rence of harm and the severity of that harm to
bility for quality as defined by 21 CFR 211.22 the recipient of a drug product.
(11). The quality control unit typically com-
prises the quality control and quality assurance Risk Assessment
functions. A systematic process of organizing information
to support decisions to be made within a risk
Quality Risk Management management process consisting of the identifica-
A systematic process for the assessment, control, tion of hazards and the analysis and evaluation of
communication, and review of risks to the qual- risks associated with exposure to those hazards.
ity of the drug (medicinal) product across the
product lifecycle. Specifications
A list of tests, references to analytical procedures,
Recall and appropriate acceptance criteria that are nu-
An action taken by a firm to remove a product merical limits, ranges, or other criteria for the
from the market. Recalls may be conducted test described. It establishes the set of criteria to
through a firm’s own initiative, by health author- which a material should conform to be consid-
ity request, or by health authority order under ered acceptable for its intended use.
their statutory authority.
2.1 Abbreviations/Acronyms
BET Bacterial Endotoxin Test PPE Personnel Protection Equipment
CAPA Corrective and Preventive Actions QA Quality Assurance
DMF Drug Master File QC Quality Control
EM Environmental Monitoring QCU Quality Control Unit
OOL Out-of-Level/Out-of-Limit SME Subject Matter Expert
OOS Out-of-Specification
4 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
3.0 Microbiologist Roles and Responsibilities
3.1 Laboratory Microbiologist Responsibilities
The principal responsibility for achieving accurate laboratory testing results resides with the analyst
performing the microbiological test. Recognition of potential practices that could create invalid results
should be an integral part of the laboratory analyst’s training. The analyst is responsible for performing
all testing according to standard operating procedures (SOP) and in-house documentation practices.
The analyst should only use qualified, calibrated, and well-maintained laboratory instruments and
equipment and approved growth media, diluents, and reagents.
The analyst should check the product test results for compliance with their specifications before dis-
carding test preparations, whenever practical. If any potential or suspected laboratory errors occurred
during testing, the analyst must discontinue testing immediately and notify their laboratory manage-
ment. The analyst, with guidance and instruction from the laboratory management, must collect and
retain all test samples, reagents, consumables, paperwork, and any other relevant materials related to
the affected assay, even if the test is deemed invalid, to aid the laboratory investigation. If errors are
clear and indisputable, such as atypical appearance of a test sample (e.g., unexpected particulate matter
present), damaged test container, test sample spillage, use of wrong pipetting volumes, missing dilu-
tion steps, aseptic handling missteps, or use of the wrong testing medium, the analyst should immedi-
ately document the event. When in doubt, the analyst may consult with the laboratory management
to confirm that the test should be discontinued.
The analyst should not knowingly continue a test that they expect to invalidate at a later time for an
assignable cause (i.e., analyses should not be completed for the sole purpose of seeing that a passing
result can be obtained when obvious errors are known). In addition, the analyst is responsible for as-
sisting management with the laboratory investigation.
3.2 Microbiologist Role in a Manufacturing Investigation
The key to successful manufacturing investigations of microbial testing failures with pharmaceutical
ingredients and finished drug products is the inclusion of an experienced microbiologist as an SME
on the manufacturing investigation team. This microbiologist may work in the quality control (QC)
microbiology testing laboratory at the manufacturing site, the quality control unit (QCU), product
development, or a corporate microbiology support group. Ideally, the microbiologist should have a
comprehensive knowledge of product formulation and specific manufacturing operations, obtained
from frequent shop-floor visits or surveillance of the overall process. For smaller organizations, with-
out internal microbiological expertise, the microbiologist may be an outside consultant. To be truly
effective, the SME must be a trained microbiologist with broad experience in microbiological investi-
gations. Furthermore, it would be advantageous if the SME is familiar with the actual product impli-
cated in the failure. Without this expertise on the investigation team, it is less likely that the root cause
of the failure can be determined, and the investigation may be hampered or severely limited.
The microbiologist should be engaged in the investigation as soon as is practical, as microbiological
investigations are always time-sensitive.
The microbiologist should be part of the first step in an investigation, such as performing a walk-
through of the manufacturing area, to become oriented and identify situations and events that are
nonroutine and may be directly linked to the deviation. To be successful, the microbiologist must
have access to all related testing results, have the cooperation of manufacturing managers, supervisors,
operators, and support personnel, and have the authority to interview staff, inspect processing equip-
ment, take investigatory microbial samples, and review change control and batch records. In some
instances, access to customer complaint records may be necessary. For failures related to purchased
pharmaceutical ingredients, it is highly desirable that a microbiologist join any audit team visiting the
ingredient supplier to conduct an investigational review.
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 5

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Systematic, proactive risk assessments for assessing the overall aseptic manufacturing process and con-
trols have been proven helpful in identifying potential weaknesses in advance, and may mitigate the
occurrence of a deviation, for example, sterility failures and endotoxin or environmental monitoring
(EM) excursions (12).
3.3 Microbiology Laboratory Management Responsibilities
Upon notification by a laboratory analyst of a suspected laboratory error, the laboratory management
must conduct an objective assessment to determine if an error has occurred. Data should be reviewed
promptly to ensure the contemporaneous memory of events and to determine if the results might be
attributed to an isolated or systematic laboratory error. In the absence of laboratory error, a confirmed
valid test could indicate problems in the manufacturing operations; however, all facts need to be evalu-
ated before predetermining a cause. The correct compliance assumption is that the results are valid
until proven otherwise.
Laboratory management should ensure that the probable cause is supported by evidence, using root
cause analysis tools when appropriate (e.g., 5 Whys, Ishikawa/fishbone diagram). Laboratory manage-
ment should promptly notify the QCU and any impacted departments of the suspected deviation and
inform them that a laboratory investigation has been initiated and when it might be completed.
If testing is conducted by a contract testing laboratory, the quality agreement between the contract
testing laboratory and the manufacturer should clearly assign responsibilities, include a timeline, and
specify the requirements of the laboratory investigation.
3.4 Subject Matter Expert Responsibilities
SMEs can support the investigation by providing technical assistance related to the assay methods and
technologies utilized, designing any investigational testing, and providing general scientific guidance,
as needed. This expert could have greater experience and scientific background related to the assay or
manufacturing process from within the company. Hiring a qualified outside consultant may also be
an option.
3.5 Quality Control Unit Responsibilities
The QCU oversees all aspects of the microbial deviation investigation. A QCU representative or other
approved personnel would be responsible for coordinating with the cross-functional team involved in
supporting the investigation, including personnel from manufacturing, facilities, calibration, valida-
tion; approving any laboratory retesting plans; and approving the laboratory and manufacturing inves-
tigations. The QCU also would be responsible for overseeing quality agreements made with contract
testing laboratories and for ensuring that microbial deviation investigations are adequately addressed.
6 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
