1.0  Introduction
The distribution of life science products is extremely diverse, ranging from raw materials to finished 
product through the supply chain to the end user. Typically, as the distribution process moves from 
shipments on pallets to individual packages to delivery to the end patient, the term “Last Mile” is 
applied. The Last Mile defines the point at which products have reached their final destination (e.g., 
pharmacy, medical practice, private residence). Product temperature must continue to be maintained 
within registered storage and/or transport conditions. This may include shipments from a wholesale 
distributor to a pharmacy where the products are held awaiting customer pick-up or, as the Last Mile 
process has become an even more complex system, home delivery of products that also include cell 
and gene therapy. 
1.1	
Purpose
This technical report provides guidance for establishing a quality management system for distribu-
tion of all types of temperature-sensitive medicinal and pharmaceutical products, from preparation of 
products for transportation at shipping sites to the shipment of products to receiving sites for storage 
or distribution to patients (end users). 
The examples accompanying the points to consider provided herein on how to protect the quality of 
the product are for demonstrational purposes only. 
1.2	
Scope
This technical report offers a resource for all stakeholders involved in the pharmaceutical supply chain 
and provides a model for qualifications from the process design through implementation and opera-
tion to verification. The stakeholders include, but are not limited to, the following organization types: 
• 
Pharmaceutical and biotech companies of commercial and clinical medicinal products, including 
manufacturers, contract manufacture organizations (CMOs), and repackagers 
• 
Health care providers (HCPs) 
• 
Logistic service providers 
• 
Wholesalers 
• 
Distributors (including subcontractors) 
• 
Pharmacies, including mail order, infusion, specialty, and compounding pharmacies 
• 
503B pharmacies currently in the United States 
• 
Nongovernmental organizations such as the United Nations International Children’s Emergency 
Fund (UNICEF) and Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) 
The stakeholders referenced are responsible and accountable for the processes that control the han-
dling, transport, and storage of the product from the point of manufacture to distribution to the 
patient. The stakeholders need to work closely with the manufacturers who have all the stability data 
and knowledge necessary to evaluate the excursion. 
The content of this document follows the sequence of the model provided in Figure 1.0-1, covering 
process design, process qualification, and ongoing process verification for thermal protection systems 
in the pharmaceutical supply chain.
Note: Numerous technical reports from PDA and other organizations exist that provide more detail 
regarding temperature control management. These are listed in the reference Section 9.0. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
Figure 1.0-1	 Qualification Process Flow and Key Deliverables
Process Design
User Requirement Specifications
• Product (primary and 
secondary package)
• Shipping solution
• Stability data (PDA TR 53)
• Mode of transportation
• Route/lane(s)
• Temperature profile(s)
• Regulations
Distribution Risk Assessment (PDA TR 58)
Process 
Qualification
Validation Master Plan (VMP)
Design Qualification
IQ/Operational Qualification
Performance Qualification
Qualification plan complete
Shipping control strategy
Control strategy (qualification criteria) (PDA TR 64 and TR 72)
Ongoing 
Process 
Verification
Quality Management System
• Process (SOP)
• Monitoring
• Training
• Stakeholder management (LSP, SLA, Quality Agreement)
• Management of Nonconformances
• Complaints
• Periodic Quality and Business Review
• Change control (Supplier, Shippers, LSP/Carrier, Customer)
2.0  Glossary 
The terms and definitions below are in common use within the industry and represent industry best 
practices in the experiences of the technical report team.
503B Pharmacy 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
created this designation to, “recognize the differ-
ences between outsourcing facilities and conven-
tional drug manufacturers, while maintaining the 
minimal standards necessary to protect patients 
from the risks of contaminated or otherwise sub-
standard compounded drug products.” US Phar-
macies with this designation must comply with 
State Board of Pharmacy guidelines.
Acceptance Criteria
Predefined criteria that must be met by testing; 
numerical limits, ranges, or other suitable mea-
sures for acceptance of test results.
Ambient Temperature Profile 
The temperatures selected to simulate the an-
ticipated and experienced extremes used to chal-
lenge a thermal protection system in a testing 
chamber.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
3
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Corrective Action/Preventive Action 
(CAPA)
A corrective action is taken to eliminate the root 
cause of a nonconformance and prevent recur-
rence. A preventive action is meant to eliminate 
the cause of a potential nonconformance or 
another potential undesirable situation (hence, 
aimed at preventing an occurrence).
Conditioning/Preconditioning
The process to bring the payload or a thermal 
protection system component(s) to a specified 
temperature condition by keeping it for a given 
period of time in the conditioning environment. 
Data Acquisition System
A combination of sensors, measurement hardware, 
and software used to measure physical conditions 
that convert the results into digital numeric values. 
Data acquisition systems are used in thermal pro-
tection system qualification to measure tempera-
ture using, for example, thermocouples.
Data Loggers
Measurement instrument that is capable of re-
cording temperature over a defined period of 
time based on memory capacity. The data can be 
retrieved, reviewed, and stored for accept/reject 
decision-making along with analysis of route.
Design Qualification (DQ)
Tests or assessments that are performed prior to 
operational qualification to ensure that the user 
requirements are met by the proposed thermal 
protection system.
Equilibration Time
The duration required for a thermal protection sys-
tem with product load to reach the required product 
temperature range within the thermal requirements.
Indicators
A measurement instrument capable of compar-
ing environmental conditions (e.g., temperature) 
to alarm settings to determine if those settings 
have been exceeded. Limited data may be stored. 
Installation Qualification (IQ)
The process of obtaining and documenting evi-
dence that the premises, equipment, and/or sup-
porting systems have been provided and installed 
in compliance with their design specifications.
Logistics Service Provider (LSP)
Providers that contribute to the transportation 
and storage/distribution process including but 
not limited to carriers, integrators, forwarders, 
and custom brokers. LSP’s may contract aspects 
of the logistics process to Subcontractors.
Management Review
A formal, documented review of the quality sys-
tem’s performance executed periodically at senior 
management level according to a planned schedule.
Mechanical Testing (also Distribution 
Testing, Physical Testing, or Dynamic 
Testing)
Testing that demonstrates and documents, with 
a high degree of assurance, the ability of a ther-
mal protection system to withstand the distribu-
tion environment in compliance with the user 
and design requirements. Some typical examples 
are shock, drop, impact, compression, and vibra-
tion testing.
Nonconformance
Any unexpected and/or unwanted deviation 
from established processes, procedures, regula-
tion, laws, requirements, standards, or specifica-
tions including but not limited to temperature, 
anomalous trends, and quality system failures. 
Operational Qualification (OQ)
Testing that demonstrates and documents, with 
a high degree of assurance, that a system consis-
tently performs as intended under the anticipat-
ed shipping conditions in compliance with the 
user and design requirements. 
Pack-Out
The detailed instructions on how to precondi-
tion and assemble the packaging system with the 
payload to be shipped. With a seasonal pack-out 
configuration, the preconditioning and assembly 
may change depending on the time of year, am-
bient temperatures, and/or transportation lane. 
A universal pack-out configuration remains un-
changed throughout the year. 
Passive Thermal Protection System 
(see Thermal Protection Systems, 
Passive Payload (also Product Load))
The variable amount of product to be trans-
ported in the thermal protection system, which 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
includes the combination of cases, cartons, and 
product assembled to be packed inside the ve-
hicle. It may also refer to the volume of the space 
defined for product within the passive thermal 
protection system.
Performance Qualification (PQ)
Transport tests of the thermal packaging system 
and process that are conducted in the representa-
tive transportation or distribution environment by 
those who will be executing the day-to-day ship-
ping process. The PQ serves to demonstrate that 
the qualified system is effective and reproducible. 
Phase Change Material (PCM)
A physical material that absorbs energy when 
melting and releases thermal energy when freez-
ing. PCMs are used in thermal protection sys-
tems to absorb or release heat energy from the 
external environment and maintain the desired 
temperature range of a packaging system. Dry 
ice is a type of phase change material. PCMs are 
also commonly called refrigerants, coolants, gel 
packs, bricks, and ice. 
Placebo Product (also Mock, 
Simulated, or Dummy Product)
A placebo product is used to replace the actual 
product during qualification. Rather than use 
expensive pharmaceutical products, a placebo 
product provides a cost-effective way to test 
cold-chain solutions during the qualification 
process. The placebo product should imitate as 
closely as possible the dimensions and thermal 
behavior of the actual product and its packaging 
(primary and secondary). Preliminary tests may 
be necessary to prove that the placebo product is 
an acceptable emulation of the real product and 
its packaging (primary and secondary) that will 
be shipped in the qualified solution. 
Proportional Integral Derivative (PID) 
Controller
The control loop mechanism that provides feed-
back on the performance of the thermal testing-
chamber control system.
Qualification
Documented testing that demonstrates, with a 
high degree of assurance, that a process or system 
will function to meet its predetermined accep-
tance criteria.
Shipper
An individual or company that tenders products for 
transportation (common term also used to identify 
a package containing products to be shipped). 
Stability Budget
A stability budget considers the results of long-
term, accelerated, extreme excursion, and tem-
perature cycling studies to determine the amount 
of time out of storage that a drug product may ex-
perience without any significant risk to its quality. 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
A written set of step-by-step instructions that de-
scribe the requirements necessary to complete an 
activity, task, or process.
Subcontractor 
An entity that takes a portion of a contract from 
the principal contractor such as an LSP or from 
another subcontractor. 
Temperature Excursion 
An event in which product is exposed to tem-
peratures outside of the recommended storage 
and/or transport temperature range. 
Thermal Protection System (TPS)
Any active or passive temperature control system for 
the distribution of temperature-sensitive products. 
Active Thermal Protection System
A temperature-controlled container with refrig-
eration and/or heating capabilities and its asso-
ciated calibrated temperature-control devices. 
This term includes commonly used contain-
ers like temperature-controlled trucks/trailer, 
temperature-controlled ocean containers, and 
active-unit load devices for airfreight.
Passive Thermal Protection System
An insulated container that, when assembled, will 
provide thermal protection for its payload from out-
side temperatures. It comprises a set of components 
including an insulated container, spacers, dunnage, 
shipping refrigerants (e.g., gel pack, gel brick, dry 
ice), packaging, and product payload configured in 
a specific manner to function as a qualified temper-
ature-controlled system for a specified duration.
Transportation Lane
The two points that define the origin and desti-
nation for a shipment.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Transportation Route
The origin, in-transit, and destination points for 
a shipment.
User Requirements Specifications (URS)
Defines the users’ critical parameters of the 
product, packaging, and transport system for the 
qualification process.
Validated Equipment
Validated equipment is used to conduct opera-
tional qualifications (OQ) including, but not lim-
ited to, thermal test chambers and data acquisition 
systems. In addition to OQ, equipment validation 
typically includes installation qualification (IQ), 
performance qualification (PQ), and periodic re-
validation. Validated thermal test chambers should 
include an active preventive maintenance schedule. 
Data acquisition systems should include periodic 
calibrations to NIST or other accepted industry 
standards. For both validated and calibrated test 
equipment, the time between validation and/or cal-
ibration should be defined by predetermined time 
intervals documented by an internal procedure.
Validation Master Plan 
A master plan is used to outline and define the val-
idation scope, practices, and requirements that will 
assure the drug substance and drug product will 
retain all critical quality attributes as they move 
through their respective supply chains. This plan 
includes, for example, the qualification of the 
packaging, the choice between active and passive 
shipping containers, the route chosen, the weather 
and traffic conditions anticipated, and the selection 
and location of temperature monitoring devices.
2.1	
Abbreviations
CAPA
Corrective Action/Preventive Action
CMO
Contract Manufacture Organizations
DQ
Design Qualification 
HCP
Health Care Providers
IQ
Installation Qualification
LSP
Logistics Service Provider 
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
OQ
Operational Qualification 
PAHO
Pan American Health Organization 
PCM
Phase Change Material
PID
Proportional Integral Derivative
PQ
Performance Qualification
SLA
Service Level Agreement
SOP
Standard Operating Procedure
TPS
Thermal Protection System
TTI
Time Temperature Indicator 
UNICEF
United Nations International Children’s 
Emergency Fund 
URS
User Requirements Specifications
VMP
Validation Master Plan
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
