6.0 
Conclusion 
This technical report provides guidance for establishing a process for the qualification of distribution 
of temperature-sensitive medicinal and pharmaceutical products. It offers a resource for all involved 
stakeholders in the pharmaceutical supply chain, providing a model for qualifications from the process 
design through implementation and operation to verification including the shipment preparation of 
the products and thermal protection systems, their transportation and arrival at the receiving site for 
storage and further distribution to the patient (end user). 
The technical report addresses “what” is needed to qualify thermal protection systems and processes, 
but not the “how” as this may vary depending on local regulations, business requirements, and product 
characteristics. By applying the guidance provided in this technical report, the reader will ensure that 
product quality is maintained during the distribution through the pharmaceutical supply chain in 
compliance with current regulatory expectations.
7.0 
References 
1.	 E.J. van Asselt et al. (2017). Pharma re-
quirements for temperature-controlled trail-
ers, Journal Pharmaceutical Outsourcing, 
Volume 18, Issue 4, Jul/Aug, 2017, 12-19.
2.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Techni-
cal Report No. 58: Risk Management for 
Temperature-Controlled Distribution; PDA: 
Bethesda, Md., 2012; p 73.
3.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Re-
port No. 54: Implementation of Quality Risk 
Management For Pharmaceutical and Bio-
technology Manufacturing Operations; PDA: 
Bethesda, Md., 2012; p 62.
4.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Manage-
ment; ICH: Geneva, 2005.
5.	 International Safe Transit Association. ISTA 
7D: Temperature Test for Transport Packag-
ing (Editorial Change, 2013); ISTA: East 
Lansing, Mich., 2007.
6.	 International Safe Transit Association. ISTA 
7E: Testing Standard for Thermal Transport 
Packaging Used in Parcel Delivery System 
Shipment; ISTA: East Lansing, Mich., 
2010.
7.	 Majic, Z., Van Asselt, E.J. & Bishara, R. H.: 
Pharma by Air: Equipment Qualification 
and Route Risk Assessment. Journal Pharma-
ceutical Outsourcing, Volume 17, Issue 5, Sep/
Oct, 2016, 26-31.
8.	 Van Asselt, E. J., Zvonimir, M, Bishara, R. H., 
and Stener, E.: Qualification of Pharmaceutical 
shipping Systems in seven Steps. Pharmaceutical 
Manufacturing and Packaging Source (PMPS), 
May 2020 Edition, pp.56 – 59.
9.	 International Safe Transit Association. ISTA 
Standard 20 (Revision 2.0): Design and 
Qualification of Insulated Shipping Contain-
ers (ISC); ISTA: East Lansing, Mich., 2014.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
18
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
8.0 
Case Studies
These studies have been included as examples of an approach to Qualification of storage and transport 
systems, but not to the exclusion of other approaches.
8.1	
Case Study 1: Distribution Incident Trends Analysis
CAPAs should be created for major and critical distribution deviations that have an impact on the 
product quality, for example, temperature excursions with product impact or product damages.
For events and minor deviations that happen in the distribution environment, CAPAs are not manda-
tory, as there is no impact on product quality and integrity as defined by the documented procedure.
The objective of monthly trend analysis is to confirm CAPAs opened for major and critical devia-
tions and to prioritize CAPAs according to destinations with the highest reported number of minor 
deviations.
For every deviation reported, follow the checklist on page 19 (Figure 8.1-1).
8.2	
Case Study 2: Passive Shipper SOPs
When using passive shippers, the assembly diagram, photos, and a description should be included 
within either the SOP or protocol. As with a puzzle, the multiple pieces must be assembled correctly. A 
written description of the process to assemble a passive shipper must accompany the diagram. Training 
should be completed and documented for all employees who will assemble passive shippers. Retraining 
schedules should be developed and maintained. Audits need to be performed on the accuracy of the 
passive shipper assembly. Random checks may be done after a passive shipper has been assembled and 
finalized. The Quality Unit should randomly select shippers and open them to verify proper assembly.
Transport modes need to be defined prior to the execution of any qualification. A carrier quality 
agreement may be helpful to understand exactly how logistic service providers and freight forwarders 
will consistently handle each shipment. Things to consider are the route and the risks with that route 
related to time in transit and/or security. 
Gel pack and phase-change materials are used inside passive shippers to maintain temperature. Frozen 
gel packs and phase-change materials can be at different temperatures, such as -15 °C to -10 °C. Know-
ing at what temperature these materials should be, according to the passive shipper requirements, is es-
sential to understand. Consistency is needed to assure that equipment used to condition and store gel 
packs and phase-change materials are capable of producing gel packs and phase-change materials at the 
proper temperature. The next step is to determine how long gel packs and phase-change materials need 
to stay inside the equipment to ensure the proper temperature. In most cases, it may require many days 
to condition these products depending if they are stored on a pallet, in a box, or individually. 
The goal is to make sure the materials are at the correct temperature prior to use. Using gel packs and 
phase-change materials prior to being at the proper temperature could result in failed shipments. If gel 
packs and phase-change materials are used frozen, it is imperative to determine whether or not they 
will cause irreversible damages to the payload. Gel packs and phase-change materials may freeze if 
they are come in direct contact with products affected by freezing (thermal shock and denaturing the 
product); this should have been tested during prior qualification processes. Thermal shock can occur 
unintentionally if the cold bank moves during handling and ends up touching the payload, or if the 
shipper is placed in a cold room prior to shipping. The layout and written plan should include a pro-
cess to warn users that the cold bank may require material to separate it from the payload. Introducing 
gel packs and phase-change materials at the wrong temperature into a pack-out or improperly placing 
them can result in adverse temperatures.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
19
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
q	 Determine if the reported deviation is relative to damage, temperature, or another 
reason (e.g., logistic split)
q	 Determine the root cause based on gathered information 
q	 Document the root cause according to the following information:
q	Type of freight (air/sea/road/rail) 
q	Site of origin 
q	Site of destination
q	Logistic service provider
q	Root cause owner (e.g., may be handling agent, hauler, airline, cold chain solution 
supplier)
q	Root cause location (e.g., may be storage or tarmac time at transit airport, 
motorway rest area, aircraft)
q	 Monthly review
q	Perform a monthly review report based on a rolling 12-month period of 
distribution deviations
q	Calculate per site destination the percentage of deviations (= number of deviation/
total shipments)
q	Sort the deviation percentage (by decreasing order)
q	 Identify the site destinations with the highest deviation percentage. 
q	Based on a fixed percentile (e.g., Percentile 95, meaning the 5 % of destinations 
with the highest deviation percentage), count the occurrence for same root cause 
location and owner
q	If more than one occurrence, identify the occurrence as a cluster of a potential 
issue to investigate further
q	If occurrence is more than two within the 12-month rolling period (destination/
root cause location/owner), investigate further and create a CAPA accordingly
q	 Biannual review
q	Perform a biannual review based on the last 12 months of distribution deviations
q	Calculate per root cause owner and per root cause location the number of 
deviations/shipments
q	Sort the deviation percentage by decreasing order
q	Identify the root cause owner and root cause location with the highest incident 
percentage
q	For the top three root cause owners and root cause locations, investigate further 
and create a CAPA accordingly
Figure 8.1-1	 Deviation Checklist
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
20
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
8.3	
Case Study 3: Qualification Master Plan
The following case study is an example of how to implement the information contained in this techni-
cal report. Risk analysis and planning for its mitigation should be the first step.
To make validation terminology applicable to a good distribution practices (GDP) environment, a 
qualification master plan (QMP) is written to define the qualification strategy. For each qualification 
step (design, operational, and performance qualifications), a rationale is written to support the qualifi-
cation program according to the type (active or passive) of thermal protection system (TPS).
More specifically, when the qualification program addresses winter and summer conditions in the op-
erational qualification (OQ) and performance qualification (PQ), particular attention is given to the 
PQ done with commercial batches that can last one year or more.
Performing a TPS PQ with consecutive shipments of the product is considered a best practice, because 
it mimics the real situation and therefore confirms the representative OQ result. However, considering 
the recommendations from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the World Health Organiza-
tion, which advocate the PQ be completed before commencing commercial distribution of the product, 
it is necessary to document and develop a rationale to ensure the product quality used during the PQ.
After the OQ, an intermediate qualification summary report is written, based on the OQ conclu-
sion, to justify the decision to use commercial product for the PQ. The output of the OQ performed 
considering winter and summer conditions is to evaluate temperature risk during static conditions 
(thermal chamber temperature profiles) and performance of the solution in order to define the number 
of probes and locations that have to be used for routine operations. In order to demonstrate that the 
OQ results are effective and reproducible over the years, PQ field transportation tests are performed 
in real shipping conditions (dynamic condition), during which the temperature is monitored and 
documented in a PQ winter and PQ summer report. PQ will consist of replicated live transporta-
tion tests done as defined in the intermediate validation report. Based on a matrix approach, multiple 
destinations and product loads may be considered. The number of replicate(s) should be governed by 
the regulatory requirements of the specific country or region. Studies should be done in winter and 
summer conditions at the time of the year where the weather and route are challenging to assure the 
results are representative. Regional anomalies should be taken into consideration e.g., during extreme 
weather conditions; monsoon.
Another option to consider is having a continuous performance verification program in place, where 
all shipments are monitored, and the performance of a temperature-controlled shipper is verified based 
on temperature data and the number of nonconformances experienced on regular quarterly/annual 
basis. Deviation wording may need to be changed, as root cause analyses are mainly performed for 
major and trending nonconformances. All minor nonconformances, by nature, do not have product 
quality or patient safety impact and therefore do not require a root cause analysis or implementation 
of corrective and preventive actions (CAPA).
The output of the PQ is to evaluate temperature during real shipment and performance of logistics 
processes with the TPS.
Until the final Quality Assurance Summary Report is approved, in addition to the PQ shipments, real 
transportation shipments will be made based on the output from the OQ validation results. There is 
no product risk, as every shipment is temperature-monitored in a location defined by the analysis of 
the thermal mapping results obtained during the OQ phase. In addition, any temperature nonconfor-
mance will be documented. Based on the risk analysis and mitigation policy of the company, a root 
cause analysis will be conducted, for example, for major excursions or trends, to guarantee that the 
transportation system is under control.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
21
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
A final Quality Assurance Summary Report is issued once the PQ is completed and the qualification 
process is closed.
9.0 
Additional Reading
ANVISA – Brazilian Health Regulatory Agency
• 
ANVISA Guide 02: Transportation system
ASTM – American Society for Testing and Materials
• 
ASTM F2825 Standard Practice for Climatic Stressing of Packaging Systems for Single Parcel 
Delivery: Packaging System
BPOG – BioPhorum Operations Group
• 
BPOG Best Practice on Transport Qualification: Thermal Protection System
EC – European Commission
• 
European Commission GDP: Containers AND “qualified equipment (e.g., thermal packaging, 
temperature-controlled containers or temperature-controlled vehicles)”
FDA – Food and Drug Administration
• 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR Part 11, Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures—
Scope and Application; Pharmaceutical cGMPs. Government Publishing Office: Washington, 
D.C., 2003.
HDA – Healthcare Distribution Alliance
HC – Health Canada
• 
Health Canada (GUI-0069): Shipping Container
IATA – International Air Transport Association
• 
IATA Perishable Cargo Resources – Chapter 17 Air Transport Logistics for Temperature – Sensi-
tive Healthcare Products: Active container solutions OR Active Systems AND passive packaging 
systems
International Council for Harmonisation 
• 
Quality Guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical Quality System; ICH: Geneva, 2008.
ISO – International Organization for Standardization
• 
ISO TC122: qualified equipment like thermal packaging, temperature-controlled containers or 
temperature-controlled vehicles
ISPE – International Society of Pharmaceutical Engineers
• 
ISPE Good Practice Guide – Cold Chain Management: Portable Packaging or Shipping Systems
• 
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. GAMP Guide: Records & Data Integrity; 
ISPE: Bethesda, Md., 2017.
ISTA – International Safe Transit Association
• 
ISTA PCG-01 Revision 00 – Reusable Passive Thermal Packaging Best Practice Guideline
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
22
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
• 
ISTA PCG-02 Revision 00 – Passive Thermal Packaging System Operational Qualification Best 
Practice Guideline
PDA – Parenteral Drug Association
• 
PDA Technical Report No. 46: Last Mile: Guidance for Good Distribution Practices for Phar-
maceutical Products to the End-User
• 
PDA Technical Report No. 52: Guidance for Good Distribution Practices (GDP\s) for the Phar-
maceutical Supply Chain: Qualified Packaging Container
• 
PDA Technical Report No. 53: Stability Testing to Support Distribution of New Drug Products
• 
PDA Technical Report No. 64: Active Temperature-Controller Systems: Qualification Guidance
• 
PDA Technical Report No. 72: Passive Thermal Protection Systems for Global Distribution – 
Qualification and Operational Guidance: Passive Thermal Protection System
USP – United States Pharmacopeia
• 
<UPS> 659 – Packaging and Storage Requirements
• 
U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter (1079) Risks and Mitigation Strategies for 
the Storage and Transportation of Finished Drug Products. In USP43–NF38 USP: Rockville, 
Md., 2020; p 7635.
• 
<USP> 1160 – Pharmaceutical Calculations
WHO – World Health Organization
• 
WHO DIP 818 Guidelines on the international packaging and shipping of vaccines: Shipment 
Unit
• 
WHO Annex 9 Model Guidance for the Storage and Transport of Time- and Temperature-
sensitive pharmaceutical products: Shipping Containers AND insulated passive containers AND 
Active Containers
White Papers
• 
Van Asselt, E. J., Zvonimir, M, Bishara, R. H., and Stener, E.: Qualification of Pharmaceutical 
shipping Systems in seven Steps. Pharmaceutical Manufacturing and Packaging Source (PMPS), 
May 2020 Edition, pp.56 – 59.
• 
Majic, Z., Van Asselt, E.J. & Bishara, R. H.: Pharma by Air: Equipment Qualification and 
Route Risk Assessment. Journal Pharmaceutical Outsourcing, Volume 17, Issue 5, Sep/Oct, 
2016, 26-31.
• 
Majic, Z., Van Asselt, E.J., Bishara, R.H. & Stener, E.: Model for Qualification of Shipping Sys-
tems for Temperature Sensitive Pharma Products, Journal Pharmaceutical Outsourcing, Volume 
21, Issue 1, Jan/Feb/Mar, 2020, 22-27
• 
van Asselt, E.J. & Bishara, R.H. (2015). Establishing and Managing the Drug Product Stability 
Budget, Journal of Pharmaceutical Outsourcing, Volume 16, Issue 4, July/August, 2015, 20-27.
• 
van Diest, G-J., van Asselt E.J. et al. (2017). Pharmaceutical supply chain security risk assessment 
for shipping lanes, Journal Pharmaceutical Outsourcing, Volume 18, Issue 5, Sep/Oct, 2017, 16-25.
• 
van Asselt, E.J., Bishara, R.H. & Majic, Z. (2019). Temperature Data Integrity and Security 
along the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain, Journal Pharmaceutical Outsourcing, Volume 20, Issue 
3, Jul/Aug/Sep 2019, 12-15.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
• Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual 
use of an Authorized User 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
• Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone 
other than an Authorized User 
• Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, 
either available on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license 
from PDA, Inc.
• Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA 
Electronic Publication 
• Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the 
PDA Electronic Publication 
• Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic 
Publication or its content 
• Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk 
reproduction or distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose 
• Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
including any text or graphics 
• Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright 
information or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material 
To License or purchase Reprints
• Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a 
fee.  
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact: 
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, 
ext. 133. Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West 
Highway, 
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
• Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.  
To order reprints, please contact:  
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 
150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Guidance for Temperature-Controlled Medicinal Products — Maintaining the Quality of 
Temperature-Sensitive Medicinal Products through the Transportation Environment
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside 
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are 
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. 
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the 
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a 
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s 
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Biotechnology Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality 
Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and deter-
mines whether to publish or not publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged 
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be 
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org. 
PDA Officers and Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Jette Christensen, Novo Nordisk
Chair-Elect: Susan Schniepp, RCA
Treasurer: Melissa Seymour, Biogen, Inc.
Secretary: Emma Ramnarine, Genentech/Roche
Immediate Past-Chair: Rebecca Devine, Consultant
President: Richard Johnson
Directors 
Barbara M. Allen, PhD, Eli Lilly and Company
Michael Blackton, Adaptimmune, LLC
Bettine Boltres, PhD, West Pharmaceutical Services
Tia Bush, Amgen, Inc.
Javier Camposano, Celltrion
Ghada Haddad, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Joyce Hansen, Johnson & Johnson
Stephan Krause, PhD, AstraZeneca Biologics
Mary Oates, Emergent Bioscience
Mathias Romacker, Pfizer (ret.)
Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Osamu Shirokizawa, LifeScientia
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Jahanvi Miller, MBA, Assistant Director, Scientific Affairs
Glenn Wright, VP, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing and Press 
Relations
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer
Sanctioning Advisory Board: SAB
Phil DeSantis, DeSantis Consulting Associates (Chair)
Greg Bassett, Amgen (Vice Chair)
Masahiro Akimoto, OTSUKA
John Ayres, M.D., Consultant
Ed Balkovic, Ph.D., MicroBio Technical Support
Marcia Baroni, Emergent BioSolutions Inc
Rebecca Brewer, Quality Executive Partners
Tom Damratoski, Bristol Myers Squibb
Rhonda Ezell, Vitruvias Therapeutics
Guenther Gapp, Gapp Quality GmbH
Mauro Giusti, M.S., Eli Lilly 
Marc Glogovsky, M.S., Valsource, LLC
Gabriele Gori, M.S., GlaxoSmithKline
Dennis Guilfoyle, Ph.D., Johnson & Johnson
Ghada Haddad, Ph.D., Merck
Kenneth Hinds, Ph.D., Johnson & Johnson
Ken-ichi Izutsu, Ph.D., National Institute of Health 
Sciences
Gitte Letting, Novo Nordisk 
Ivy Louis, VIENNI TRAINING & CONSULTING 
LLP
Stefan Merkle, Ph.D., Janssen
Mike Sadowski, Baxter
Matthew Schmidt, M.S., Merck
Siegfried Schmitt, Ph.D., Parexel International Corp.
Kristin Valente, Ph.D., Merck
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
