=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-May-2018
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-5659E1B4-5AD4-4F13-8731-914B11585E33_2_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7416_02_01
DOI Ref:
f1koq
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈1229.7〉 GASEOUS STERILIZATION
INTRODUCTION
The use of sterilizing gases for the preparation of materials and equipment is commonly used for items that are susceptible to damage by
heat or radiation processes. Many polymeric materials, especially medical devices, are surface sterilized in this manner, as is nonpressure-
rated process equipment. The sterilization of dry powders using gases is inappropriate due to the inability of gases to penetrate solid
materials. The majority of gas sterilization processes employ ethylene oxide (EO), and procedures for use with other gases generally are
patterned after EO practices. Ozone, mixed oxides of nitrogen, and chlorine dioxide are some of the other gaseous sterilants used. [Systems
that can exist in liquid and gas phase at the operating temperatures (e.g., hydrogen peroxide, peracetic acid, and paraformaldehyde) are
excluded from consideration in this chapter.] EO's ability to penetrate through polymers, cellulosics, and other materials allows it to be used
for the terminal sterilization of medical devices in their «nal packaging. The other sterilizing gases may be suitable for similar applications.
Process control for gas sterilization equipment is accomplished by control of sterilant gas concentration, relative humidity, temperature,
and system pressure. Mixing of the gas in the sterilization chamber may be bene«cial. EO sterilization may be used for parametric release as
described in Terminally Sterilized Pharmaceutical Products—Parametric Release 〈1222〉.
Gas sterilization differs markedly from processes during which the agent used can condense during the operation. Vapor sterilization
processes will be addressed separately in Vapor-Phase Sterilization〈1229.11〉.
As outlined in Sterilization of Compendial Ar ticles 〈1229〉, analysts must take care in ensuring sterility and demonstrating that the essential
quality attributes of the materials are not adversely affected by the process. With respect to gas processes, key considerations include the
immediate effects of sterilizing gas on the materials or equipment being sterilized, residual sterilant, sterilant byproducts, and potential
chemical reactions. The common gas processes differ slightly with respect to process execution and material concerns and thus are
described individually.
ETHYLENE OXIDE
EO is a powerful alkylating agent that destroys microorganisms by chemical reaction, primarily with cell DNA. The destructive mechanism
largely follows «rst-order kinetics and depends on concentration, humidity, and temperature. The use of EO for medical devices in their «nal
packaging has, to a large extent, shaped EO sterilization processes (and, to a lesser extent, all gas sterilization) for other applications (2,3).
The usual EO process follows a sequence of prehumidi«cation, air removal, rehumidi«cation in the chamber, gas exposure, gas removal from
the chamber, and postexposure aeration. The preexposure steps ensure that adequate moisture is present on and within the items being
sterilized. The postexposure steps provide time for the diffusion of EO and its byproducts out of the materials and packaging. When EO is
used for nonporous equipment the process can be streamlined, which eliminates many of the pre- and postexposure steps because of the
need only for surface sterilization. During EO sterilization the gas is introduced at the beginning, and only minimal additions are necessary
later to maintain pressure as the gas is absorbed into the material/sterlization load within the vessel. Humidity adjustment during the
process also may be required. In some instances, EO reacts with materials in the load to form ethylene chlorohydrin and ethylene glycol.
These compounds, including EO, must be reduced to safe levels before the items can be used by patients (4,5). EO processing requires strict
worker safety and environmental controls because it is associated with carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, and neurotoxicity. In addition, EO is
explosive in concentrations of greater than 2.6% by volume in air, therefore, iner t gases are often used to minimize ¬ammability. The
commonly accepted biological indicator (BI) strain is Bacillus atrophaeus (formerly B. subtilis var. niger).
OZONE
Ozone is a potent oxidizing agent produced by passing a stream of oxygen or air through a high-voltage electrical «eld. Ozone is an
effective biocidal agent for treatment of water supplies and has demonstrated lethality at concentrations from 2%–10% in air. Optimal
microbial destruction is accomplished when the relative humidity is above 80% at room temperature. Ozone degrades to oxygen in the
presence of moisture and metals and therefore usually is generated in situ. Ozone does not penetrate porous materials to the same extent as
EO does. Process systems that use ozone for gas sterilization have the advantage of simplicity. Its generation and destruction (using a
catalytic conver ter) are accomplished without moving par ts or consumables other than the supplied oxygen. The sterilization process uses a
sequence of humidi«cation, injection, exposure, and ventilation to remove the ozone from the chamber at the end of the cycle. The common
BIs identi«ed for ozone are Geobacillus stearothermophilus and Bacillus atrophaeus.
CHLORINE DIOXIDE
Chlorine dioxide is an effective sterilizing gas. Pure chlorine dioxide is metastable and therefore is generated as needed. Chlorine dioxide
is noncarcinogenic, non¬ammable, and effective at ambient temperatures. Its ability to penetrate materials may be less than that of EO.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:44 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.7〉 Gaseous Sterilization


=== PAGE 2 ===
A typical chlorine dioxide sterilization process uses a sequence of preconditioning, conditioning dwell period, charge, and exposure,
followed by aeration.
The BI most commonly used is Bacillus atrophaeus.
NITROGEN DIOXIDE
Nitrogen dioxide is a sterilizing gas effective at ambient temperature. Liquid nitrogen dioxide is conver ted to a gas on introduction to the
target chamber. Nitrogen dioxide is nonexplosive and its residues are noncarcinogenic, noncytotoxic, and nonteratogenic. It has a limited
ability to penetrate polymeric materials in comparison to EO, which makes postcycle aeration more rapid. It is incompatible with cellulosic
materials such as paper and cardboard. The suggested BIs for nitrogen dioxide are G. stearothermophilus and B. atrophaeus.
VALIDATION OF GAS STERILIZATION
The validation of gaseous sterilization generally begins with the establishing of a “minimum lethal process dwell time” through the use of
fractional exposure studies. These fractional studies establish that exposure time, under standard process conditions, where the biological
indicator is fully inactivated. This minimum exposure time then becomes the basis for the application of the half-cycle approach for
validating the sterilization cycle. The absence of information relating the effect of varying gas concentration, humidity, and temperature on
microorganisms resulted in a conservative assumption that the bioburden is equal in antimicrobial resistance and population to that of the
biological indicator. The half-cycle method can be de«ned as follows.
The half-cycle validation method requires the destruction of a high concentration (NL
T 10
6
 spores) of a resistant microorganism under
de«ned, minimum conditions for complete kill. This establishes the minimum lethal process dwell time. In routine operation, the process
dwell period is arbitrarily doubled and suppor ts a theoretical reduction of the biological indicator (and thus the bioburden) to a probability of
a nonsterile unit (PNSU) of 10
−6
 (for de«nitions of terms in this chapter, see Sterilization of Compendial Ar ticles 〈1229〉).
The half-cycle method used for gas sterilization is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Half-cycle sterilization validation.
Alternative approaches to cycle validation are available. Gillis and Mosley developed a means for parametric evaluation of EO sterilizing
conditions that may result in greater use of other validation methods (6). A bracketing approach (see Figure 2) that better suppor ts the
process operating ranges for the critical parameters relative to the half-cycle method has also been used. In the bracketing method, one
evaluates conditions that bracket the de«ned process condition in order to establish parameters for the minimum and maximum effects on
the materials and bioburden. The minimum lethal process dwell time (see half-cycle description above) establishes the worst case for
microbial kill. Incremental increases in process dwell time beyond the minimum lethal process dwell time are used to establish the routine
and maximum exposure periods, the latter of which impar ts the greatest effect on materials. In addition, adjustments to agent concentration
and relative humidity are utilized to fur ther enhance the bracketing approach. By this method, the routine process conditions may be
established between the minimum and maximum process conditions to assure complete microbial kill while maintaining the integrity of the
materials.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:44 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.7〉 Gaseous Sterilization


=== PAGE 3 ===
Figure 2. Bracketing method.
Equipment Quali«cation
The equipment quali«cation for gas sterilization should include both pre- and postcycle systems to con«rm that the equipment has been
properly installed and operates as intended.
Empty Chamber Parameter Distribution
Despite the use of true gases, evaluation of parameter uniformity across the chamber is a common activity. This ensures that the gas and
humidity introduction methods provide consistency throughout the chamber and can be correlated to the routine monitoring location(s),
when present. Biological indicators are not required in the evaluation of the empty chamber uniformity.
Component and Load Mapping
Component and load mapping using invasive sampling are not a par t of gas sterilization because sampling systems placed within the load
items would alter gas and humidity penetration. Evaluation of lethal conditions with individual items and across loading patterns is best
provided by biological indicators or process challenge devices placed within the load items and distributed within the load. Indicators or
process control devices are placed within the items and load at locations believed to be hardest for the gas and humidity to penetrate.
Biological Indicators
The biological indicator of choice for gas sterilization varies, as noted above. B. atrophaeus (ATCC 9372) is used with EO and chlorine
dioxide, and ozone sterilization is monitored with G. stearothermophilus (ATCC 12980 or 7953). D-values for the biological indicator can be
used to establish exposure periods for the sterilization process to ensure adequate process e­cacy. When positioning biological indicators
within items it is impor tant to ensure that the placement of the BI does not occlude gas passage or otherwise interfere with the
distribution/penetration of the sterilant within the item.
Process Con«rmation and Microbiological Challenge
The core of the validation activity is the con«rmation of acceptable process parameters with simultaneous physical and chemical
measurement and microbial challenge. Sensors are placed in the chamber, or biological indicators are positioned within the load items.
Proof of cycle e­cacy is provided in replicate studies in which the biological indicators are killed and the physical measurements correspond
to the expected values.
ROUTINE PROCESS CONTROL
Gas sterilization is subject to formal controls that maintain a validated state over time. The practices outlined in 〈1229〉 include the general
requirements appropriate for all sterilization systems. Sterilization is accomplished by a number of related practices that are essential for
continued use of the process over an extended period of time. The essential practices to maintain validated status include calibration,
physical measurements, ongoing process control, change control, preventive maintenance, periodic reassessment, and training. When
parametric release has not been established, biological indicators positioned within the load are used for routine release of each sterilization
load, along with a review of documentation from the sterilizer control system.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:44 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.7〉 Gaseous Sterilization


=== PAGE 4 ===
REFERENCES
1. USP General Chapters—Microbiology Exper t Committee. An outline of planned changes to USP Sterility Assurance 〈1211〉.
Pharmacopeial Forum. 2012; 38(2).
2. ISO 11135-1:2007 Sterilization of Health Care Products—Ethylene Oxide—Par t 1: Requirements for Development, Validation, and
Routine Control of a Sterilization Process for Medical Devices. Geneva: International Organization for Standards (ISO); 2007.
3. ISO 11135-2:2008 Sterilization of Health Care Products—Ethylene Oxide—Par t 2: Guidance on the Application of ISO 11135-1. Geneva:
International Organization for Standards (ISO); 2008.
4. ISO 10993-7 Biological Evaluation of Medical Devices, Par t 7: Ethylene Oxide Sterilization Residuals. Geneva: International
Organization for Standards (ISO); 2008.
5. Ethylene oxide, ethylene chlorohydrin, and ethylene glycol proposed maximum residue limits and maximum levels of exposure. Fed
Regist. 1978; 43(122):27474–27483.
Ã. Gillis J, Mosley G. Validation of ethylene oxide sterilization processes. In: Agalloco J, Carleton F
J, eds. Validation of Pharmaceutical
Processes. 3rd ed. New York: InformaUSA; 2007.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<1229.7> GASEOUS STERILIZATION
Huiping Tu
Director, Biologics
GCM2022
General Chapters - Microbiology
2022
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. PF 39(3)
Current DocID: GUID-5659E1B4-5AD4-4F13-8731-914B11585E33_2_en-US
Previous DocID: GUID-5659E1B4-5AD4-4F13-8731-914B11585E33_1_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7416_02_01
DOI ref: f1koq
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:44 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.7〉 Gaseous Sterilization
