=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-Aug-2013
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-91440F72-855B-4E11-9E50-4DFF8DF
AC467_2_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7409_02_01
DOI Ref:
gb3rc
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈1229.1〉 STEAM STERILIZATION BY DIRECT CONTACT
SCOPE AND BACKGROUND
Steam sterilization is perhaps the most common of all sterilization processes. It is used in settings ranging from practitioner o­ces to
large-scale manufacturing facilities. The diversity of practices that use steam sterilization is re¬ected in the range and sophistication of the
equipment used. This general information chapter addresses sterilization in which saturated steam comes into direct contact with the load
items (whether wrapped or unwrapped) and provides an overview of the basic concepts of this mode of sterilization, including its validation.
The load items in this sterilization process are variously termed par ts, components, hard goods, wrapped goods, or porous goods. These
items may be metallic, glass, ceramic, elastomeric, or polymeric materials that have little or no sensitivity to thermal degradation at the
sterilizing temperatures. For steam sterilization by direct contact, it is customary to sterilize items using an overkill method.
Sterilization of liquid-«lled containers may be substantially different. Moist Heat Sterilization of Aqueous Liquids 〈1229.2〉 provides
information about applications in which steam is a heating medium but is not in contact with the sterilization target, the liquid in the
container.
SATURATED STEAM
Saturated steam is a biphasic mixture of H
O in gas and liquid phases in thermal equilibrium. Saturated steam has a singular
temperature–pressure relationship in which both phases are present, and at a given temperature only one pressure is possible for saturation.
The impor tance of using saturated steam for sterilization arises primarily from two attributes. First, saturated steam rapidly kills
microorganisms because of the presence of liquid water. Steam heated above saturation, also termed superheated steam, lacks liquid water,
and although it is higher in temperature than saturated steam it is substantially less lethal to microbes. Second, when steam changes phase
from gas to liquid, it releases thermal energy (2202 kJ/kg at 121°) that is transferred to the load items, facilitating sterilization of their
exposed surfaces.
The initial objective for saturated steam sterilization is that the air in the sterilizing chamber must be replaced by saturated steam.
Residual air within the sterilizer chamber and load items acts as both an insulator and an obstacle to steam penetration to all surfaces of the
load items, and its removal is essential for effective sterilization. The presence of residual air in the chamber negates the singular
temperature–pressure relationship of saturated steam. In the absence of saturation, physical measurements may not provide assurance of
lethality.
GRAVITY DISPLACEMENT CYCLES
In the simplest autoclave cycles, air removal is accomplished by gravity displacement. Because steam is hotter and less dense than air, it
rises to the top of the autoclave, and the colder air exits at the bottom of the chamber. Saturated steam entering the chamber changes into
liquid condensate as it contacts the colder surfaces of the autoclave chamber and load items. Retention of condensate within the load
reduces cycle effectiveness because it is a barrier to steam contact, and additional steam is needed to maintain the saturated steam at the
sterilizing temperature. The load items, wrapping materials, and load arrangement should be designed to facilitate air removal and
condensate drainage. In gravity displacement cycles, the load slowly reaches the desired sterilizing temperature because air removal is
relatively slow compared to cycles in which its removal is mechanically assisted. During the exposure segment of the cycle, a thermostatic
trap at the bottom of the chamber drain allows the removal of condensate (and any residual air) from the sterilizer while maintaining
sterilizing conditions. At the conclusion of the dwell period, the chamber is returned to atmospheric pressure.
PREVACUUM CYCLES
To remove air more effectively from the chamber and the load items, sterilizers may employ multiple evacuation/pressure pulses in which
air is replaced by steam. The number and depth of these pulses may vary. Because the alternating vacuum and pressure pulses may stress
wrapping materials, the latter must be chosen carefully. The operation of the sterilizer during the exposure segment is similar to that of the
gravity displacement cycle previously described. The vacuum system can be used at the end of the process to remove residual steam and
condensate from the load items. The selection of a speci«c cycle and its associated sterilization parameters for a given item depends on a
number of factors, including the heat lability of the material, heat penetration into the ar ticle, the item’s mass, di­culties with air/condensate
removal, and other factors described in the validation program (see below).
STERILIZATION CYCLE CONTROL
Sterilizers are controlled by computerized/automated systems that manage the overall process execution and data repor ting. The systems
for steam sterilization may be controlled by calibrated temperature and/or pressure sensors on the equipment. During the exposure por tions
2
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:41 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.1〉 Steam Sterilization by Direct Contact


=== PAGE 2 ===
of the cycle, a minimum dwell time at a prede«ned temperature is required to ensure the method lethality target (minimum time–temperature
or F
) is met. Cycle e­cacy for steam sterilization often is measured using F
, which is de«ned as the equivalent exposure time at 121°. F
 is
a means for quantifying steam sterilization effectiveness by determining the equivalent sterilization time in minutes relative to a base
temperature of 121° and a z-value of 10°; z-value is de«ned as the number of degrees of temperature change necessary to change the D-
value by a factor of 10. The F
 method is used to evaluate sterilization processes operated at varying temperature conditions to a single
standard.
The process lethality at temperatures other than 121° can be calculated to determine lethality equivalent to that provided at 121°. Moist
heat sterilization process e­cacy is not intrinsically linked to a target temperature of 121°, which is simply the Celsius conversion of 250°F
,
and other temperatures can be used. Sterilizer control systems for direct sterilization typically provide a minimum time at a de«ned set point
temperature after the initial air/condensate removal. Steam sterilizers are controlled using temperature sensors located in the drain line
before the thermostatic trap, although other control schemes may be used. The temperature at this location typically is recorded for
permanent documentation of sterilizing conditions. In sterilization by direct contact, exceeding the minimum time–temperature requirements
or F
 is acceptable because of minimal adverse consequences to the materials being sterilized.
Total lethality can be calculated over the course of the process. For the speci«c reference temperature of 121° and a z-value of 10°, the
total accumulated F
 can be determined by the following equation:
where
t
 = star t time
t
 = end time
T = temperature
Summing the instantaneous lethality contributions over the entire sterilization process allows the calculation of the overall process
lethality or F
 delivered. The F
 calculation should begin at 100° and should continue through the end of the dwell period provided that
saturated steam conditions are maintained.
VALIDATION OF STERILIZATION BY DIRECT CONTACT
The predominant approach for steam sterilization by direct contact is the overkill method de«ned in Sterilization of Compendial Ar ticles
〈1229〉. Overkill sterilization is a method in which the destruction of a high concentration of a resistant microorganism is correlated with the
destruction of reasonably anticipated bioburden present during routine processing. That objective can be demonstrated by attaining any of
the following: a de«ned minimum lethality (F
), a de«ned set of physical conditions, or con«rmation of a minimum log reduction of a resistant
biological indicator.
The validation requirements for the overkill method are less onerous than those for other methods such as those based on bioburden or
bioburden/biological indicators. When the load items can withstand substantial heat without adverse consequence, overkill is the method of
choice for steam sterilization because of its ease of execution, reduced considerations for bioburden control, and overall simplicity.
Equipment Quali«cation
Equipment quali«cation is a prede«ned program that examines the equipment to con«rm that it has been properly installed and operates
as intended before the sterilization process. Equipment quali«cation can be separated into installation quali«cation and operational
quali«cation, or can be considered joint installation and operational quali«cation. The quali«cation effor t provides a baseline for the
sterilizer’s preventive maintenance and change control.
Empty Chamber Temperature Distribution
A common procedure to evaluate steam sterilizer installation is the evaluation of the empty chamber's performance. Each air removal
method used in the sterilizer is evaluated by temperature measurement near the corners of the sterilizer chamber, near the controlling probe,
and other locations as appropriate. The distribution of temperatures in the empty chamber should be determined only by sensors located in
the chamber, and the temperatures of the chamber drain or outside the chamber proper are not directly relevant in this validation activity.
Differences in the cycle dwell period can be ignored because only the shor test dwell period for each air removal method must be evaluated.
The acceptance criteria for this test vary with the sterilizer's capabilities and customary use. Biological indicators are not required in the
evaluation of empty chamber temperature distribution.
Component Mapping
Items that are steam sterilized can be quite complex and may have interior void volumes, obscured surfaces, crevices, and di­cult-to-
reach product contact surfaces that must be sterilized. The ability of saturated steam to penetrate the wrapping materials or containers and
to reach the surfaces should be established for each item. Although this is relatively easy for simple items such as spatulas, beakers, and
other simple geometric shapes, it can be substantially more di­cult for «lling assemblies, «lter housings, tubing, and hoses. Analysts should
conduct studies to determine cold spots in items to ensure that heat penetration takes place throughout the load items using thermocouples
in contact with the item's surface. These studies can be performed in a laboratory setting and need not be repeated when the same item is
sterilized in multiple autoclaves. During this evaluation, all load items should be wrapped and oriented in a manner that facilitates steam
0
0
0
0
0
0
=
10(
)ⅆt =
10[
]Δt
F0
∫t2
t1
T−121
10
∑t2
t1
T−121
10
1
2
0
0
0
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:41 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.1〉 Steam Sterilization by Direct Contact


=== PAGE 3 ===
ingress and air and condensate removal. Items must be wrapped and oriented in an essentially identical manner for reproducible
sterilization.
Load Mapping
The determination of loading patterns is an essential practice for terminal sterilization of aqueous liquids by moist heat (see Moist Heat
Sterilization of Aqueous Liquids 〈1229.2〉), but this practice is not a critical concern regarding direct sterilization of items because differences
between components play a greater role than location within the load.
1
 Loads for direct steam sterilization can be validated using a
maximum and minimum load as determined by either the number of each item or their mass. Best practices include placing larger items on
the lower shelves, allowing condensate from these items to exit the sterilizer with minimal contact with other load items.
Biological Indicators
The commonly used biological indicator for steam sterilization by direct contact contains spores of Geobacillus stearothermophilus (ATCC
12980 or ATCC 7953), a thermophilic microorganism with a moist heat resistance substantially greater than that of most vegetative
microorganisms. The spore challenge can be placed on a substrate within or on a load item, or the challenge can be a load item that is
inoculated with a spore suspension. When biological indicators are used according to the manufacturer’s directions, the resistance
information provided by the vendor can be used. End users must determine the population and resistance of inoculated items they prepare.
Heat Penetration and Microbiological Challenge
The goal of the validation activity is the con«rmation of acceptable heat penetration using temperature measurements and biological
indicator challenges. Customarily this study is performed under conditions where the exposure time and/or temperature are reduced slightly
from the routine set points. Thermocouples and biological indicators should be placed with load items at the locations determined to be
most di­cult to heat during component mapping. Thermocouples should be in contact with the item's surface. Analysts must take care in
the inser tion of thermocouples and biological indicators so they do not alter the ability of the steam to enter the objects being challenged.
This di­culty can be overcome with special «ttings for thermocouple entry or by placement of temperature probes in units placed near the
units that contain biological indicators. In the latter case, replicate studies provide proof of cycle e­cacy when both the biological indicators
are killed and the physical measurements correspond to the expected time–temperature values or F
. If the microbial and physical
measurements do not meet prede«ned acceptance criteria, an investigation is required and corrective action is necessary to rectify the
discrepancy.
Routine Process Control
As with all sterilization processes, after validation, steam sterilization must be subject to formal controls that maintain it in a validated
state over time. Sterilization of Compendial Ar ticles 〈1229〉 outlines the general requirements for all sterilization processes including training,
calibration, physical measurements, physical integrators or indicators, ongoing method control, change control, preventive maintenance, and
periodic reassessment.
REFERENCES
Agalloco, J. Steam Sterilization, chapter in Pharmaceutical Dosage Forms: Parenteral Medications: Volume 2, 3rd edition, edited by Nema, S.,
& Ludwig, J., InformaUSA, New York. 2010.
Agalloco, J., Understanding Overkill Sterilization: Putting an End to the Confusion, Pharmaceutical Technology, Vol. 30, No. 5, supplement, p.
S18–25, 2007.
Agalloco, J., Akers, J., & Madsen, R., Revisiting the Moist Heat Sterilization Myths, PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology,
Volume 63, No. 2, pp. 89–102, 2009.
DeSantis, P
., Steam Sterilization in Autoclaves, chapter in Validation of Pharmaceutical Processes: 3rd edition, edited by J. Agalloco & F
. J.
Carleton, InformaUSA, New York, 2007.
1
A Risk-Based Approach to Variable Load Con«guration Validation in Steam Sterilization: Application of PDA Technical Repor t 1 Load
Equivalence Topic. A. Pavell and K.A. Hughes. PDA J Pharm Sci and Tech 2010, 2010 Mar-Apr;64(2):124-136.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<1229.1> STEAM STERILIZATION BY DIRECT
CONTACT
Huiping Tu
Director, Biologics
GCM2022
General Chapters - Microbiology
2022
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. PF 38(2)
Current DocID: GUID-91440F72-855B-4E11-9E50-4DFF8DF
AC467_2_en-US
0
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:41 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.1〉 Steam Sterilization by Direct Contact


=== PAGE 4 ===
Previous DocID: GUID-91440F72-855B-4E11-9E50-4DFF8DF
AC467_1_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7409_02_01
DOI ref: gb3rc
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:41 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.1〉 Steam Sterilization by Direct Contact
