RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION PLAN
Risk Assessment
The risk of introducing the new filling system was evaluated; two aspects were considered in the risk
assessments:
• A facility design and fit assessment were completed taking into consideration the changes to the
facility to allow for installation and commissioning of the new equipment and process for sterile
manufacturing. This risk assessment included an overall cGMP assessment, including an evalu-
ation of the personnel, material, equipment, waste flows, classifications, differential pressuriza-
tion, gowning and associated gowning facilities, materials, and finishes.
• Product and process assessment was completed to assess the product and process CQAs and
CPPs impacted by aseptic fill-finish processing as illustrated in Figure 12-1. The parameters
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 47

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
that were assessed as potentially having a significant impact on product quality were identified,
triaged for resourcing, and further studied to achieve a higher level of process understanding.
An extensive analysis, using a Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) tool, was completed as
per ICH Q9. The FMEA provided an evaluation of potential failure modes for the aseptic filling
process and their likely effect on outcomes and/or product performance. Identifying these failure
modes allowed plans to be developed for risk reduction to eliminate, contain, reduce, or control
the identified potential failures. Additionally, the FMEA aided in prioritizing the most impor-
tant risks and their mitigations.
The output/results of the risk assessments were used as a basis for design of the isolator, clean rooms,
and utilities and to identify where further analysis and mitigation may be required as described in the
Mitigation Plan.
Mitigation Plan
Any potential risk identified with the introduction of these changes will be carefully assessed through
the process validation and product comparability assessments described in this PACMP.
To inform the design of the comparability protocol, the potential impact of the change on CPPs (Table
12-14) for the filling process and/or CQAs (Table 12-15) of the drug product was further evaluated.
This evaluation included the data generated and gained from historic product experience and data
collected from Engineering runs and Laboratory pump studies summarized in Table 12-9. This is not
an all-inclusive list of risks identified, only those that will be mitigated by the comparability protocol
and/or process validation associated with this PACMP to support this change. The full risk assessment
is in the firm’s PQS. A risk level was calculated using a risk priority number (RPN) by multiplying the
scoring of each risk factor (RPN = Severity × Occurrence × Detection), as seen in Table 12-8:
Table 12-8 Risk Level Calculation Table
Risk Level RPN Range
Low 1-20
Medium 24-45
High 48-125
Table 12-9 Evaluation of Risk to Product and/or Project to Inform Comparability Study Design
Risk Level
Parameter Rationale Mitigation to Support Comparability
(H, M, L)*
Product Attributes
Potency L Although filling equipment is being im- Potency will be confirmed to
proved, the filling process is not chang- meet specification as a part of
ing. Further, primary container closure normal batch release and as per
components remain unchanged. It is comparability protocol.
very unlikely that the potency would
be impacted by this change based
on preliminary data collected through
Engineering runs.
48 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
(Table 12-9 continued)
Risk Level
Parameter Rationale Mitigation to Support Comparability
(H, M, L)*
Product Attributes
Identity L Although filling equipment is being im- Identity will be confirmed to
proved, the filling process is not chang- meet specification as a part of
ing. Further, primary container closure normal batch release and as per
components remain unchanged. It is comparability protocol.
very unlikely that the identity would
be impacted by this change based
on preliminary data collected through
Engineering runs.
Purity/ M Although filling equipment is being Purity will be confirmed to meet
Integrity, improved, the filling process is not specification as a part of normal
changing. Primary container closure batch release and as per comparabil-
Product and
components are not changing. It is ity protocol. PPQ will assess filling
Process
very unlikely that the purity profile process capability against predefined
Impurities,
would be impacted by this change CPPs, including bioburden and filter
Sterility based on preliminary data collected integrity. Impact of residual HO will
2 2
through Engineering runs. also be assessed. Further, the sterile
filtration step will be validated, and
the prefiltration bioburden and post-
use filter-integrity bubble point are
predefined CPPs.
Other Attributes
Yield M Although filling equipment is being PPQ will assess filling process ca-
improved, the filling process is not pability against predefined CPPs and
changing. Primary container closure will look at yields.
components are not changing. In
addition, the filling process will be
validated. Data from Engineering runs
support that impact to yield will not
be adverse.
Fill Volume M Although filling equipment is being PPQ will assess filling process ca-
improved, the filling process is not pability against predefined CPPs and
changing. Primary container closure will look at yields.
components are not changing. In addi-
tion, the filling process will be validated.
Data from Engineering runs support that
impact to fill volume will not be adverse.
Container M Although filling equipment is being Container–closure integrity test-
Closure improved, the filling process is not ing will be completed. Specifically,
Integrity changing. Primary container closure microbial ingress challenge will be
components are not changing. In useful to demonstrate the potential
addition, the filling process will be for product contamination over the
validated. Data from Engineering runs product’s shelf life or dating period.
support that impact to yield will not The container and closure system in-
be adverse. tegrity tests for OFB will be designed
to detect a breach of the container
and/or closure system prior to product
contamination post-filling change.
* H = High, M = Medium, L = Low
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 49

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
PROCESS DEVELOPMENT AND CHARACTERIZATION STUDIES
Laboratory Pump Studies
The equipment used for the new isolator will be comparable to that used in the current aseptic filling
suite. The new pump could potentially impact the product quality due to shear forces. This laboratory
study was performed to evaluate the pump and establish its operating parameters; the result is sum-
marized here. These studies demonstrated that the new pump will not negatively impact the product
quality and identified the filling parameters. The pump settings identified in these studies were used
in the Engineering runs.
The new isolator will use peristaltic filling pumps (currently a diaphragm pump system is used). A
laboratory-scale study, using a pump representative of the one used for the new isolator, was performed
to optimize the filling set-up and pump parameters and to evaluate the performance of the pumps
about fill volume accuracy, precision, and impact on product quality.
Studies were initially conducted using the OFB placebo solution to identify the pump settings that
would optimize the fill volume accuracy and precision. These conditions were then tested using OFB
drug product solution to ensure that the addition of OFB does not affect those parameters and to
evaluate its quality. The equipment and optimized set-up of the pump configuration resulted in en-
hanced process control capability for the fill volume compared to the pumps and pump configuration
used in the current aseptic fill suite. Further optimizations of the pump settings were carried out dur-
ing Engineering runs.
To assess the potential impact of shear forces on product quality during the filling, the same OFB drug
product solution was pumped through the pump set-up, including filling needles, three times. After
the third pump cycle, samples of the OFB drug product solution were analyzed against the CQAs. In
addition, testing was performed to evaluate the generation of ≥2 µm and ≥5 µm subvisible particles.
This data generated from the proposed peristaltic pump was compared to data generated from the cur-
rently approved diaphragm pump.
The data for the pump studies, which demonstrate that the pump settings will not impact OFB prod-
uct quality, are shown in Table 12-10.
Table 12-10 Testing Results for OFB Drug Product after Three Pump Cycles
Acceptance Criteria
Test Results
(Release and Stability)
Appearance The solution is clear to colorless to yellow-green.
Pass
There may be a few particulates.
Identification Conforms to reference standard Pass
Potency 75–125% 102%
Purity and Impurities Meets HPLC
GC
Bacterial Endotoxin <10 EU/mL <5 EU/mL
Sterility Sterile Sterile
pH 7.6 ± 0.2 7.6
50 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
(Table 12-10 continued)
Acceptance Criteria
Test Results
(Release and Stability)
Subvisible Particle Testing
≥2 µm For information only 3587 particles/container*
≥5 µm For information only 975 particles/container*
≥10 µm ≤6000 particles/container 134 particles/container
≥25 µm ≤600 particles/container 12 particles/container
Polysorbate 80 0.100 ± 0.050 mg/mL 0.090 mg/mL
* Assessed against data generated on product produced with diaphragm pump and shown to have a highly
similar subvisible (i.e., ≥2 µm and ≥5 µm) profile
Engineering Runs
Seven Engineering runs were conducted with the new filling equipment, as per a predefined protocol.
All vial sizes (3 mL, 6 mL, 10 mL) were run. Table 12-11 shows the conditions used for each run.
Table 12-11 Filling Conditions for Engineering Runs
Run Batch Size Fill Target Solution
Engineering Run 1 750 L 5 mL (Mid) Placebo*
Engineering Run 2 1250 L 5 mL (Mid) Placebo*
Engineering Run 3 750 L 5 mL (Mid) OFB
Engineering Run 4 750 L 2 mL (Low) Placebo*
Engineering Run 5 1250 L 2 mL (Low) OFB
Engineering Run 6 1250 L 9 mL (High) Placebo*
Engineering Run 7 750 L 9 mL (High) OFB
* Same physical characteristics of OFB (static and dynamic viscosity)
Engineering Runs 1 and 2 were performed using a placebo solution. The filling conditions identified
in the laboratory studies were used for Engineering Run 1. The average fill volume was 6.03 mL with
a standard deviation of 0.08 mL. Slight adjustments were made to the pump parameters prior to En-
gineering Run 2 to improve the precision.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 51

Figures 12-2 and 12-3 show the fill volume and distribution, respectively, of each vial in Engineer-
ing Run 2. The average fill volume in Engineering Run 2 was 6.01 mL, which is comparable to the
accuracy observed in Engineering Run 1. The precision was improved in Engineering Run 2, and the
standard deviation of the fill volumes was reduced to 0.03 mL. These parameters were used for Engi-
neering Run 3, which was performed with OFB drug product solution.
Figure 12-2 Individual Vial Fill Volumes for Engineering Run 2
6.6
6.5
6.4
6.3
6.2
6.1
6
5.9
5.8
5.7
5.6
5.5
Figure 12-3 Distribution of Fill Volumes for Engineering Run 2
52 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91
)Lm(
emuloV
lliF
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
09.5 19.5 29.5 39.5 49.5 59.5 69.5 79.5 89.5 99.5 00.6 10.6 20.6 30.6 40.6 50.6 60.6 70.6 80.6 90.6 01.6 eroM
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Fill Volume (mL)

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Engineering Runs 4 and 5 evaluated the lower fill-volume range, whereas Engineering Runs 6 and 7
evaluated the higher fill-volume range. These runs used the same pump parameters that were identified
in Engineering Run 2. The data for all Engineering Runs is presented in Table 12-12.
Table 12-12 Filling Conditions for Engineering Runs
Run Fill Volume Target Average Fill Volume ± 1 Standard Deviation
Engineering Run 1 5 mL 5.00 ± 0.11 mL
Engineering Run 2 5 mL 5.00 ± 0.05 mL
Engineering Run 3 5 mL 4.99 ± 0.04 mL
Engineering Run 4 2 mL 2.02 ± 0.2 mL
Engineering Run 5 2 mL 2.00 ± 0.01 mL
Engineering Run 6 9 mL 9.03 ± 0.10 mL
Engineering Run 7 9 mL 8.99 ± 0.11 mL
Samples from the three Engineering runs that used OFB drug product solution were analyzed against
the CQAs, and additional testing was conducted to evaluate the generation of ≥2 µm and ≥5 µm sub-
visible particles. The data for these studies are shown in Table 12-13. These data demonstrated that
the filling process does not impact the OFB product quality.
Table 12-13 Testing Results for OFB Drug Product Engineering Runs
Test Acceptance Criteria Eng Run 3 Eng Run 5 Eng Run 7
(Release and Stability) (6mL) (3mL) (10mL)
Appearance The solution is clear to colorless to Pass Pass Pass
yellow-green; there may be a few
particulates.
Identification Conforms to Reference Standard Pass Pass Pass
Potency 75-125% 102% 99% 115%
Purity and Impurities Meets Meets Meets Meets
Bacterial Endotoxin <10 EU/mL <5 EU <5 EU <5 EU
Sterility Sterile Sterile Sterile Sterile
pH 7.6 ± 0.2 7.6 7.5 7.6
Subvisible Particle Testing
≥2 µm N/A 1958 917 3742
≥5 µm N/A 443 234 719
≥10 µm ≤6000 particles/container 58 26 94
≥25 µm ≤600 particles/container 2 0 4
Polysorbate 80 0.100 ± 0.020 mg/mL 0.112 0.107 0.098
The data from the development studies and Engineering runs demonstrated that the filling equipment
used for the new isolator can successfully fill vials of three different sizes with acceptable accuracy and
precision. The physicochemical analysis of the OFB product demonstrated that the new filling equip-
ment does not negatively impact the quality of the product.
Comparability Plan and Process Validation
Based on the assessments, the change to the filling process was assessed by both a comparability study
and a full-process validation (including pre- and post-change media-fill data completed for the decom-
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 53

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
missioning of the suite for equipment change-out and required construction and subsequent recom-
missioning) and the appropriate equipment qualifications.
Process Validation
A clear validation/qualification plan will encompass the following:
• Integration plan for process automation system
• Validation and qualification of the sterilization tunnel
• Equipment and room qualifications (installation and operation qualification plans, equipment longev-
ity assessment/plans, assessment of product-contact equipment and material compatibility/suitability)
• Air flow visualization (smoke test) pre- and post-upgrade
• Media fill pre- and post-change
• Process validation (taking note of how the filling process is impacted by new equipment and
space), hold times, residual H₂O₂ assessment, and product impact assessment
• Assessment of process change on facility with respect to environmental monitoring, HVAC
systems, material flow, personnel flow, and air flow
• Assessment of impact on established and validated cleaning procedures
• Assessment of impact of new equipment on product container–closure components and assess-
ment of compatibility
• Assessment of impact to existing batch records, work procedures, among other factors
• Container–closure integrity
Process validation for each fill size will be completed under predefined validation PPQ protocols.
Critical Process Parameters
As defined by ICH Q8(R2), a CPP is a process parameter whose variability has an impact on a CQA and,
therefore, should be monitored or controlled to ensure the process produces the desired quality (16).
The CPPs for the filling of OFB are provided in Table 12-3. For this PPQ, the CQAs and consideration
for lifecycle knowledge, with respect to the proposed isolator, will be assessed as outlined in Table 12-14.
Table 12-14 Critical Process Parameters for OFB Drug Product Filling
Proven Acceptable
Process Step Manufacturing Criteria Justification for Criteria
Range
Sterilization Conveyor speed/time To be determined As per Factory Acceptance Testing and
Tunnel manufacturer’s validation guide
Maximum stop time after filling To be determined
process interruption
Conveyor temperature and heat To be determined As per Factory Acceptance Testing and
distribution in tunnel and glass manufacturer’s validation guide
variation of vials
Conveyor pressure and airflow To be determined As per Factory Acceptance Testing and
manufacturer’s validation guide
54 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
(Table 12-14 continued)
Proven Acceptable
Process Step Manufacturing Criteria Justification for Criteria
Range
Filler Conveyor speed To be determined As per Factory Acceptance Testing and
manufacturer’s validation guide
Pump operation To be determined As per Factory Acceptance Testing and
manufacturer’s validation guide, peristaltic
pumps can be sensitive to tubing changes;
will be assessed over time and location
Sterile Pressure test: Post-use filter- ≥50 psi As per filter manufacturer’s validation
Filtration integrity bubble point following guide
WFI flush
Filling (Filling Vial weight checks: Weight ±1.5% The filling accuracy was validated for the
uniformity and check-in intervals of ~1% of dedicated 3 mL, 6 mL, and 10 mL (re-
homogeneity) target batch size, sampling spectively) pump assembly by performing
from each of the filling pumps/ three trials at the minimum volume of
nozzles in sequence 20 mL, and three trials at the maximum
volume of 2 mL, 5 mL, and 9 mL, using 3
mL, 6 mL, and 10 mL vials respectively.
The check weight system operates by
removing one vial prior to fill by robotic
fingers; the tare weight is recorded and
the vial is then returned to the fill line,
filled, and removed by robotic fingers
at the gross weight station. The filling
accuracy is determined based on the
programmed target fill weight.
Hold Times Drug product maximum hold To be determined Controls for this step include:
times will be confirmed via PPQ
The tank is stored at 2-8 °C prior to
the bulk drug being filled. Bacterial and
endotoxin samples are taken prior to
final sterile filtration and filling.
Critical Quality Attributes
As defined by ICH Q8(R2), a CQA is a physical, chemical, biological, or microbiological property or
characteristic that should be within an appropriate limit, range, or distribution to ensure the desired
product quality.
Importantly, there are no changes proposed that impact the primary, secondary, or tertiary packaging.
A description of the primary container closure system is provided in the “Container Closure” section.
As stated, this is a sterile liquid product; no compounding takes place.
Current and proposed inputs are as follows (see also “Container Closure”):
• Glass vials: 3 mL, 6 mL, and 10 mL
• Stoppers: Bromobutyl rubber stoppers
• Caps: Aluminum seal, flip-off
• Product filled at ambient temperature, but tank held at 2-8 °C prior to filling; hold times are validated.
Current and proposed outputs are as follows (see also “Container Closure”):
• Washed vials from vial washer
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 55

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• Depyrogenated vials
• Filled vials within weight tolerance and 100% weight check from the filling machine
• Fully stoppered vials
• Capped vials with integral seals
The associated CQAs for OFB are summarized in Table 12-2. For this PPQ, the CQAs and consid-
eration for lifecycle knowledge, with respect to the proposed isolator, will be assessed as outlined in
Table 12-15.
Table 12-15 Critical Quality Attributes and Lifecycle Knowledge Management
Critical Step Analytical Method Acceptance Criteria
Pre-sterile filtration Bioburden ≤10 CFU/mL
Sterilization Tunnel and Filler Bioburden and endotoxin Meets criteria
Container Closure Integrity Microbial ingress challenge Meets criteria
Product Release Criteria
Identification Conforms to reference standard Meets criteria
Appearance Visual The solution is clear to colorless to
yellow-green; there may be a few
particulates.
Potency Biological Assay 75-125%
Purities Impurities HPLC and GC Meets critera
Particulates (subvisible) Light Obscuration (LO) ≥2 µm – N/A
≥5 µm – N/A
≥10 µm – ≤6000 particles/container
≥25 µm – ≤600 particles/container
pH pH meter 7.6 ± 0.2
Bacterial Endotoxin Turbidimetric LAL <5 EU/mL
Sterility Sterility Meets 21 CFR 610.12
Excipients: Assay Meets criteria
Polysorbate 80
The results from the first three commercial lots of OFB will be assessed against data from the currently
approved commercial process (three historical lots). Comparability will be assessed against the preset speci-
fications described in Table 12-15. Comparability acceptance criteria have been determined based on
product and process knowledge and data. For quantitative release assays, where applicable, a statistical ap-
proach for determination of comparability specifications will be used to demonstrate that the introduction
of the new isolator has no impact on identity, strength, quality, purity, or potency of the product.
Container–Closure Integrity Testing
Microbial challenge testing will be executed according to the guidance outlined in PDA Technical
Report No 27: Pharmaceutical Package Integrity. The PDA recommends the following critical test pa-
rameters:
• Challenge media formulation: Tryptic soy broth (TSB) media will be used, which is acceptable
for the cultivation of aerobic microorganisms
• Challenge organism: Pseudomonas aeruginosa as referenced in PDA TR-27 as a suitable challenge
organism
56 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• High viability count in challenge media at end of test (≥105 CFU/mL): 106 CFU/mL will be used
• Differential pressure exposure to simulate product processing conditions: No extremes of pressure or
vacuum are applied during product processing, therefore, no pressure or vacuum will be applied
• Ability of sterile-packaged media to support growth of challenge organism: Growth promotion
will be performed to verify that the media can support microbial growth
• Sensitivity of analytical method if used to detect growth: Visual inspection will be performed to
detect growth
• An exposure time of 1–2 hours and incubation period of 14 days are proposed
Challenge organisms recommended are Escherichia coli, Serratia marcesans, Clostridium sporogenes, P.
aeruginosa, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and Brevundimonas diminuta (17).
All three vial sizes (3 mL, 6 mL, and 10 mL) will be tested.
Cleaning Validation
The PPQ will capture all cleaning validations through the new filling process.
Isolator Chamber Decontamination
The isolator system ensures a defined reduction of microbial contamination on the surfaces of the iso-
lator chamber using hydrogen peroxide. H₂O₂ decontamination cycles for the isolator in the syringe
and vial lines were developed by defining the parameters that ensured a sterility assurance level of 6-log
microbial reduction.
For the decontamination cycle, Geobacillus stearothermophilus with a population of at least 106 pores/
carrier are placed at defined locations, representing worse-case locations, within the isolator chambers.
An assessment of potential impact to product and exposure to low levels of ozone and/or hydrogen
peroxide will be completed.
Media Fills
Three media fills (aseptic process simulation) will be performed to requalify the filling process, the
equipment, and the aseptic process following the introduction of the isolator. The media fills will be
executed under protocol and serve to validate the aseptic process as a whole, using the sterile compo-
nents, controlled room, and filling equipment to fill sterile media. The media fill validation will be
simulated at all steps: from introduction of components from the sterilization tunnel to sterile filtra-
tion of the drug substance (using media), to preparation of the containers and closures and the filling,
stoppering, and sealing of the drug product (media). The three media fills will bracket all vial sizes
(3 mL, 6 mL, and 10 mL), container sizes (neck diameters), fill speeds, and filling time durations.
Air Visualization Studies
Smoke studies, or airflow visualization tests, will also be conducted during the qualification of the new
isolator for aseptic filling. The smoke studies are conducted to confirm airflow direction in the cleanroom.
Full details of all validation and qualification exercises will be included in the PPQ protocol.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 57

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
The purpose of this study is to determine the impact of the introduction of improved isolator technol-
ogy to the filling suite for drug OFB (and all drugs filled on the same line). The drug product filling
changes impact Site PDACorp.; the suite footprint remains unchanged. Drug product (at the com-
mercial scale) filled using the new technology will be compared to currently approved drug product to
confirm comparability as per ICH Q5E (10). The data collected and analyzed under the Engineering
runs and Laboratory pump studies described above have demonstrated that the introduction of the
new isolator will yield highly similar drug product, and no adverse impact on the safety or efficacy pro-
file of the final drug product is foreseen. This will be confirmed through this comparability protocol
and integration and evaluation of all data collected, including routine batch analyses (leveraging the
currently approved release parameters to complete physiochemical comparability), in-process control,
process validation/evaluation data, container–closure integrity testing, and stability. The comparison
of the results to the predefined criteria will allow for an objective assessment of whether the pre- and
post-change products are comparable.
Comparability testing comprises release testing, which is summarized in Table 12-16.
Table 12-16 Release Testing
Standard Claimed (e.g., Professed, House, USP, Ph. Eur.)
Specification, Reference Number, and/or Version
Test Acceptance Criteria Analytical Procedure
(Release and Stability) (Type/Source/Version)
Appearance The solution is clear to colorless to yellow- Visual Inspection
green. There may be a few particulates.
Identification Conforms to Reference Standard IR Spectrum
Potency 75-125% Biological Assay
Purity and Impurities E.g., identified impurities, unidentified HPLC
impurities and total impurities
GC
Bacterial Endotoxin ≤5 EU/mL Turbidimetric LAL
Sterility Sterile Compendial
pH 7.6 ± 0.2 pH meter
Excipients: 0.100 ± 0.050 mg/mL Assay
Polysorbate 80
Subvisible Particles Light Obscuration (LO)
≥10 µm ≤6000 particles/container
≥25 µm ≤600 particles/container
Additional characterization data (including completion of container–closure integrity testing) is not
informative to this isolator change as the primary container closure has not changed. Further, the
process parameters of the new filling equipment will be validated, and the CPPs and CQAs will be
confirmed accordingly. A summary of the filling process parameters impacted by this change is pro-
vided in Table 12-17.
58 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 12-17 Summary of Changes from Currently Approved Process to Proposed Process
Parameter Current Process Proposed Process
Product L-histidine Same
Formulation Polysorbate 80
Maltose
Container Closure Vial: Type I (not sulfate or sulfate-treated) glass Vial: Same
(siliconized)
Stopper: Bromobutyl rubber stopper (pre- Stopper: Same
siliconized)
Flip cap: Aluminum Seal with Flip-off Cap Flip cap: Same
Glass vials are washed and depyrogenated, batch- Glass vials are washed and
style, in an oven validated for this purpose depyrogenated in a validated tunnel
In-Process Controls Prefiltration bioburden Prefiltration bioburden
Environmental monitoring Environmental monitoring
Filling Conventional filler Isolator
Fill Volume Limits Same
Target Fills:
3 mL vials: 2 mL
6 mL vials: 5 mL
10 mL vials: 9 mL
Alert Limits:
3 mL vials: 1.9–2.1
6 mL vials: 4.7–5.3 mL
10 mL vials: 8.5–9.5 mL
Capping Reject vials with raised stoppers, 100% visual Same
inspection
Process Hold Times A maximum hold time from drug substance to filling Hold times will be validated during
is seven (7) days at 28 °C in a stainless steel vessel process validation
Testing and Acceptance Criteria
The testing and acceptance criteria to be used to assess comparability pre- and post-introduction of the
isolator are as follows:
• Three filled commercial-scale lots executed against PPQ (1 lot per vial size, PPQ will include
visualization study results pre- and post-change), media-fill results (pre- and post-change), and
confirmation of fill volume via extractable fill-volume study
• Filter validation to be completed
• Hold times to be successfully validated
• Cleaning procedures to be successfully validated
• Same three lots also to meet the release specifications outlined in Table 12-16.
• Confirmed results from container closure integrity test execution with a commitment to follow
through to the end of shelf life
Justification of Change
The introduction of the state-of-the art isolator for aseptic filling is considered necessary to enhance
the current GMP standing. Currently, the site utilizes a conventional filler with an aseptic Grade A
core within a suite with a Grade B background.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 59

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Contamination may take the form of particulates, microorganisms, or endotoxins. Human operators,
as a source of both viable and nonviable particles, pose the greatest risk to product contamination
during aseptic processing. Introducing the isolator filling technology significantly reduces these risks:
• Number of process operation steps, which will reduce the potential for an error that ultimately
could lead to the distribution of a contaminated product
• Need for intervention(s), that is, any manual or mechanical manipulation of the sterilized drug,
components, containers, or closures prior to or during aseptic assembly that poses the greatest
risk of contamination
The isolator will also create a physical barrier, lending protection to the product, container, and clo-
sure, preventing exposure to the environment (i.e., currently “open” process steps in the LAF filler).
Use of the improved filling system will further enhance protection of the product from human contact.
Upon approval of this PACMP and with successful execution of the studies (see “Comparability and
Process Validation”), introduction of the proposed filling line is considered a process improvement. All
data will be provided post-change as a Notification.
Commitment and Implementation Plan
PDACorp will submit the final study report for this PACMP and the proposed PPQ upon successful
completion of the studies described.
The following sections or established conditions will be updated and submitted with the results of the
PACMP and PPQ in the follow-up Notification submission:
3.2.P.2.3 Manufacturing Process Development – Including comparability final report.
3.2.P.3.3 Description of Manufacturing Process and Process Controls – Description of the
manufacturing process, highlighting differences from the approved process, and information
on the controls performed at critical steps of the manufacturing process of the proposed drug
product.
3.2.P.3.5 Process Validation and/or Evaluation – Process validation and/or evaluation
studies (e.g., equipment qualification, media fills) as described, following the PACMP and
planned PPQ protocol. All information demonstrating the qualification of the equipment
(operational qualification, performance qualification) or qualification of the change will be
provided as final reports.
3.2.P.5.4 Batch Analysis – Batch analysis of lots filled with previously approved equipment
compared to lots filled after the change.
3.2.P.8.1 Stability Summary and Conclusions – Based on data available at the time of filing.
3.2.P.8.2 Stability Commitment – Commitment to continue stability studies for the first
three PPQ and Engineering runs in accord with currently approved storage conditions and
shelf life (0, 3, 6, 9, 12, 24, and 36 months) at 2-8 °C; in addition, thereafter, to place at least
one batch per year on stability.
3.2.P.8.3 Stability Data – At least six months of stability data from three Engineering runs
under nominal, accelerated, and stressed conditions. Real-time data available at time of filing
will be provided for the first PPQ lot.
60 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
3.2.A.1 Facilities and Equipment – Information on the proposed production facility in-
volved in the manufacture of the drug product, specifically, current state versus proposed new
state with new filling equipment, and impact on the following will be provided: Complete set
of floor plans and flow charts (drawings, room classification, water systems, HVAC systems),
as appropriate and/or as impacted, as well as the cleaning validation, as appropriate. In addi-
tion, the results of the environmental monitoring studies in classified areas will be provided.
Cleaning procedures (including data in a summary validation report) demonstrating lack of
carryover or cross-contamination for new filling process if impacted by new equipment, in-
formation describing the change-over procedures for the shared product-contact equipment,
if impacted by the new filling process as per new equipment, as applicable.
12.4 References
1. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Con-
trols Changes to an Approved Application: Certain Biological Products; U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2021.
2. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Changes to an Approved Application:
Biological Products; Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research. U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services: Rockville, Md., 1997.
3. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by
Aseptic Processing—Current Good Manufacturing Practice; U.S. Department of Health and Hu-
man Services: Rockville, Md., 2004.
4. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Submission Documentation for Ster-
ilization Process Validation in Applications for Human and Veterinary Drug Products; U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Resources: Rockville, Md, 1994.
5. Health Canada. Guidance Document: Post-Notice of Compliance (NOC) Changes: Quality Docu-
ment; Minister of Health: Ottawa, Ontario, 2019.
6. European Commission. Regulation (EC) No 1234/2008 of 24 November 2008 concerning the
examination of variations to the terms of marketing authorisations for medicinal products for human
use and veterinary medicinal products; OJ. European Commission: Brussels, 2008.
7. World Health Organization. Annex 4: Guidelines on Procedures and Data Requirements for
Changes to Approved Vaccines (TRS No. 993); WHO: Geneva, 2015.
8. World Health Organization. Annex 3: Guidelines on Procedures and Data Requirements for
Changes to Approved Biotherapeutic Products; TRS No. 1011. WHO: Geneva, 2018.
9. International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q12: Technical and Regulatory Con-
siderations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle Management; ICH: Geneva, 2019.
10. International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q5E: Compatibility of Biotechnologi-
cal/Biological Products; ICH: Geneva, 2005.
11. Longanesi, F. RABS versus Isolators Presented at 2008 ISPE Convention: Innovation in Pharma-
ceutical Manufacturing, Milano, February 28, 2008; ISPE 2008; p 51.
12. U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter <88> Biological Reactivity Tests, In Vivo. In
USP 43–NF 38, USP: Rockville, Md., 2020.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 61

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
13. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR 177.2600 Rubber articles intended for repeated use;
Department of Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2016.
14. Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 34: Design and Validation of Isolator Systems for
the Manufacturing and Testing of Health Care Products; Bethesda, Md, 2001.
15. U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter <1208> Sterility Testing—Validation of
Isolator Systems. In USP 43-NF 38, USP: Rockville, Md., 2020.
16. International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q8(R2): Pharmaceutical Develop-
ment; ICH Geneva, 2009.
17. Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 27: Pharmaceutical Package Integrity; PFS:
Bethesda, Md., 1998; pp July–August 1998, Supplement.
62 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser.
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
• Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an
Authorized User
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
• Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication
• Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other
than an Authorized User
• Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
• Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic
Publication
• Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA
Electronic Publication
• Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication
or its content
• Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose
• Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any
text or graphics
• Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication
• Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material
Multi-User Licenses
• To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Coordinator, publications@pda.org.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 63

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Post-Approval Change Management and Implementation for Biologics and
Pharmaceutical Drug Products — A User’s Guide
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials.
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Biotechnology Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality
Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and deter-
mines whether to publish or not publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org.
Sanctioning Advisory Board: RAQAB PDA Officers and Directors
Anette Yan Marcussen, NNE A/S (Chair) Officers
Denyse Baker, Eli Lilly and Company Limited (Vice-Chair) Chair: Susan Schniepp, Regulatory Compliance Associates
Jacqueline Veivia-Panter, Biocentriq Chair-Elect: Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck,
Masahiro Akimoto, Heartseed Inc. Sharp & Dohme
Secretary: Emma Ramnarine, Roche Pharma
Marcello Colao, GSK Vaccines
Treasurer: Melissa Seymour, Biogen
Rosane Cuber, Bio-Manguinhos/FIOCRUZ
Im. Past Chair: Jette Christensen, Novo Nordisk A/S
Karolyn Gale, Emergent BioSolutions, Inc.
President: Glenn Wright
Kir Henrici, The Henrici Group, LLC
Frithjof Holtz, Merck KGaA Directors
Dinesh Khokal, Amgen, Inc. Bettine Boltres, PhD, West Pharmaceutical Services
Macheras Demetra, AbbVie, Inc. Christiana Campa, PhD, GSK
Beth Kirschenheiter, Bristol Myers Squibb Javier Camposano, Celltrion
Mirko Gabriele, PhD, Thermo Fisher Scientific
Amanda McFarland, ValSource, Inc.
Marc Gloglovsky, ValSource Inc.
Jeanne Moldenhauer, Excellent Pharma Consulting, Inc.
Andrew Hopkins, Abbvie
Catriona Murphy, Eli Lilly and Company Limited
Stephan O. Krause, PhD, AstraZeneca Diagnostics
Lorianne Richter, ConcoridaValso
Ivy Louis, VIENNI Taining & Consulting LLP
Ajay Pazhayattil, Capcium Inc. Amy McDaniel, BMS
Vishal Sharma, Vienni Training and Consulting, LLP Cylia Chen Ooi, Amgen
Eva Urban, CSL Behring AG Mathias Romacker, (Retired)
Osamu Shirokizawa, Life Scientia
Gopi Vudathala, Incyte
Kelly Waldron, ValSource, Inc.
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Carrie Horton, Project Manager, Regulatory Affairs
Josh Eaton, Senior Director, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing and Press
Relations
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
