5.0 PAC Process Tools to Enhance Regulatory Flexibility
Maintaining GMP, combined with continuous learning, improvement, and in-depth knowledge about
the production process and its CPPs and/or ECs, contributes to ongoing optimization. This optimiza-
tion often results in changes to the product files submitted to and approved by the authorities, aiming
for a new desired state. Regulatory tools should be used to enhance the management of these PACs
in a way that encourages innovation and continuous improvement. Doing so may help a firm avoid
time-consuming, iterative, and expensive processes and, instead, encourage smooth, straightforward
interaction and transparent communication with regulatory authorities.
When deciding to implement a PAC, thereby aiming for a new desired state, the tools suggested in
Table 5.0-2 may prove helpful when writing the documentation and scientific justification. The use of
tools and points for consideration, such as those identified in Table 5.0-2, can aid in identifying and
presenting, at the outset, the most convincing and thorough documentation required for the regulatory
approval process. However, while the use of a PACMP as discussed in ICH Q12 (see Section 4.0) and
presented in Table 5.0-2 continues to gain acceptance, its use is not currently accepted in all countries.
The decision about change implementation should focus on potential product impact and mainte-
nance or improvement of quality and compliance. However, the development of a business case, as
recommended under “Defining Scope of Change” in Table 5.0-2, can be a helpful tool that serves
solely as internal documentation and initial justification of the change. The business case should clearly
lay out pros and cons regarding cost versus benefit and impact on product quality. Other areas could
potentially be impacted as well and should be considered, such as other manufacturing processes, sub-
mitted or drafted regulatory applications, quality or business procedures, functions or departments,
collaborating partners, and stakeholders.
Subject matter experts are key stakeholders, and employee knowledge and insight are crucial to a
successful PAC process. By obtaining increased process and product understanding, including sci-
ence- and risk-based approaches for stability studies to support the evaluation of the changes, critical
sources of variability can be identified and appropriately managed. By assessing potential impacts of
the change, relevant mitigation strategies can be developed.
Written rationales justifying the changes should be based on the assessment of different parameters, for
instance, impacts to CQAs, ECs (if applicable), and CPPs. When relevant, the process risk assessment
should link process parameters and critical material attributes to CQAs, thereby defining the CPPs
and linking them to an acceptable, scientifically justified range for the different process parameters.
The type of change and the type of operational flexibility required should be considered; some changes
may benefit from establishing a predefined design space. Design space is defined in ICH Q8(R2) as
“[t]he multidimensional combination and interaction of input variables (e.g., material attributes) and
process parameters that have been demonstrated to provide assurance of quality” (7). Working within
8 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

an established design space offers the option of implementing changes and handling the PAC process within the PQS, thereby providing increased flexibility for the
implementation of changes.
The control strategy should be designed and implemented based on quality risk management, which is a valuable tool to reflect and evaluate the different steps, by
linking the process to the established CPPs and understanding impacts and/or changes to CQAs. The control strategy should be reassessed as part of the PAC process.
Table 5.0-9 Tools and Considerations for Decision-Making for PAC
Defining the Scope of Regulatory
Understanding Risk Assessment Definition Approval Strategy Implementation
Change Assessment
9 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91
ssecorP
• What is the scope- • Have Established • Determined • Q12 PAC procedure • Define design • Define approval • Create/update
background? Conditions (ECs) categorization by or other procedure? space, as strategy for ICH PACMP, as required
been established/ performing a risk appropriate countries
• What is rationale- • Are ECs, CPPs, • Submit protocol to
filed? assessment of the
justification? and/or CQAs • Defined • Define approval authorities
change related
• Have CQAs impacted? performance strategy for
• What is the to patient safety, • Implement change
and CPPS been space, as countries following
benefit? established? product quality or • If NO and has appropriate ICH guidelines • Verify
• What other efficacy minimal impact implementation &
• Has a control -> change may be • Define • Define approval
solutions have • If the risk is validation strategy been handled in the PQS, qualification/ strategy for all
been evaluated? established? moderate to low specific jurisdiction validation other countries • Submit report to
-> lesser filing notification may be activities, as authorities
• Has a PACMP been may be considered • Contact authorities
required, impact to applicable
considered? according to
• If the risk is high CTD needs to the
• Create a strategy
-> a prior approval assessed
stakeholder
submission is likely • Prepare for
• If YES-> assess assessment -who
implementation
for specific might be affected
filling type per and who has to
jurisdiction be involved in the
process?
slooT
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• Business Case • Product and • Change Risk • PQS • Quality by Design • Approval strategy • PACMP
process Assessment (QbD)
• Timeline • Change • Change • Validation protocol
understanding
• Quality Risk Categorization • Validation Protocol categorization and report • System impact
• Process risk Assessment
assessment • Stakeholder
assessment (QRM)
Assessment
• Control strategy

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.1 Established Conditions
EC is an important term and concept in evaluating change and, while ICH Q12 works to bring more
definition to the term, the concept has been in place for some time.
5.1.1 Background
ICH Q12 defines ECs as legally binding information considered necessary to assure product quality.
Consequently, any change to an EC necessitates a submission to the regulatory authority. ICH Q12,
which the FDA officially adopted in May 2021, further considers ECs to be the elements of the phar-
maceutical development activities that result in an appropriate control strategy (23).
Previously, FDA defined ECs as the description of the product, manufacturing process, facilities and
equipment, and elements of the associated control strategy, as defined in an application, that assure
process performance and quality of a product (11). Japan has a similar concept, called “approved mat-
ters,” that refers to an item of information described in a dossier for an application that was approved
by the regulatory agency (14). Health Canada also leverages a similar concept, requesting that market
authorization holders file and maintain a Certified Product Information Document. That document
constitutes part of the approval package and provides an accurate record of key quality information
for the product proposed for marketing at the time the approval is issued. Thereafter, it serves as an of-
ficial reference document during post-approval inspections and PAC evaluations performed by Health
Canada (20). Hence, the expectation of regulators to assess changes for the potential impact on prod-
uct quality, safety, and efficacy has always existed.
Changes that could potentially have a major impact on product quality usually have the highest reporting
category. As a term and a concept, EC may guide both the firm and the regulators in predefining the pa-
rameters that are more likely to impact the product. ICH Q10 describes the control strategy as “a planned
set of controls, derived from current process and product understanding, that assures process performance
and product quality,” which may include CPPs and CQAs (9). Some elements of the control strategy may
be managed in the applicant’s PQS and not necessarily detailed in the dossier or application. Others may
be detailed in the dossier but considered to be supportive information rather than ECs.
In the ICH Common Technical Document (CTD), ECs are already defined in Module 3: Quality.
As per ICH Q12, all regulatory dossiers contain a combination of ECs and supportive information.
Although identification of ECs with appropriate justifications might allow for increased flexibility in re-
porting PACs, explicitly identifying ECs for a given product is not necessarily mandatory. If the market
authorization holder chooses to identify ECs, they should clearly identify the elements of Module 3 that
they consider to be ECs and those they consider to be supportive information. The rationale for the ECs
should remain in the appropriate CTD section. Maintaining a tabular summary of the ECs by section
and providing those in the dossier, explicitly naming them as such, is recommended (24). Another tool
for defining and tracking ECs is the use of a PLCM strategy document; the PLCM document should
be maintained in the firm’s change management system and in CTD Module 3.2.R, as per ICH Q12.
In addition to explicitly identifying ECs, the firm should propose the type of filing that will be pro-
vided should a future change impact an EC. Once a submission is approved and the ECs are agreed
upon by the firm and the regulatory agency, they are considered legally binding, and any changes to
the EC must be reported to the regulatory agency. The reporting mechanism or filing type may vary,
however, and the supporting data for a change may be part of the subsequent filing or may be main-
tained in the firm’s PQS (see Section 5.2).
5.1.2 Benefits of Defining Established Conditions
ECs can be defined as part of the initial product development or through a review of product knowl-
edge obtained over the product’s lifecycle. They should be limited to the elements found essential to
controlling the quality of a drug product based on scientific and risk-based justification. Careful evalu-
10 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
ation of the product and manufacturing process will assist in focusing on the parameters critical to
quality control, which will reduce the number of non-value-added PACs that require prior approval by
regulatory agencies. ECs will depend on the complexity of the product and the capabilities inherent to
the manufacturing process and manufacturing site. ECs may vary by dosage form and drug substance
but, fundamentally, they should not vary by region or country. Regulatory convergence across jurisdic-
tions or regulatory reliance under mutual agreement is required to fully realize the benefit.
Clearly identified and justified ECs in an application ensure that the firm and the regulatory agency are
aligned on the criticality of a process parameter or quality attribute. As a result, there should be agree-
ment on the necessity for subsequent submissions and the filing category for changes to any given EC.
While a change to an EC will require a filing with a regulatory agency, the type of filing can depend on
the risk assessment and the process and product knowledge available. The risk may be product- and/or
process-dependent and, importantly, how the risk is assessed is dependent on the effectiveness of the
PQS in place. Ultimately, the same type of change may require different filing strategies for different
products. This further highlights the importance of product and process knowledge and an effective
PQS to fully realize the benefits of identifying ECs. For example, if the risk is considered low because
the change will have little or no impact on product quality, the change may be made through a notifi-
cation; if the risk is considered high due to a potentially high impact on product quality, prior approval
of the change may be required. The documentation of these assessments and supporting data must
live in the firm’s PQS. When a prior approval supplement or variation is required, a PACMP may be
leveraged to align the planned supportive studies and expected outcomes. This would lower the filing
category and reduce the review scrutiny for the submission, which allows for implementation of the
change more rapidly and efficiently (see Section 6.0).
ICH Quality Guideline Q12 Annexes: Technical and Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceutical Prod-
uct Lifecycle Management illustrate how development approaches can impact product understanding
and, ultimately, the identification of ECs (25).
Sections 10.0 (Appendix 1) and 11.0 (Appendix 2) provide examples of ECs and the PACMPs devel-
oped to revise them.
In line with ICH Q10, if a firm can leverage the utility of a robust PQS system—one that incorporates
KM and sound quality risk and change management strategies—the firm can gain increased flexibility
to change ECs as more process and product knowledge is developed. A robust PQS will also enhance
the firm’s understanding of the product and its manufacturing process which, over time, will allow the
firm to critically analyze ECs and reevaluate their potential impact on product quality. That critical
evaluation will afford the firm the potential to remove ECs and negotiate lower filings for changes as-
sociated with existing ECs. This will then facilitate process and facility improvements.
In the current environment, firms and regulatory agencies frequently experience a lengthy submission
and approval process. By predefining ECs and gaining regulatory agency agreement, firms can reduce
the number of PACs that require regulatory agency submission or approval. The filing categories will
be reduced for those changes that do require submission. This would both enable faster implementa-
tion of changes to the drug product and mitigate drug shortages related to lifecycle management. As
they support continual improvement, PACs can result in decreased product variability, reduced supply
shortages, and increased manufacturing efficiency, as well as facilitate the introduction of innovation.
5.1.3 ECs versus Non-ECs and Change Management
All changes are managed through the firm’s change management system, that is, within the PQS, as
illustrated in ICH Q12. This guidance suggests that any parameter that needs to be controlled to en-
sure product quality (i.e., a CPP or process parameter where impact on quality cannot be reasonably
excluded) should be considered an EC. ECs are intended to provide understanding and agreement
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 11

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
between the firm and the regulatory agency on the parameters necessary to assure product quality;
these parameters can change with knowledge gained throughout the lifecycle of the product. The focus
should be on understanding and identifying ECs and appropriately linking them to an agreed-upon
post-marketing plan and regulatory oversight. As such, process parameters, which should be assigned
based on criticality to the process and its control strategy, can be considered ECs and can be defined
with regulatory agencies based on process and product knowledge. Yet, not all data and/or parameters
described in a filing will necessarily be ECs; they may be detailed in the dossier but only as supportive
information. To define the changes that may require a regulatory agency filing, it is critical both to
have explicitly defined ECs and to understand what elements are not. Ultimately, appropriately identi-
fying ECs (and therefore non-ECs) can be a useful tool for harmonization in regions not participating
in ICH when assessing the impact of PACs.
5.2 Post-Approval Change Management Protocols
The PACMP tool described in ICH Q12 enables planning and implementation of changes to ECs
and/or CPPs, and thereby to regulatory filings, in an efficient and structured manner. The concept of
the PACMP is not new. The FDA and EMA have accepted comparability protocols for several years,
and WHO guidances discuss the use of comparability protocols as a tool to help expedite the distri-
bution of product post-change (4, 5, 12, 13). The PACMP (or comparability protocol) approved by
the relevant health authority provides an agreement between the firm and the regulatory agency and
describes changes with a level of detail complying to the complexity of the change, including risk as-
sessment, control strategy, and other pertinent elements. Where possible, a description in the original
protocol of the types of changes that might be considered allowable, and/or how they will be com-
municated to the agency post-approval, should be included. Once a PACMP is approved, when the
proposed study design or acceptance criteria changes, an update of the protocol should be submitted
for implementation as agreed upon in the original protocol. If changes are needed due to unantici-
pated or unforeseen changes in plans, prior approval of a new or revised PACMP by the regulatory
agency may be required.
A firm’s processes may include internal guidance for filing initial market registrations, including tem-
plates for PACMPs. In general, PACMPs can include a description of the product’s current state, the
change to be made, the ECs and/or the product quality attributes that will be affected, the defined
testing and acceptance criteria to establish comparability of the changed product, and the proposed
category for filing the change.
Typically, a PACMP describes a single change or a group of related changes that may be made at the
same time, for example, a scale-up of a purification process that involves larger equipment and associ-
ated changes to process parameters. In addition, PACMPs can be used to describe the same change or
changes being implemented across multiple products, such as a new drug product container–closure
system being implemented across a portfolio of products. In this case, the same PACMP could be filed
for multiple applications, and subsequent submissions to provide the final data could be filed for each
individual application, including a combination of product-specific and non-product-specific data.
Contents for PACMPs may vary from one firm to another and from one type of change to another,
but as a best practice, all PACMPs should contain the following elements:
• Description of the current state and the proposed change as well as a justification or scientific
rationale for the change (e.g., issues or disadvantages with the current state and benefits or ad-
vantages with the proposed state)
• Proposed submission category or submission type for the subsequent filing that includes the
data, clearly indicating which sections of the registration will be impacted
• Detailed list of change(s)
12 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• Risk assessment (i.e., risk-based approach) to explain the potential impact of changes to product quality
• Study protocol describing how the potential impact(s) would be assessed to adequately demon-
strate comparability of the product quality before and after the change
• List of predefined acceptance criteria that must be met before implementing the change
• Validation or qualification of the changed method/process/equipment to demonstrate that all
acceptance criteria are met, as required, based on the risk level of change to the product quality
• Additional process characterization and validation studies at small-scale, as required, based on
the specific change or, minimally, an assessment to confirm that the existing process characteriza-
tion and validation studies adequately support the new process conditions
• List of post-change commitments, if any, including any stability studies to demonstrate acceler-
ated and/or long-term stability of the product with the proposed change
• Anticipated timeline for implementation of the change
• Description of how the approved PACMP will be modified, if needed, due to additional knowl-
edge gained during the actual execution
PACMPs may only be accepted by a limited number of regulatory agencies; however, harmonization
of these best practices across ICH regions and some non-ICH regions would greatly improve the po-
tential for using use these tools to facilitate the efficient implementation of PACs.
PACMPs may save firms considerable time and resources to effectively manage changes and provide
regulators greater insight into planned changes, which would facilitate the review of post-change filings.
This could alleviate constraints in the global supply chain, enabling a continuing supply of drug prod-
ucts to patients in a timely manner. Global acceptance by regulators, with a defined mechanism in local
jurisdictions for submission of PACMPs, is needed to fully realize the benefits that PACMPs can offer.
Examples of PACMPs are provided in Section 10.0 (Appendix 1) and Section 11.0 (Appendix 2).
5.3 Product Lifecycle Management
The PLCM can be described in a strategy document that describes how the firm will:
• Monitor the process and product attributes to ensure that both remain within the validated
state in accordance with the product control strategy (e.g., continued process verification)
• Manage and report changes to ECs
• Execute PAC filings that are planned as part of the product lifecycle
A PLCM strategy document may include the following sections:
• Summary of the product control strategy, e.g., a description of the CQAs for drug substance
and drug product and the controls in place for raw materials, excipients, process steps, and final
drug substance and drug product that ensure CQAs are maintained within acceptable ranges
• A table describing the CTD sections that contain ECs, the ECs in each of these sec-
tions, and the reporting categories that will be used if those ECs change
• PACMPs that may be used for future changes
• Post-approval commitments from the initial registration or subse-
quent supplements and the timelines for completion
A PLCM strategy document may provide an effective tool to help manage the commercial lifecycle of
a product. It can be filed with the initial registration, or it may be filed as a post-approval variation.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 13

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
The document would also prove helpful in the firm’s records as a repository of the commitments to the
regulatory agency that must be maintained throughout the commercial lifecycle. The PLCM strategy
document can also be used to communicate to the regulatory agency the elements of the registration
that will be maintained during the commercial lifecycle, as well as the intended reporting categories
and timing estimates. As post-approval variations are submitted, an updated PLCM should be in-
cluded that describes the updated ECs, control strategy, reference to PACMPs, post-approval CMC
commitments, and any other pertinent information about the change.
