3.0 Background and Landscape for PACs
The importance of PAC and the need to overcome these myriad challenges has led many international
organizations, including the Parenteral Drug Association (PDA), to develop recommendations and
proposals to address the situation:
PDA established the Post Approval Change; Innovations of the Availability of Medicines (PAC iAM)
program that has developed numerous papers, including this technical report.
The European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations and International Federation
of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations have issued position papers on PAC, calling for
regulatory convergence and proposing a relevant framework (1, 2).
One Voice of Quality for PAC, an initiative sponsored by the chief quality officers of more than 30
global pharmaceutical companies, has been developing risk-based recommendations to help reduce
the global complexity associated with PACs (3).
The World Health Organization (WHO) has provided guidance, suggesting pathways and require-
ments for PACs (4, 5).
The International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Hu-
man Use (ICH) has continued its push for harmonization by publishing Quality Guideline Q12: Tech-
nical and Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle Management, which focuses
specifically on PACs (6), while building upon established ICH Quality Guidelines Q8-Q11 (7–10).
The ICH Q12 guidance, which describes key concepts necessary to streamline the PAC process, is rec-
ognized as a significant step forward. In addition to the implementation of ICH Q12, there are areas
where work is still needed to achieve full harmonization, including:
• Agreement on the change categories among regulatory authorities
• Harmonization on filing procedures and timelines within ICH regions
• Inclusion of non-ICH regulatory authorities to converge on the application of these principles
By fully implementing ICH Quality Guidelines Q8–Q11, manufacturing firms can develop an effec-
tive internal PQS sufficient to optimize the management of PACs. Demonstrating the effectiveness of
the PQS would allow a reduction in the regulatory reporting burden for changes with a lower level of
risk, as they would be managed through a firm’s PQS, by:
• Ensuring ICH Q8–Q12 are implemented and leveraged as building blocks for PAC management
• Working with regulators to drive consistent reporting categories
• Developing a robust PQS system
• Enhancing transparency and trust between companies and regulators to identify when a firm’s PQS
system is sufficient to allow certain types of lower-risk change to be implemented without reporting
In keeping with ICH Q10 and Q12 guidances and with a robust PQS system in place, PACs requiring
prior approval by regulatory authorities would be limited to changes assessed as having the potential to
have a major impact on product quality and/or patient safety. Minor-to-moderate changes would be
made with notification to the regulatory authorities, and low-risk changes would be managed under a
firm’s PQS. The benefits of this paradigm shift are depicted in Figure 3.0-1.
4 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Figure 3.0-1 Scientific and Risk-Based Approach to Categorization of Changes
4.0 Key Elements of a Pharmaceutical
Quality System for PAC Management
An effective PQS is the foundation upon which PAC management and implementation are established.
PQS effectiveness in relation to risk-based change management is a core concept within the ICH Q12
framework. Several PQS elements are needed to establish effective PAC management: management
review, a corrective action and preventive action (CAPA) program, a change management system, and
process performance and product quality monitoring (3). Importantly, knowledge management and
quality risk management are key enablers of a firm’s PQS.
Having an established PQS that is executed effectively and consistently within a firm will provide con-
fidence to the regulatory agency that changes are supported by data obtained through the application
of patient-centric, scientific, risk-based principles. A well designed and effective PQS is an essential
foundation for trust between regulatory authorities and industry that will facilitate harmonization on
the categorization of changes. It also should allow more PACs to be managed under the firm’s PQS
without requiring prior review and approval by regulatory agencies (3).
When using contract manufacturing organizations (CMO) or contract development and manufactur-
ing organizations (CDMO), a firm needs to ensure that appropriate contractual agreements are in
place for PACs occurring at the CMO or CDMO and that they maintains an effective PQS (16). The
same principles for lifecycle management and reporting responsibility apply.
4.1 Management Review
A firm’s senior management is responsible for ensuring that appropriate systems and processes are in
place to manage changes effectively. In accordance with ICH Quality Guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical
Quality System, these responsibilities include:
• Defining and communicating roles within the change management system
• Ensuring timely and appropriate communication to address potential quality issues
• Providing adequate resources to ensure that changes are made based on sound scientific and risk-
based judgments
• Maintaining awareness of the long-term product lifecycle management strategy and ensuring
that appropriate controls are in place
• Developing and fostering the desired quality culture at all levels throughout the firm to safe-
guard the patient’s access to high-quality medicines
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 5
yadoT
erutuF
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Entirely in the Type IA/ Annual Type IB/ CBE/ Type II/ PAS/
Firm’s PQS Notification Minor Variation Major Variation
All changes evaluated and documented in the PQS
Entirely in the Notification (Do and Tell) Prior Approval (Tell, Wait,
Firm’s PQS Moderate/Minor Risk and Do) Major Risk

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Quality culture is a set of behaviors, beliefs, and values of an enterprise that serve as a guide to decision-
making. In the ideal state, a quality mindset and quality-focused behaviors are embedded into all func-
tions of daily work and result in positive patient outcomes. In an organization with a well-established
quality-culture environment, employees not only follow quality guidelines but consistently see others
taking quality-focused actions, hear others talk about quality, and understand the importance of qual-
ity in everyday activities (17).
For sustained effectiveness, the PQS needs to be embedded alongside a firm’s culture of quality for it to
properly perform its function and be considered reliable. Management plays an important role in nurtur-
ing key elements of a mature quality culture, including a focus on continuous improvement, demonstra-
tion of leadership, communication of a common vision, and investment in employee development and
education. Training is essential to ensure a proficient and knowledgeable quality-oriented workforce.
4.2 Corrective Action and Preventive Action Program
A properly functioning CAPA system identifies not only when actions are needed as a result of an event
that has occurred, but also operates proactively to improve based on weaknesses identified prior to an
event occurring. Ideally, the majority of all actions would be preventative. The CAPA system is often
where the initial need for change is identified and where the PAC process begins. Having a strong CAPA
program is a critical component of any PQS system, which will lead to better process understanding,
process control, and determining when action is needed.
An effective CAPA program monitors and manages unintended risks and consequences of PACs for
internal and outsourced operations. It should enable identification of root cause(s) so that appropriate
actions can be taken to correct problems and prevent their recurrence. The program should also moni-
tor and verify the effectiveness of any CAPAs associated with PAC initiatives.
4.3 Change Management System
While most changes made have no impact on the regulatory dossier, the importance of having a system
that appropriately evaluates changes and their impact on the manufacturing processes and product
cannot be emphasized enough. The change process must be able to adequately evaluate the change,
the level of risk to the process and product, and the need for a PAC to be filed. Tools, such as those
described in ICH Q10 and Q12 and in the PIC/S Recommendation: How to Evaluate/Demonstrate the
Effectiveness of a Pharmaceutical Quality System in relation to Risk-based Change Management, focus on
the relevance of risked-based change management.
The PIC/S recommendation provides a checklist to evaluate the effectiveness of a firm’s PQS in rela-
tion to risk-based change management and acknowledges that the level of effort and associated docu-
mentation should be commensurate with the level of risk the change entails. This, in turn, should
be used to justify the categorization and filing requirements for that change (18). To ensure that the
underlying risk level is well understood, the change management process needs to be robust enough to
capture the impact of any proposed change. Therefore, it must support a knowledge-based assessment
and review of the change, ensuring that the final scientific justification supports the ultimate filing
decision to the applicable regulatory agency.
A structured, well-organized change management process is essential for a successful PAC process.
It must cover critical quality attributes (CQA), critical process parameters (CPP), product lifecycle
management (PLCM), and control strategy and include creating ECs as appropriate, among other
elements (see Section 4.1). Such an approach ensures that relevant quality aspects are considered, and
possible quality impacts are thoroughly assessed, documented, and communicated to relevant stake-
holders, including regulatory bodies.
6 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4.4 Process Performance and Product Quality Monitoring
A comprehensive program to monitor the manufacturing process performance and product quality
should be in place at every manufacturing facility to ensure that the process continues to perform in
a state of control and in keeping with the validated state. A sound monitoring plan allows a firm to
establish the baseline process performance and detect early warnings of atypical process performance.
Having some process monitoring data before and after the change is an essential component of the
overall qualification of any change. In essence, product and process monitoring results serve as the
scientific basis for improvement of the manufacturing process and the control system. Typically, after
a process change is put in place, monitoring frequency is increased to confirm that the process contin-
ues to perform as expected. For example, documentation of any deviations from trend limits and/or
adverse trends with respect to process, in-process, release, and/or stability testing parameters should be
carefully assessed in line with the quality system. These deviations should be investigated for root cause
and evaluated to ensure the change has no adverse impact on product quality.
Effective change management is fundamental to ensuring that PACs are controlled in an environment
characterized by data-driven, scientific, and risk-based assessments. In an effective change manage-
ment environment, all aspects of the product and process are managed to ensure that there are no
unintended consequences and that product quality and process performance are maintained in a state
of control.
4.5 Quality Risk Management and Knowledge Management
Quality risk management (QRM) and knowledge management (KM) are key enablers of an effective
PQS. An organization that strives to have a strong, quality-oriented culture will use QRM and KM to
guide the identification and proactive management of PACs. PDA Technical Report No. 54: Implemen-
tation of Quality Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations pro-
vides a comprehensive description of the QRM elements and tools aligned with ICH Q9. In addition,
annexes to TR-54 supply examples of QRM application for manufacturing processes and equipment
qualification that may be relevant for PAC management (19).
An effective QRM system provides a sound framework that ensures systematic and proactive risk-
based and data-driven decision-making is being employed for all PACs. QRM should enable innova-
tion by allowing faster implementation of changes that reduce the risk of quality failures and manufac-
turing problems and improve process capability. An effective QRM system can also separate changes
that require regulatory reporting or notification from changes that can be managed completely within
the PQS. Effective QRM enables a firm to demonstrate an understanding of the existing production
process and of the risks, associated impacts, and mitigation of those risks in that process.
An effective KM system leverages historical and recently identified product and process knowledge,
including innovation and technology advancements. It also considers knowledge gained from process
monitoring, deviations, trends, complaints, recalls, annual product or product quality review, audits,
inspections, and management reviews. Effective KM ensures that the right knowledge is used by the
right people at the right time, allowing for effective risk-based decision-making and formal product and
process risk assessments. A systematic, transparent, and well-understood KM system ensures that changes
are based on scientific rationale and can facilitate implementation of identified changes accordingly.
Several FDA, Health Canada, and WHO guidance documents on CMC changes in a post-approval
situation demonstrate how product and process knowledge and effective QRM can be leveraged to
establish lesser reporting categories for changes (4, 5, 11, 20). FDA consistently states in guidances its
intent to apply the principles of quality risk assessment and risk management in accordance with ICH
Q9 during their review. The Agency recognizes that, in order to keep pace with the many advances in
quality management practices in manufacturing and enable it to more effectively allocate its limited
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 7

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
regulatory resources, implementing a risk-based approach for regulating pharmaceutical manufactur-
ing is necessary (21). Accordingly, one FDA guidance allows that changes demonstrated to have a
minimal impact to a product can be filed as an annual reportable item (22). Likewise, the Health
Canada and WHO guidances, which provide conditions to be fulfilled for specific change types to
help guide firms on how to assess risk and categorize changes accordingly, include the option of an-
nual notification for minimal impact. In light of this, the principles of KM and QRM can be equally
applied in both ICH and non-ICH regions and should be recognized by global regulatory authorities.
