1.0 Introduction
The complexity of global post-approval change/variation (PAC) processes and the time required to receive
their approval presents a challenge for industry when it is working to implement needed changes and op-
erating with a focus on continual improvement. Industry benchmarking shows that receiving approval for
a PAC requiring global approval can take between two and five years, and the time it takes from original
submission can vary from six months to several years depending on the jurisdiction and review pathway
(1). For new products, where the amount of commercial process or product data at the time of the initial
submission is limited, this timing can significantly impact the ability to implement necessary process im-
provements identified as more data becomes available. In specific cases, when a change is needed to ensure
the product remains safe, efficacious, and of high quality or provides additional capacity based on high
product demand, the global approval timing can result in drug product shortages.
The current regulatory pathway to implement change is highly complex. For each jurisdiction in
which a product is licensed, the respective regulatory agency typically requires a notification, based
on its risk reporting category, or it must preapprove certain PACs for certain products. Differences
in country- and region-specific requirements for PAC filings, filing procedures, and associated time-
lines can often make simultaneous implementation of changes problematic, necessitating a product
be tested or produced using different processes based on where it will be distributed. Companies must
consider this factor when deciding to implement a change.
These challenges were highlighted during the COVID-19 pandemic, as companies continued to man-
ufacture lifesaving products despite the extreme strain on supply chains for raw materials, components,
and manufacturing supplies. As alternative sources of supply or alternative materials were identified,
the complexity of the global regulatory PAC process presented a significant challenge to product sup-
ply, highlighting the need for a harmonized approach to PAC implementation.
1.1 Purpose
This technical report expands on the latest concepts and tools for improving PAC management, as pub-
lished in ICH Q12. It provides a practical guide for the pharmaceutical industry on how to implement
PACs within the framework of an effective pharmaceutical quality system (PQS) and in alignment with
ICH quality guidelines. It recognizes the challenges that the limited amount of global harmonization
among regulators presents with respect to PACs and attempts to provide some insight on how industry
can work with regulators to improve in this area. Though TR-91 aligns with ICH Q12, it also provides
guidance for non-ICH regions. It suggests how to implement the tools described in ICH Q12 and pro-
vides examples of the concepts that can facilitate aligned industry understanding for PACs.
TR-91 highlights the benefits of some of the tools described in ICH Q12 that are already available in
certain jurisdictions, specifically, PAC management protocols (PACMPs, or comparability protocols) and
established conditions (ECs). These concepts were acceptable for use by several regulatory agencies prior
to ICH Q12, that is, ECs and comparability protocols by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
(11,12) and comparability protocols by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) (13) and WHO (4,5).
Section 10.0 (Appendix 1) and Section 11.0 (Appendix 2) provide examples of PACs common in indus-
try; these are presented as representative frameworks for consideration, presented as hypothetical PAC-
MPs (or comparability protocols) that can be leveraged for similar changes. These examples, although not
all-inclusive, do offer insights into the types of documentation and the scientific justification that may
be required for implementation. They are intended to be illustrative, but they do portray how negotia-
tion with regulators, where existing requirements may be disproportionate to risk given either knowledge
gained through development or process experience, could be demonstrated using a PACMP approach.
1.2 Scope
The information in this technical report focuses on chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC)
changes that can be applied to PACs for both small-molecule and large-molecule pharmaceutical products.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 1

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2.0 Glossary of Terms
2.1 Glossary
Approved Matters Innovation
A piece of information described in a dossier The introduction of new technologies or meth-
for an application which was approved pursu- odologies (9).
ant to Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour, and
Welfare, Article 14, Paragraph 1 or Article 19-2, Knowledge Management
Paragraph 1 of the Law (14). Systematic approach to acquiring, analyzing,
storing, and disseminating information related
Critical Process Parameter to products, manufacturing processes, and
A process parameter whose variability has an im- components (9).
pact on a critical quality attribute and therefore
should be monitored or controlled to ensure the Notification
process produces the desired quality (7). The submission to a regulatory authority of a
change in established conditions, or a change
Change Management that has the potential to have a minor or moder-
A systematic approach to proposing, evaluating, ap- ate impact to product quality, safety, and/
proving, implementing, and reviewing changes (9). or efficacy, that does not require a regulatory
authority approval prior to implementation.
Continual Improvement
Recurring activity to increase the ability to Pharmaceutical Quality System
fulfill requirements (15). Management system to direct and control a phar-
maceutical firm with regard to quality (9, 15).
Control Strategy
A planned set of controls derived from current Prior Approval
product and process understanding that assures Change to an approved established condition,
process performance and product quality. The or a change that has the potential to have a
controls can include parameters and attributes major impact to product quality, safety, and/
related to drug substance and drug product ma- or efficacy, that requires regulatory review and
terials and components, facility and equipment approval prior to implementation.
operating conditions, in-process controls, finished
product specifications, and the associated meth- Product Lifecycle
ods and frequency of monitoring and control (9). All phases in the life of a product from the
initial development through marketing until the
Critical Quality Attribute product’s discontinuation (7).
A physical, chemical, biological, or microbio-
logical property or characteristic that should be Product Lifecycle Management
within an appropriate limit, range, or distribu- The Product Lifecycle Management (PLCM)
tion to ensure the desired product quality (7). document outlines the specific plan for product
lifecycle management that includes the ECs, re-
Established Conditions porting categories for changes to ECs, PACMPs
FDA The description of the product, manu- (if used), and any post-approval CMC commit-
facturing process, facilities and equipment, ments. Its purpose is to encourage prospective
and elements of the associated control lifecycle management planning by the market-
strategy, as defined in an application, that ing authorization holder and to facilitate regula-
assure process performance and quality of tory assessment and inspection. The PLCM
an approved product (11). document should be updated throughout the
product lifecycle as needed (6).
ICH ECs are legally binding information
considered necessary to assure product Product Realization
quality. As a consequence, any change to Achievement of a product with the quality
ECs necessitates a submission to the regula- attributes appropriate to meet the needs of pa-
tory authority (6). tients, health care professionals, and regulatory
2 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
authorities (including compliance with market- provides an agreement between the market-
ing authorization) as well as internal customers’ ing authorization holder and the regulatory
requirements (9). authority (6).
Post-Approval Change Management Process Capability
Protocol (or Comparability Protocol) Ability of a process to realize a product that will
FDA A comprehensive, prospectively writ- fulfill the requirements of that product. The
ten plan for assessing the effect of proposed concept of process capability can also be defined
CMC postapproval change(s) on the iden- in statistical terms (12).
tity, strength, quality, purity, and potency of
a drug product or a biological product (i.e., Quality
product), as these factors may relate to the The degree to which a set of inherent properties
safety or effectiveness of the product (i.e., of a product, system, or process fulfills require-
product quality) (11). ments (8).
ICH A regulatory tool that provides predict- State of Control
ability and transparency in terms of the A condition in which the set of controls consis-
requirements and studies needed to imple- tently provides assurance of continued process
ment a change as the approved protocol performance and product quality (9).
2.2 Abbreviations
API ICH
Active pharmaceutical ingredients International Council for Harmonisation of
Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for
CBE Human Use
Changes Being Effected
PAC
CMC Post-approval change
Chemistry, manufacturing, and controls
PACMP
CPP Post-approval change management protocol
Critical process parameter
PAS
CQA Prior Approval Supplement
Critical quality attribute
Ph. Eur.
EC European Pharmacopoeia
Established conditions
PQS
EMA Pharmaceutical quality system
European Medicines Agency
USP
FDA United States Pharmacopeia
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
WHO
cGMP World Health Organization
Current good manufacturing practices
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 3

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
