11.0 Appendix 1: Replacement of Traditional
Adventitious Agent Detection Methods with Rapid,
PCR-based Detection Methods
11.1 Background
Changes to adopt new and improved technologies for test methods can pose a challenge to the supply
chain as this type of change typically requires regulatory agency filings and, sometimes, prior approval.
The use of testing methods to detect adventitious agents in biologics manufacturing is a necessity and
is required by regulators globally. During the manufacturing process for biologics, manufacturers may
use eukaryotic expression systems, which can be prone to microbial contamination. Consequently,
these processes require strict microbial control strategies, including testing for such adventitious agents
as mycoplasma, Leptospira, and viruses.
Current adventitious agent test methods, however, pose numerous limitations. Assays based on poly-
merase chain reactions (PCR) offer the potential to mitigate these limitations and offer even better
overall detection of adventitious agents. Biologics manufacturers are actively exploring this area, and
current research indicates that PCR-based testing is not only scientifically acceptable, but also accepted
by regulators.
20 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
PCR-based test methods for Mycoplasma sp. present certain advantages for microbiological control—
better sensitivity, faster turnaround of results, reduced sample handling, and fewer test failure issues
(e.g., due to sample matrix effects)—and timely batch release for biologic drug substances.
11.1.1 Description and Rationale of Proposed Changes
The proposed change(s) should be described in sufficient detail to enable a regulatory agency to evalu-
ate the relevancy and adequacy of the PAC strategy, such as supporting data and change categorization.
Including information on the basis and rationale for the change(s), where applicable, is recommended.
The differences from the data that have already been approved should be highlighted clearly (prefer-
ably in a tabular format, as illustrated in Table 11.1.1-1).
Currently, mycoplasma testing of bulk harvest is performed according to established compendial
methods—the culture method (broth and agar cultivation procedure), and the indicator-cell culture
method (cultivation using an adequate cell line followed by a DNA-staining procedure) (1-2).
In this case study, the firm plans to introduce an alternative PCR-based method for the detection of
Mycoplasma sp. in a product’s bulk harvest. This PCR method would be used to perform mycoplasma
testing on unprocessed bulk harvest samples as an alternative mycoplasma test method. The existing,
registered test for mycoplasma (compliant with both European and U.S. pharmacopeias) will remain
in the application.
Table 11.1.1-1 List of Proposed Changes
Current State Proposed Change Rationale (see details below)
Traditional PCR-based • Automated handling of the specimens, avoidance of significant
mycoplasma adventitious manual handling
detection agent
• Significantly reduced process time—less than 1 day compared to
methods (Ph. mycoplasma
28 days using the traditional, growth-based and indicator-cell-based
Eur. 2.6.7/USP detection
mycoplasma detection methods (Mycoplasma, Leptospira, or viruses
<63> culture method
could contaminate expensive downstream processing equipment during
and indicator cell
the traditional 28-day method, resulting in a possible supply disruption)
culture methods)
• Fully automated readout—no need for well-trained analysts with a
high level of expertise to interpret results
• No need for specialized equipment and laboratories to perform
microbiological growth-based and indicator-cell cuture-based assays
• Less prone to interference—some cytotoxic New Molecular Entities
(NMEs) interfere with in vitro cell culture assays
• Increased sensitivity—lower dilution needed to overcome product
inhibition
• Increased specificity
• Less complex sample workflow—only PCR-based assays will be used
• Fewer safety issues—due to the fully automated sample workflow,
avoids manual pipetting that might result in repetitive strain injuries
11.1.2 Present State of Testing
Current detection methods for traditional adventitious agents require the following:
• Significant manual handling of the specimens
• Test period of up to 28 days for results, during which time Mycoplasma, Leptospira, or viruses could
contaminate the downstream processing equipment, resulting in a possible supply disruption
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 21

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• Well-trained analysts with a high level of expertise to interpret results
• Specialized equipment and laboratories
Additional drawbacks of traditional cell- and growth-based detection methods for adventitious agents are:
• Some cytotoxic NMEs interfere with in vitro cell culture assays
• Low sensitivity due to dilution needs (see Table 11.1.2-1)
• Limited specificity
• Different assay platforms
• Complex sample workflow
• Safety, health, and environmental issues
• Risk of secondary contamination, as some adventitious agents require the use of viable positive
controls
Increasing concern has been raised in recent years regarding the sensitivity and/or specificity of tradi-
tional detection assays for adventitious agents. Validation studies of the lack of detection limit/sensitiv-
ity have demonstrated the superiority of PCR-based rodent parvovirus detection assays over the tradi-
tional 324K-cell-based detection assays. Table 11.1.2-1 presents a summary of the validation results.
Table 11.1.2-1 Summary of Validation Results
Rodent Parvovirus Sensitivity of the 324K-Cell- Sensitivity of the PCR-Based
(Species or Strain) Based Assay/(TCID50/mL) Assay/(TCID50/mL)
Kilham’s rat virus (KRV) >10 0.003
Mouse Minute Virus (MMV17) >10 0.14
Mouse Minute Virus (MMV52) >10 0.27
H1-Parvovirus 0.86 0.02
Regarding the lack of specificity, a biopharmaceutical firm discovered that mouse minute virus (MMV)
had contaminated its Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell production system (3). Neither the in vitro
general viral screen nor the 324K cell assay detected this MMV strain, though it can be reliably de-
tected using a PCR assay. This clearly shows that not all viruses can be detected by indicator-cell-based
in vitro viral screen assays.
In addition, this limited specificity, which translates into potential inaccuracies in detecting contami-
nants, has been confirmed not only for viral contaminants, but also for bacterial contaminants. For
example, Spiroplasma citrii cannot be detected by the traditional growth- and cell-based mycoplasma
detection assays. Table 11.1.2-2 provides a summary of validation results (4).
22 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 11.1.2-2 Detection Limit/Sensitivity of Mycoplasma Detection Assays
Detection Limit
Detection Limit Detection Limit
Indicator-Cell
Mycoplasma Strain Reference Strain Culture Method Mycoplasma PCR
Culture Method
(CFU/mL) (CFU/mL)
(CFU/mL)
M. hominis ATCC 23114 0.1 1 0.1
M. orale ATCC 23714 0.1 Not detectable 1
M. arginini ATCC 23838 0.1 10 1
A. laidlawii EDQM 0.01 0.01 0.1
M. hyorhinis EDQM 1 1 10
M. pneumoniae NCTC 10119 1 Not detectable 1
M. salivarium ATCC 23064 0.1 Not detectable 1
M. fermentans ATCC 19989 1 10 0.1
Sp. citri ATCC 27556 Not detectable Not detectable 1
M. hyorhinisa ATCC 29052 Not detectable 10 10
a Fastidious Strain
The data summarized in Table 11.1.2-2 illustrate that the culture method and the mycoplasma PCR
assay are sensitive methods for detecting mycoplasma contamination in preharvest cell-culture fluid
samples derived from a CHO-cell culture process. Both methods can detect the mycoplasma species
included in this comparability study with a sensitivity of ≤10 CFU/mL, but the PCR-based myco-
plasma detection method is superior to the traditional mycoplasma detection methods in regard to
specificity.
While this limited specificity and detection limit/sensitivity is a current challenge for the development
of NMEs, it will become an even greater challenge in the future. Some of the NMEs, such as antican-
cer therapeutics, interfere with traditional in vitro indicator-cell culture-based detection methods for
adventitious agents. The mode-of-action of some NMEs is based on cellular cytotoxicity. Cytotoxicity-
induced cell death not only kills the oncogenic target cells but also the permanent cell lines used as
indicator cells for the traditional in vitro detection methods. Therefore, the testing sample needs to
be diluted (product-dependent up to 1:10,000), resulting in very low sensitivity of the traditional in
vitro detection methods. Whether or not this situation will be tolerated by regulators in the future
is questionable; however, regulators have published guidance documents recommending PCR-based
methods for specific target organisms.
Another example demonstrating the acceptance of PCR-based detection methods by regulators can
be found in the FDA’s Q&A on Current Good Manufacturing Practices, Good Guidance Practices. Here,
the Agency raised the question of whether the microbial control strategies of biologics manufactur-
ers are capable of detecting unusual microbiota such as Leptospira. The FDA recommends the “use of
validated PCR methods (e.g., as an investigative tool) for rapid screening and detection of spirochete
bacteria” (5).
To address the potential limitations of the traditional detection methods discussed in Section 11.1.2,
several companies have introduced multiyear programs, intending to replace traditional cell- and
growth-based detection methods (for microbial contaminants, e.g., mycoplasmal contaminants, or
specific virus strains, such as MMV) with new, fully automated PCR-based methods. These new meth-
ods include purification of the target nucleic acid and real-time PCR amplification and detection
systems.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 23

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Automated PCR-based testing methods for adventitious agents, in contrast to traditional indicator-
cell and growth-based methods, detect contaminants in five to eight hours of analytical time. Thus,
biopharmaceutical companies can isolate the contamination to upstream and harvest equipment
without contaminating downstream equipment. No additional or subsequent processed lots using
the contaminated downstream equipment are secondarily contaminated. Consequently, decontami-
nation efforts are less extensive, resulting in reduced facility shut-down times. In general, PCR-based
adventitious-agent detection methods significantly reduce reaction times, minimize the impact of any
potential contamination on the product supply, and ensure an uninterrupted supply to patients.
Higher throughput and higher reliability are additional benefits of PCR-based methods as they can be ex-
ecuted on fully automated robotic platforms without the need for manual intervention. This avoids safety,
health, and environmental hazards, including such ergonomic issues as repetitive strain injury. Other bene-
fits include cost savings, improved productivity, and increased agility and flexibility in the testing network.
11.2 Current Filing Considerations
Given that the regulatory landscape is not globally harmonized, different submission strategies must be
applied to introduce PCR-based adventitious-agent detection methods by PACs:
• U.S.— Either by product-specific control-system lifecycle-management submissions, multi-
product changes-being-effected (CBE-30) submissions, or prior-approval supplements (PAS)
• EU— By product-specific analytical variations
The current and future regulatory requirements are summarized in Table 11.2-1.
In the current U.S. and EU biologics regulatory guidances, this method change is not defined for a
biologic; therefore, it must bear the caveat that the agencies reserve the right to respond with feedback
to the proposed comparability protocol and approve, deny, and/or ask for more information.
Table 11.2-1 Summary of Current and Future Regulatory Requirements
Future Regulatory
Current Regulatory Requirements
Requirements
Existing What’s Supporting Additional Current Filing Justification Proposed Filing
Established changing? Data Required Tests Required Category w/ Supporting Category
Conditions to Demonstrate Data, Testing
or Impacted Equivalence & Risk
Sections Assessment
Can be an Replace- See “Com- See details • US: PAS PACMP as Follow up
in-process ment of mitment and below (Tell, Wait prior approval with post-
control (IPC) conventional Implementa- and Do) in each juris- change
or a release mycoplasma tion Plan” in diction prior to data as
• EU: Type IB
specification testing the example change imple- “Notification”
(Tell and Do)
with more below mentation of fulfilled
• IPC
sensitive commitment
(S.2.2.S.2.4)
PCR-based (Do & Tell)
• Relese method
specifica-
tion (S.4.1,
S.7.1, S.7.3)
24 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
11.2.1 Risk Management
The PCR method has been scientifically proven to be more sensitive and easily able to detect more
mycoplasma strains than the 21-day method. The risk of the current, older method having less detect-
ability will be mitigated by replacing it with a more sensitive method. In addition, a risk assessment
of the new PCR method was completed, and additional risk controls will be implemented as part of
the change plan.
11.3 Comparability Protocol Strategy Overview for the Replacement of the
Traditional Mycoplasma Detection Methods with a PCR-based Method
According to Ph. Eur. Mycoplasma 2.6.7 and Ph. Eur. Nucleic Acid Amplification Techniques 2.6.21,
the following parameters should be evaluated for a qualitative assay by the validation program (1,6):
• Specificity— ability to unequivocally assess target nucleic acid in the presence of other (poten-
tially interfering) components that may be expected to be present
• Detection Limit/Sensitivity— lowest amount of target nucleic acid in a sample that can be
detected, but not necessarily quantitated as an exact value
• Robustness— measure of its capacity to remain unaffected by small, but deliberate, variations
in method parameters and provide an indication of test method reliability during normal usage
• Comparability Study— comparison of the detection limits of the alternative method and of-
ficial methods; however, specificity should also be considered
The validation program could be split into two sections:
• Generic Method Validation— evaluation of all the parameters listed above
• Product-Specific Method Validation— use of different lots of the specimen to be tested with
a limited number of sensitivity experiments to evaluate whether the PCR-based detection method
is unaffected by the specific sample matrix (test for interfering or inhibiting properties of the
sample matrix or method suitability test) and by lot-to-lot-variability of the sample to be analyzed
The experimental data generated during the generic method validation program, as well as the data of
the product-specific method validation(s) method suitability test(s), would be included in the submis-
sion package.
11.3.1 Conditions that Need to be Met Prior to Implementation of the Change:
Acceptance Criteria for the PCR-Based Mycoplasma Detection Method
11.3.1.1 Acceptance Criteria for the Generic Method Validation
11.3.1.1 Specificity
The ability of the PCR-based mycoplasma detection method to detect a large panel of mycoplasma
species should be demonstrated using characterized reference panels (e.g., reference strains). Moreover,
as the primers will likely detect other bacterial species, the potential cross-detection should be docu-
mented in the validation study.
Based on the results of this validation of specificity, if a gap in the specificity of the method is identified
(such as detection of nonmycoplasmal bacteria species), an appropriate strategy must be proposed in
the validation study to allow interpretation of positive results on a routine basis. For example, a second
test may be performed using an alternative method without this specificity gap or by using an official
method.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 25

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
11.3.1.2 Detection Limit/Sensitivity
A positive cut-off point should be determined for the PCR-based detection method. The positive cut-
off point, as defined in Ph. Eur. 2.6.21, is the minimum number of target sequence copies per volume
of sample that can be detected in 95% of test runs.
Acceptance criteria for the detection limit/sensitivity are defined as follows:
• If the alternative method is proposed to replace the culture method, the PCR-based mycoplasma
detection system must be shown to detect 10 CFU/mL for each relevant mycoplasma test species
chosen.
• If the alternative method is proposed to replace the indicator-cell culture method, the nucleic
acid amplification techniques (NAT) system must be shown to detect 100 CFU/mL for each
mycoplasma test used.
11.3.1.3 Robustness
To determine whether the assay remains unaffected by deliberate variations caused by different lots of
reagents and solutions, three lots of selected critical PCR assay ingredients are used for the PCR-based
mycoplasma detection assay.
Using any of these combinations, the PCR-based mycoplasma detection assay must be able to detect
at least 10 CFU/mL of any of the mycoplasma reference preparations (e.g., M. orale).
11.3.1.4 Comparability Study
In the comparability study, the PCR-based alternative method should be performed in parallel with
the official methods to evaluate simultaneously the detection limit/sensitivity of both methods using
CHO cultures inoculated with different spike levels of mycoplasma reference strains.
The detection limit/sensitivity, as well as the specificity of the PCR-based mycoplasma detection meth-
od, should be comparable or superior to the traditional mycoplasma detection methods.
11.3.1.5 Acceptance Criteria for Product-Specific Method Validation
To evaluate whether the test specimen possesses inhibitory or interfering properties on the PCR-based
mycoplasma detection method, the parameter detection limit/sensitivity should be examined with
three different lots of the test specimen (method suitability test).
The detection limit/sensitivity of the PCR-based assay determined in the generic method validation
must be confirmed using a defined set of mycoplasma species for different lots of the test specimen.
26 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Example: Post-Approval Change Management Protocol
For Change in Analytical Method
PURPOSE
The intent of this validation is to demonstrate that the mycoplasma PCR assay is suitable for the
detection of mycoplasma species in preharvest cell-culture fluid (PHCCF) samples. It also fulfills the
requirements given in Ph. Eur. 2.6.7 for an alternative NAT-based method proposed as an alternative
to the indicator-cell culture and the culture methods for the detection of mycoplasmas. According
to Ph. Eur., the criteria specificity, sensitivity/detection limit, and robustness should be addressed. In
addition, a comparability study with the compendial methods, the indicator-cell culture method, and
the culture method should be performed.
The presence of mycoplasma DNA in the sample is determined by a 400-500 bp target sequence that is am-
plified; this amplicon is detected finally by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis or by real-time PCR (qPCR).
Details of the assays and validation data are published in a peer-reviewed article by Deutschmann, et
al.2010 (7).
This protocol provides guidance on how to validate the PCR-based mycoplasma detection method for:
• Generic validation of the mycoplasma PCR assay. This part of the overall validation is based on the
validation requirements of Ph. Eur. 2.6.21 and the ICH Q2(R1) guideline for a qualitative test (6,8)
• Comparability study for method validation between the mycoplasma PCR assay and the two
compendial mycoplasma detection methods (culture method and indicator-cell culture method)
• Study on inhibiting substances of the PHCCF to evaluate whether the PHCCF interferes with
the performance of the mycoplasma PCR assay
BACKGROUND
Materials and Methods
Test Microorganisms
• M. hominis ATCC 23114
• M. orale ATCC 23714
• M. arginini ATCC 23838
• Acholeplasma laidlawii (EDQM reference strain) (9)
• M. hyorhinis (EDQM reference strain) (10)
• M. hyorhinis ATCC 29052 (fastidious strain, used in comparability study)
• M. pneumoniae NCTC 10119
• M. salivarium ATCC 23064
• M. fermentans ATCC 19989
• Spiroplasma citri ATCC 27556
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 27

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Nonmycoplasmal Strains
In addition, the following closely related non-Gram-positive mycoplasma strains will be used for speci-
ficity experiments:
• Streptococcus bovis
• Lactobacillus acidophilus
• Clostridium sporogenes
CHO Cells
• CHOK1 cell line (DSMZ No.: ACC 110) will be used for the generic method validation and
test positive controls (GAPDH PCR)
• PHCCF samples of three different fermentation runs will be evaluated in the study on PCR-
inhibiting or PCR-interfering substances
DESCRIPTION OF PLANNED CHANGES
Generic Validation of the Mycoplasma PCR Assay
The validation of the mycoplasma PCR assay follows the criteria described in Ph. Eur. 2.6.21 and in
the ICH Q2(R1) guideline for a qualitative test. According to the Ph. Eur., the criteria specificity,
sensitivity/detection limit, and robustness should be addressed.
Specificity
The specificity of the assay will be tested with a large panel of the mycoplasma strains listed in the “Ma-
terials and Methods” section, as well as with other bacterial species that might be cross-detected in the
assay. The bacterial species listed in Materials and Methods were chosen for this study due to the close
phylogenetic relationship to mycoplasma strains. CHO cells will be spiked with mycoplasma strains as
noted. These spiked cells will be examined as a sample in the mycoplasma PCR assay.
In addition, CHO cells will be spiked with a serial dilution of the Gram-positive bacteria to concentrations
of 106–102 CFU/mL. These spiked cells will also be examined as a sample in the mycoplasma PCR assay.
Acceptance Criteria
Acceptance criteria of the test assay must be met for all positive and negative controls.
An amplicon of 400-500 bp must be detectable for all mycoplasma strains tested.
No acceptance criterion is defined for the cross-detection of the Gram-positive bacteria.
Sensitivity/Detection Limit
The detection limit of the mycoplasma PCR assay is the lowest number of CFU in a sample that can be
detected but not necessarily quantitated. To determine the detection limit for each mycoplasma strain, three
independent 10fold dilution series will be tested. The mycoplasma strains chosen will represent all strains
required in the NAT validation chapter (Ph. Eur. 2.6.21), as well as M. orale, M. salivarium, and M. hominis.
According to the data published by McGaritty et al., the five strains—M. hyorhinis, M. orale, M. argi-
nini, M. fermentans, and A. laidlawii—account for more than 95% of all isolates found in mammalian
cell cultures (11).
28 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
More recent publications by Timenetsky et al. and Uphoff & Drexler confirm the data published by
McGarrity et al. In addition, both M. salivarium and M. hominis have been described as sources of my-
coplasma contamination in mammalian cell cultures. These literature citations support the relevancy
of the selected validation strains to industry contamination risks (12-14).
The determination of the sensitivity/detection limit of the mycoplasma PCR method will be per-
formed using the mycoplasma strain stocks listed in the Comparability Study section below. For the
calculation of the different mycoplasma spike concentrations, the titer before freezing will be used.
To determine the detection limit for each mycoplasma strain stock, three independent runs (dilution
series) will be prepared on different days with eight test replicates for each dilution, giving a total num-
ber of 24 test results. In each dilution series, CHO cells will be spiked with 10, 5, 1, 0.5, and 0.1 CFU/
mL. The spiked CHO cells will then be analyzed as samples in the mycoplasma PCR assay. If the cut-off
point is reached for one organism, no further testing of the higher dilutions will be evaluated. The cut-
off point is the minimum number of CFU/mL of sample that can be detected in 95% of the test runs.
If necessary, additional spike concentrations will be used.
Acceptance Criteria
Acceptance criteria of the test assay must be met for all positive and negative controls.
If the mycoplasma PCR assay is proposed as an alternative to the compendial methods (culture meth-
od and indicator-cell culture method), the Ph. Eur. claims that the alternative method can detect
10 CFU/mL for each mycoplasma strain mentioned. Therefore, for each of the strains tested for the
detection limit, a band of 400-500 bp must be present in no fewer than 23 of 24 test results (=95%
cutoff) up to a concentration of at least 10 CFU/mL.
Robustness
In order to examine the robustness of the ready-to-use PCR mycoplasma detection assay, CHO cells
will be spiked with M. orale master stock at concentrations of 1000, 100, 10, 1, 0.1, and 0.01 CFU/
mL. The spiked CHO cells will be analyzed as samples in the PCR mycoplasma detection assay. The
tests will be carried out independently from each other by one analyst on three different days.
The PCR mycoplasma detection assay was developed for use with two models of thermocycler. Each
thermocycler uses different mechanisms for heating and cooling; hence, both thermocycler models will
be included in the robustness study.
To determine whether the assay is affected by different lots, two lots of the commercial kit will be used
to perform the experiments.
Acceptance Criteria
Acceptance criteria of the test assay must be met for all positive and negative controls.
A band of 400–500 bp must be present up to a concentration of 10 CFU/mL in all three test runs.
The detection limit determined for all three test runs must be comparable (difference between the test
runs of not more than 1 log step).
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 29

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Comparability Study
To demonstrate equivalency between the compendial test methods (culture method and indicator-cell
culture method) and the mycoplasma PCR assay, comparability studies will be performed using the
mycoplasma reference strain stocks.
To demonstrate comparability between the indicator-cell culture method, the culture method, and the
mycoplasma PCR assay, 15 mL of a CHO-K1 culture will be spiked with the following mycoplasma
strain stocks to a concentration of 100 CFU/mL:
• M. hominis ATCC 23114 • M. pneumoniae NCTC 10119
• M. orale ATCC 23714 • M. salivarium ATCC 23064
• M. arginini ATCC 23838 • M. fermentans ATCC 19989
• A. laidlawii EDQM reference strain (15) • Sp. citri ATCC 27556
• M. hyorhinis EDQM reference strain (10)
• M. hyorhinis ATCC 29052
(fastidious strain)
The spike concentration will be determined using the titer of each of the mycoplasma strain stocks
before freezing.
Based on this initially spiked sample (100 CFU/mL), a serial 10fold dilution will be prepared using
unspiked CHO-K1 cell culture as diluent, leading to samples spiked with 100, 10, 1, 0.1, 0.01, and
0.001 CFU/mL. The spiking will be performed in triplicate.
After spiking, these samples will be subjected to all three different mycoplasma detection methods in
parallel without freezing the samples. From each dilution, 10 mL of this spiked sample will be used
in the culture method, 1 mL will be used as the inoculum for the indicator-cell culture method, and
900 µL will be subjected to the mycoplasma PCR.
In this comparability study, the detection limit for each respective method is determined as the lowest
spike concentration in which mycoplasma can be detected in all three runs.
The detection limit of the three mycoplasma detection methods should be comparable.
Study on PCR-Inhibiting or PCR-Interfering Substances of the Preharvest Cell-Culture Fluid
To evaluate if the PHCCF of CHO-based manufacturing processes possess inhibitory or interfer-
ing properties upon the detection of mycoplasma DNA with the mycoplasma PCR assay, PHCCF
samples of three different fermentation runs will be spiked with M. hyorhinis and A. laidlawii to titers
close to the detection limit determined in the generic method validation. M. hyorhinis has been chosen
for this study as one representative of strains with results in a lower sensitivity (5 CFU/mL) in the
generic method validation. A. laidlawii is chosen because this strain possesses the most mismatches to
the primer sequences as compared to all the strains included in the generic method validation.
Sensitivity/Detection Limit
The detection limit for M. hyorhinis and A. laidlawii will be analyzed in the presence of three different
batches of PHCCF samples.
30 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Therefore, three independent dilution series will be prepared with these two test microorganisms on
different days with eight test replicates for each dilution, giving a total number of 24 test results. In
each dilution series, one of three PHCCF samples will be spiked with 10, 5, and 3 CFU/mL of A.
laidlawii or 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 CFU/mL of M. hyorhinis. The spiked PHCCF will be analyzed using
the mycoplasma PCR assay.
Acceptance Criteria
Acceptance criteria of the test assay must be met for all positive and negative controls.
To confirm the results of the generic method validation, a band of 400-500 bp must be present in 23
of 24 test results up to a concentration of, at least:
• 10 CFU/mL for the detection of M. hyorhinis
• 0.1 CFU/mL for the detection of A. laidlawii
COMMITMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
Proposed Reporting Category for Proposed PACs
The firm’s PQS will be followed to implement the change, and the relevant regulatory authorities will
be notified. Post-change monitoring will occur to ensure no unintended consequences result; all docu-
mentation relevant to the change will be available for review by regulatory authorities during inspection.
Implementation of Changes
The firm will outline the global implementation plan for this change (e.g., timing of the introduction).
11.4 References
1. Council of Europe. Mycoplasmas, Chapter 2.6.7. In European Pharmacopoeia (Ph. Eur.), 10th
Edition, Council of Europe: Strasbourg, France, 2019.
2. U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter <63> Mycoplasma Tests. In USP 44–NF 39,
USP: Rockville, Md., 2020.
3. Moody, M, et al. Mouse Minute Virus (MMV) Contamination--A Case Study: Detection, Root Cause
Determination, and Corrective Actions. PDA J Pharm Sci Technol 2011, Nov-Dec; 65 (6), 580-8.
4. Deutschmann, S M. Mycoplasma PCR: Interactions with Agencies, A Journey to Global Acceptance—
Lessons Learned, Presented at ECA’s European Mycoplasma Testing Conference, Copenhagen,
Denmark, May 23, 2013; 2013.
5. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Questions and Answers on Current Good Manufacturing
Practices—Production and Process Controls. Guidances (Drugs). https://www.fda.gov/drugs/
guidances-drugs/questions-and-answers-current-good-manufacturing-practices-production-and-
process-controls#14 (accessed 11 Feb 2021).
6. Council of Europe. Nucleic acid amplification techniques, Chapter 2.6.21. In European Phar-
macopoeia (Ph. Eur.), 10th Edition, Council of Europe: Strasbourg, 2018.
7. Deutschmann, S M, et al. Validation of a NAT-based Mycoplasma assay according to European
Pharmacopoiea. Biologicals 2010, 38 (2), 238-48.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 31

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
8. International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q2(R1): Validation of Analytical
Procedures: Text and Methodology; ICH: Geneva, 2005.
9. Council of Europe. Ph. Eur. Reference Standard - Leaflet: Acholeplasma laidlawii BRP batch 1
EDQM: Strasbourg, 2008.
10. Council of Europe. Ph. Eur. Reference Standard - Leaflet: M. hyorhinis BRP batch 1; EDQM:
Strasbourg, 2008.
11. McGarrity, G J, et al. Mycoplasma muris, a New Species from Laboratory Mice Int J Syst Bacte-
riol 1983, 33 (2), 350-55.
12. Timenetsky, J, et al. Detection of multiple mycoplasma infection in cell cultures by PCR. Braz J
Med Biol Res 2006, 39 (7), 907-14.
13. Uphoff, C C; Drexler, H G. Eradication of mycoplasma contaminations. Methods Mol Biol
2013, 946, 15-26.
14. Uphoff, C C; Drexler, H G. Detection of Mycoplasma contamination in cell cultures. Curr
Protoc Mol Biol 2014, 106 (1), 28.4.1-28.4.14.
15. Milne, C; A, D. Establishment of European Pharmacopoeia Mycoplasma Reference Strains.
Pharmeuropa Bio 2006, Nov; 2006 (1), 57-71.
