6.0 Global Lifecycle and PAC Management
6.1 ICH Regions
The impact of ICH in harmonizing guidelines and aligning ICH member regions has provided sig-
nificant advantages in both the PLCM and the management of PACs. The continuing challenge is the
wide diversity of expectations of non-ICH regions in both the content and timing of PAC submission
approvals. Some common characteristics leveraged in ICH regions that enable efficient PACs include:
• Clear guidance for filing changes, including reporting categories based on risk
• Acceptance of science- and risk-based approaches for developing data to support PACs,
such as bracketing and/or matrixing of process validation and stability batches
• Potential acceptance of limited stability data when justified, such as three or
six months of real-time data and three months of accelerated data, to sup-
port major changes, and less or no stability data for minor changes
• Well-defined timelines for review and approval of PACs, in the range of six months
for a major change and shorter periods for minor to moderate changes
• Relatively fewer requests for additional documentation not included in CTD Module 3, such as
declarations or GMP certificates, although the latter may be needed for addition of a new facility
6.2 Non-ICH Regions
Regions not participating in ICH frequently observe fewer of the characteristics that enable PACs
to be managed consistently across multiple regulatory authorities. Examples seen in some non-ICH
regions include:
• Lack of available post-approval guidance
• No or very limited provision for a differentiation in filing level, such as allowing for providing
notifications rather than submissions for lower-risk changes or recognizing risk-based scientifi-
cally valid strategies, such as bracketing or matrixing of process validation and stability data
• Requirements for extensive amounts of drug product stability data to support even minor
changes or drug substance changes, for example, up to the full shelf life
• Requirements for extensive ancillary documentation to support PACs,
such as declarations, certificates of various types, and legalizations
In 2020, PDA completed a survey of industry on this topic. According to survey results, half of the
respondents indicated that the authorities that take the most time to approve prior-approval supple-
ments require more than a year to grant such approval. Some markets were reported as having ex-
tremely long review times for changes, for example, five years. Some markets add extra requirements,
such as implementing product changes immediately upon that country’s approval, which is not always
feasible given the manufacturing schedule or lag in approval by other jurisdictions. The survey also
14 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
indicated some jurisdictions may not allow for the simultaneous review of multiple changes, instead
requiring each change to be submitted for agency review individually, in sequence (26). These types
of requirements make it extremely difficult to file global PACs, which can make it very challenging to
initiate or even propose process improvements. In some cases, this can impact product supply.
When considering the supply chain, extended approval times for products with limited expiry dating
can create significant challenges, as it may not be possible to build up sufficient inventory levels. For
example, a process or facility change that requires modifications that, when made, no longer allows for
the product to be manufactured using the original process. Once the change is made, the inventory of
product using the original process is set and, if approval takes an extended time (in some cases years),
the chance the inventory will be depleted or will expire before the change is fully approved increases
significantly, impacting product availability and affecting the patient. The WHO guidances on bio-
therapeutics and vaccines provide good examples of changes and apply a risk-based approach to PACs,
similar in format to the Health Canada Post-Notice of Compliance (NOC) Changes: Quality Document
(20). The WHO publications are intended to serve as a guide for establishing national requirements
for the regulation of PACs to biotherapeutic products and vaccines. In jurisdictions that do not of-
fer their own guidance, these guidelines can be helpful in applying a risk-based approach to the PAC
requirements and approval timing. In these cases, the guidance(s) should be referenced during the
PAC process. Also, the WHO PAC guidelines strongly encourage national regulatory authorities to
establish requirements commensurate with their own regulatory capacity, experience, and resources
and to work toward minimizing any negative impact on access to approved products (4,5). National
regulatory authorities are encouraged to consider establishing procedures for the expedited approval of
changes based on previous expert review and approval of the same changes by the national authorities
of the other countries where those products are licensed or, alternatively, based on the decision of a
recognized regional regulatory agency.
Where there is a potential for the timing of change approval in non-ICH regions to impact product
supply, it is highly recommended that the firm contact those regulatory agencies early to alert them to
the potential issues and request their assistance.
7.0 Legacy Marketed Products and ICH Q12
One of the challenges with the changing global regulatory landscape relates to marketed products, that
is, products that have been approved and are in distribution. The full benefits of the ICH Q12 PAC
processes may initially only apply to products that are newly submitted in jurisdictions that apply ICH
guidelines. Consequently, for many older products already on the market, there may be a prolonged
period to implement ICH Q12 PAC principles, which may be impacted by the inclusion of specific
information in the approved filing. For example, identifying which items should be called out as ECs
could present a challenge and could require considerable time and resources to accomplish.
To take full advantage of ICH Q12, some type of modernization of the regulatory filing around the
CMC sections may be needed.
Regardless of how they embrace ICH Q12 concepts, in ICH regions, firms will have the option to
develop and submit a list of ECs to regulatory agencies in a prior-approval submission. This would
allow the firm to conduct a full or partial assessment and possibly remove parameters currently in the
filing that, based on product knowledge, do not require a submission to change. This could reduce
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 15

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
the filing category of some of the parameters, for example, moving from prior approval to notifica-
tion. The firm could also use a prior-approval submission to change from a parameter-based EC to
performance-based conditions. This could be done for the entirety of Modules 3.2.S and 3.2.P or only
for specific sections.
The potential advantage to adding ECs to a marketed product is that more historical data and a bet-
ter understanding of the product exists for marketed products than would have been available when
the initial marketing authorization was submitted. That product history and knowledge can be used
to demonstrate that the changes made to certain parameters and quality attributes are low risk and,
therefore, should be allowed notification-only status or could be managed solely within the PQS. To
reduce the regulatory burden of PACs, the historic manufacturing and characterization data would
have to be submitted to justify the risk assessment scientifically. This data should be submitted in the
development sections of the filing (e.g., Modules 3.2.S.2.6 and 3.2.P.2) to support the proposed ECs
and reduced filing category. If these data are submitted in sufficient detail, once the ECs are approved,
future PACs could be implemented more quickly.
In most cases, prospectively filing a prior-approval submission to add ECs would not be efficient unless
it is submitted along with a planned major change. Otherwise, the ECs would have to be approved
before a change could be made without needing a submission, which would further increase the regu-
latory burden. Additionally, regulatory agencies in different jurisdictions may not agree to the same
ECs, which would add to the complexity of the maintenance of ECs by the firm.
8.0 Recommendations for Harmonization
(Categorization of Changes)
In the current regulatory environment, industry benchmarking shows that it can take up to five years
to have a single change approved across all affected countries. Current guidances from regulatory
agencies, including the FDA, EMA, WHO, and Health Canada, attempt to clarify how changes are
to be evaluated, when they should be reported, and if prior approval from the agency is required to
implement the change (4, 5, 11, 13, 20). Based on the severity of the effect of the change to the ECs
or product quality and, hence, to the safety and efficacy for patients, the changes are generally classified
in three categories:
• Do and Record (Lowest Risk) — manage within the PQS (e.g., Health Canada Level IV)
• Do and Tell (Minor to Moderate) — notification (e.g., Type IA or Annual Reportable)
— Tell, Wait and Do (some Moderate) — (e.g., Type IB or CBE-30)
• Tell, Wait and Do (Major) — prior approval (e.g., Type II or Prior Approval Supplement)
The EU’s variation regulations and post-authorization guidance and FDA’s scale-up and post-approval
change (SUPAC) guidance documents provide specific details on the scientific data that should be
submitted and how it should be presented for specific PACs (27-31). The requirements are consistent
with the potential impact of the change on the quality, safety, and efficacy of the product similar to the
underlying concepts adopted by the FDA in its Guidance for Industry: Changes to an Approved NDA
or ANDA (32).
Specific scientific documentation requirements and approval timelines can vary greatly among juris-
dictions, however.
16 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
To allow the industry to continue to modernize and make the needed improvements in both quality
and productivity in a timely fashion, action is needed in many of the non-ICH regions. Establishing
new regulations or modifying existing regulations to introduce the three mechanisms for change—PQS
management, notification, and prior approval—that align with ICH Q12 and other global regulatory
expectations is recommended. To fully realize the benefits of ICH Q12, a certain level of regulatory
convergence and harmonization is needed. With respect to categorization of changes, this convergence
and harmonization is necessary for global movement towards the model provided in Figure 3.0-1.
8.1 Harmonized Definitions and Consistent Requirements for Approval of
Changes
The categorization of changes depicted in Figure 3.0-1 as major, moderate, or minor throughout all
regions would greatly benefit both regulators and manufacturers globally by providing clear, consistent
guidelines.
Having a consistent set of requirements in place would allow firms to prepare a single scientific jus-
tification for their PACs that can be submitted to all regulatory agencies for approval. Specifically,
better definition of the requirements for the approval of a major change would clarify data-reporting
expectations. With this clarity, firms could better plan for major changes. With this convergence and
harmonization using the ICH framework, regulatory agencies also could provide guidelines on the
requirements for comparability that include a time-period requirement for stability data for each of the
three categories of change. Applying the same requirements across ICH and non-ICH regions would
also benefit patients.
8.2 Mutual Recognition and Consistent Review Times of PACs in ICH Regions
Most often, product applications are filed across multiple regions. If the classification of changes and
requirements for justification of a PAC were consistent throughout all ICH regions, a firm would be
able to submit the approval evidence of a change from one ICH member to other ICH members,
minimizing the repetitious review time for subsequent approvals. If member countries mutually rec-
ognize the approval of a PAC, filing the change in one ICH member country could then be sufficient
to obtain approval in all ICH regions.
Similar concepts could be applied in non-ICH regions. Acceptance of changes approved by recognized
regulatory agencies in ICH countries based on sound science- and risk-based principles would result
in a lower regulatory burden worldwide. This is an established practice, for example, with issuing
Certificates of Pharmaceutical Product. Many jurisdictions accept a Certificate from one jurisdiction
and leverage the approval from the Certificate-issuing country to alleviate the regulatory burden in the
country accepting the Certificate.
Taking this reasoning further, the review timelines for a PAC submission could be defined by the type
of change, which would then be similar throughout the ICH regions and the rest of world. (Table
8.2-1 provides an example of such a proposal.) Making this change would ensure that firms can better
anticipate the timeline for approvals of the PAC, allowing for improved planning, faster introduction
of innovative technologies, and timelier availability of improved products to patients.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 17

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 8.2-1 Proposed Harmonized Standard Review Time
Consistent PAC Risk-Level Reporting Category and Review Times
Do and Record Do and Tell – Notification Tell, Wait and Do –
(Lowest Risk) (Minor to Moderate) Prior-approval (Major)
Review Not Applicable, documented within Regional timelines apply but NMT Timelines are jurisdiction-
Time§ a firm’s PQS 90 days# specific#* but NMT 180 days
NMT=No more than
§ Excludes potential clock stops due to queries
# Ranges from implementation upon filing to a specified timeline post-filing; “NMT” timelines are strongly encouraged and
recommended here
* Timelines for major prior-approval submissions may be impacted by site evaluations or inspections
9.0 Conclusion
PACs and the continuing work to harmonize the processes used by the regulatory authorities to govern
them is a key enabler to fully implementing a continual improvement model that ensures access to
state-of-the-art, high-quality medicines and prevents or mitigates supply disruptions. The principles
outlined in ICH Q12 provide the pathway to harmonization.
If implemented globally, the principles set out in ICH Q12, including PACMPs, can lead to more
consistent reporting requirements, with the level of reporting based on the risk associated with a spe-
cific change. This, in addition to increased alignment of regulatory authority processes and approval
times, can enable a more rapid implementation of innovative technologies and improvements in the
manufacturing process.
10.0 References
1. European Federation of Pharmaceutical In- Solutions. PDA J Pharm Sci and Tech 2020,
dustries and Associations. Optimising Post-Ap- 74 (4), 456-67.
proval Change Management for Timely Access to
Medicines Worldwide; Efpia: Brussels, 2017. 4. World Health Organization. Annex 4:
Guidelines on Procedures and Data Require-
2. International Federation of Pharmaceuti- ments for Changes to Approved Vaccines
cal Manufacturers & Associations. IFPMA (TRS No. 993); WHO: Geneva, 2015.
Position Paper on the Handling of Post-ap-
proval Changes to Marketing Authorizations; 5. World Health Organization. Annex 3: Guide-
IFPMA: Geneva, 2016. lines on Procedures and Data Requirements
for Changes to Approved Biotherapeutic Prod-
3. Ramnarine, E, et al. Effective Management ucts; TRS No. 1011. WHO: Geneva, 2018.
of Post-Approval Changes in the Pharma-
ceutical Quality System (PQS)—through 6. International Council for Harmonisation.
Enhanced Science and Risk-Based Approach- Quality Guideline Q12: Technical and
es Industry One-Voice-of-Quality (1VQ) Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceuti-
18 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
cal Product Lifecycle Management; ICH: 16. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guid-
Geneva, 2019. ance for Industry: Contract Manufacturing
Arrangements for Drugs: Quality Agreements;
7. International Council for Harmonisation. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Quality Guideline Q8(R2): Pharmaceutical Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2016.
Development; ICH Geneva, 2009.
17. Srinivasan, A; Kurey, B. Creating a Culture
8. International Council for Harmonisation. of Quality. Harvard Business Review 2014, 92
Quality Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Manage- (4), 23-25.
ment; ICH: Geneva, 2005.
18. Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/
9. International Council for Harmonisation. Cooperation Scheme (PIC/S). How to
Quality Guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical Qual- Evaluate/Demonstrate the Effectiveness of a
ity System; ICH: Geneva, 2008. Pharmaceutical Quality System in relation
to Risk-based Change Management; PIC/S:
10. International Council for Harmonisation. Geneva, 2019.
Quality Guideline Q11: Development and
Manufacture of Drug Substances (Chemical 19. Parenteral Drug Association. Technical
Entities and Biotechnological/Biological Enti- Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality
ties); ICH: Geneva, 2012. Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and
Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations;
11. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Draft PDA, Inc.: Bethesda, Md., 2012.
Guidance for Industry: Established Conditions:
Reportable CMC Changes for Approved Drug 20. Health Canada. Guidance Document: Post-
and Biologic Products; U.S. Department of Notice of Compliance (NOC) Changes:
Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, Quality Document; Minister of Health: Ot-
Md, 2015. tawa, Ontario, 2019.
12. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Draft 21. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Pharma-
Guidance for Industry: Comparability ceutical Quality in the 21st Century – A Risk-
Protocols for Human Drugs and Biologics: Based Approach; U.S. Department of Health
Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2007.
Information, Revision 1; U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, 22. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guid-
Md, 2016. ance for Industry: CMC Postapproval Manu-
facturing Changes for Specified Biological
13. European Medicines Agency. Questions and Products to be Documented in Annual
Answers on Post-Approval Change Manage- Reports; U.S. Department of Health and
ment Protocols; Committee for Medicinal Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2017.
Products for Human Use: London, 2012.
23. U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
14. Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Guidance for Industry: Q12 Technical and
Japan. Act on Securing Quality, Efficacy and Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceuti-
Safety of Products Including Pharmaceuticals cal Product Lifecycle Management; U.S.
and Medical Devices, Act No. 145 of August Department of Health and Human Services:
10, 1960; Pharmaceuticals and Medical De- Silver Spring, Md., 2021.
vices (Japanese Law Translation): 1960.
24. International Council for Harmonisation.
15. International Organization for Standardiza- The Common Technical Document for the
tion. ISO 9000:2015 Quality Management Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human
Systems -- Fundamentals and Vocabulary; ISO: Use: Quality – M4Q(R1); ICH Secretariat:
Geneva, 2015. Geneva, 2002.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 19

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
25. International Council for Harmonisation. 29. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guid-
Quality Guideline Q12 Annexes: Technical ance for Industry: SUPAC-SS: Nonsterile Semi-
and Regulatory Considerations for Phar- solid Dosage Forms Manufacturing Equipment
maceutical Product Lifecycle Management; Addendum; U.S. Department of Health and
ICH: Geneva, 2019. Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 1998.
26. Parenteral Drug Association. PDA Research: 30. European Commission. Regulation (EC)
2021 Post-Approval Change Issues and Impacts No 1234/2008 of 24 November 2008
Survey; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2021; p 57. concerning the examination of variations
to the terms of marketing authorisations
27. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guid- for medicinal products for human use and
ance for Industry: SUPAC-MR: Modified veterinary medicinal products; OJ. European
Release Solid Dosage Forms, Scale-Up and Commission: Brussels, 2008.
Postapproval Changes; Center for Drug Evalu-
ation and Research (CDER). U.S. Depart- 31. European Medicines Agency. Post-Authori-
ment of Health and Human Services: Silver sation Procedural Advice for Users of the
Spring, Md., 1997. Centralised Procedure; EMA: London, 2022.
28. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guid- 32. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guid-
ance for Industry: SUPAC-SS: Nonsterile ance for Industry: Changes to an Approved
Semisolid Dosage Forms; Scale-Up and Post- NDA or ANDA; Center for Drug Evaluation
Approval Changes: Chemistry, Manufactur- and Research. U.S. Department of Health
ing and Controls; In Vitro Release Testing and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md,
and In Vivo Bioequivalence Documentation; 2004.
U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services: Rockville, Md., 1997.
