22
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Transfer of packaged materials into a cleanroom area should follow the cleanroom material transfer 
procedure of shedding any additional wrappings (double-/triple-bags or containers) or performing ex-
ternal surface disinfection as the material container moves from an outer room to an inner room. There 
should also be an appropriate procedure for disposal of used wrappings and containers for movement 
out of cleanroom areas to prevent cross-contamination by residual material. 
6.6	 Importance of Supplier Quality Systems
The significance of a supplier’s quality system cannot be overstated. Raw materials can be key sources 
of contamination and are primarily controlled through the supplier’s quality system.
Before purchasing raw materials for GMP manufacturing, a quality agreement with the supplier should 
be in place. For raw materials, an evaluation of the supplier’s quality system should be conducted. For 
critical raw materials, special attention should be paid to the supplier’s process flow and controls (e.g., 
hazard analysis of critical control points (HACCP) approach), representative sampling and appropri-
ate testing (including sample size, location, and frequency), trends of all specification test results, and 
good packaging and distribution practices.
6.7	 Starting Materials Unique to Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing
The use and control of biological starting materials (i.e., cell banks or virus banks) are unique to 
biopharmaceutical and vaccine manufacturing. The contamination of biological starting material can 
significantly impact the performance of a biopharmaceutical drug substance and thus, negatively influ-
ence patient safety and the therapeutic effect. 
Biological starting material should be procured from an approved supplier to ensure adequate con-
tamination control. Contamination control for biological starting material is similar to the controls 
required for sterile product manufacture in terms of the use, cleaning, and monitoring of manu-
facturing and storage facilities as well as employing adequate, trained personnel and adhering to 
GMPs. 
Master and working banks are sterile or axenic, and they should be manipulated in a dedicated, well-
controlled and contained environment, such as a Grade A setting, where aseptic technique is critical. 
Biological starting material should have adequate source documentation to ensure that animal-derived 
materials, if used, were controlled for transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) and BSE. Test-
ing is performed for sterility (or purity for microbial materials) and to ensure that mycoplasma, bacte-
rial endotoxins, and viral contamination are not present. 
Biological starting material should always be handled as sterile materials. ICH Quality Guideline Q5A: 
Quality of Biotechnological Products: Viral Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology Products Derived from Cell Lines 
of Human or Animal Origin describes some of the expectations related to test requirements of cell banks. 
All equipment in the manufacturing area should be adequately cleaned and decontaminated to main-
tain the state of sterility of the materials and to prevent cross-contamination. This usually means that 
equipment can be either sterilized or steam-sanitized. All supplies that come in contact with the bio-
logical starting material should either be purchased sterile or sterilized prior to use.
Other materials in biopharmaceutical manufacturing, such as buffers and culture media, should be 
assessed for contamination risk. Evaluation of the supplier’s manufacturing process, specifications, and 
analytical testing trends can provide substantial input for the risk assessment. The potential for ex-
trinsic contamination should be considered during the contamination risk assessment along with the 
impurity removal capability of the process. The potential risk for microbiological growth and develop-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
23
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
ment of bacterial endotoxins in media or buffers that are held for extended periods of time can be high. 
Assessment of these materials should be included in the risk assessment of the bulk drug substance. 
Section 9.0 provides further detail on process controls for drug substances and drug product. 
Appropriate, integrity-assured (by testing) packaging for these types of biopharmaceutical starting 
materials is important in preventing contamination. If sterilization is possible prior to the packag-
ing of the starting materials before being stored or transported, it should be considered. If single-use 
packaging is used, additional protective-barrier packaging should be considered for transport. PDA 
Technical Report No. 66: Application of Single-Use Systems in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing can provide 
more information.
6.8	 Starting Materials for Advanced Therapy Medicinal Product Manufacturing
Strong contamination control, based on quality risk assessment, is needed for the biological starting 
materials used in advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMP), also known as cell and gene therapy 
products (CGTP), to prevent adventitious agents from being introduced from the biologic origin and 
to prevent cross-contamination. Contamination of these materials can significantly influence product 
safety and the therapeutic effect, and thus affect the patient’s health. ATMP starting materials can 
include human donor cells or tissues, banked human cell lines, viral banks, viral vectors and their 
supporting cell lines, and naked nucleic acids. The level of contamination control needed for ATMP 
starting materials should be based on the level of risk to the finished drug product.
Human donor cells and tissues are collected and initially tested according to good clinical practices and 
good clinical laboratory practices, rather than GMPs. Traceability of the human donor cells and the 
health assessment of the donor are the keys to contamination control at the point of collection. When 
donor material undergoes manipulation or selection for the AMTP, it becomes starting material for 
manufacture and requires GMP controls as appropriate by phase. 
Some of the starting materials may not be GMP or compendial-grade, so the risk assessment should 
consider the hazards and controls related to material origin, supply chain, manufacturing controls, and 
analytical testing. 
7.0 
Environmental Control, Validation, and Monitoring
Environmental control is a fundamental part of the CCS because contaminants from the environment 
can enter the utilities, raw materials, equipment, and the process stream from the air and through surface 
transfer. A spike in environmental contaminants (e.g., seasonal variations) can challenge the other elements 
of the CCS. For instance, molds and spore-forming bacteria are in high concentrations outdoors, and a 
spike in these organisms in the cleanroom can challenge the facility cleaning/disinfection and equipment 
sanitization/sterilization programs (spore-forming bacteria are still the most common bioreactor contami-
nants). Increased skin bacteria from the operators in the environment can challenge the aseptic processing 
controls; skin bacteria are still the most common contaminants found in products intended to be sterile.
Environmental monitoring (EM) programs do not prevent or control contamination, but they provide an 
indicator of environmental quality through multiple discrete snapshots in time. The main purpose of the 
EM program is to measure the performance of the contamination controls related to the environment and 
to highlight the potential loss of control due to a variety of causes, such as personnel behavior, disinfection 
practices, HVAC equipment malfunction, and facility age. An ongoing generation of EM trends can be 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
24
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
used for remediation to ensure that the facility continues to operate in a state of control and to prevent 
extrinsic contamination of the product. The effectiveness of an EM program is dependent on the proper 
identification of critical control points (CCPs) as part of a risk assessment (e.g., HACCP).
An EM program with acceptable trends should not be used to support poor aseptic or disinfection prac-
tices, for example, to defend a decrease in disinfection frequencies or the elimination of sporicidal agents. 
Section 15.0, Table 9 and Table 10 provide additional points to consider regarding EM and testing 
controls. PDA Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022): Fundamentals of an Environmental Monitoring 
Program also provides extensive guidance on establishing an effective EM program for facilities, critical 
utilities, and personnel. 
7.1	 Environmental Performance Qualification
Environmental monitoring performance qualification (EMPQ) is performed to provide documented 
evidence that the facility design and environmental controls can act together to consistently achieve 
the desired level of contamination control for the intended manufacturing use. The EMPQ evaluates 
the CCS environmental control elements including facility and HVAC design, access and flow, clean-
ing/disinfection, gowning, material transfer, and pest control. 
EMPQ is conducted in newly constructed controlled classified areas or after significant changes in 
existing facilities, that is, changes that could affect the contamination control performance of the envi-
ronment. The EMPQ sample locations (including CCPs) should be selected based on a risk assessment 
using guidance from ISO 14644-1:2015 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments – Part 1: 
Classification of Air Cleanliness by Particle Concentration. Prior to the EMPQ, the new area should be 
fully functional with equipment installed and all relevant CCS programs established and underway. 
The cleanroom installation and operation qualification are outlined in ISO 14644 and include airflow 
visualization (smoke) studies, which should be performed under static and dynamic (worst-case or 
process-relevant) conditions. The data generated from the execution of the EMPQ supports the es-
tablishment of the ongoing EM program, which includes the selection of routine sampling locations. 
For additional information on EMPQ design and site selection, refer to PDA Technical Report No. 13 
(Revised 2022): Fundamentals of an Environmental Monitoring Program.
7.1.1	 Environmental Requalification
Requalification is performed after controlled classified areas have been modified in ways that involve 
changes to structure, process flow, or materials of construction. In addition, the area may be requalified 
after a significant change has occurred, such as a change in the operational use of the area or other con-
tamination control programs (e.g., EM program, sanitization program, gowning). Periodic requalifica-
tion studies may be performed based on risk assessments, site validation procedures, or changes in the 
ongoing trend data or as required by local regulations (e.g., current version of Annex 1 recommends 
requalification of Grade A & B every 6 months and Grade C &D every 12 months.)
The change control for the affected rooms should assess cumulative changes in the rooms that may 
warrant requalification. An EMPQ study protocol should include the scope and requirements of the 
requalification, sampling plan, and acceptance criteria.
7.1.2	 Environmental Monitoring Critical Parameters 
The HVAC system and associated air handling units control the cleanliness of the air and provide 
an environment that is suitable for operators to work safely and comfortably. Procedures should be 
in place to monitor and trend critical parameters to assess whether the cleanroom is performing as 
intended. The procedures should also include instructions on how to handle excursions and alarms. 
Critical parameters are outlined in Sections 7.1.2.1–7.1.2.3.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
