19
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The routine water-monitoring program should be based on QRM principles and the learnings from the 
qualification period. The critical points of use that deliver water to the process should be monitored more 
frequently than noncritical points of use that are used for facility cleaning or not used at all. Also, water 
ports that represent the worst-case location in the distribution loop should be monitored frequently.
On-line technologies, such as total organic carbon and conductivity, have increased the ability to 
detect water system problems in real time, potentially avoiding the use of compromised water for 
production. Similar on-line technologies for real-time bioburden and endotoxins are currently being 
investigated; they offer a huge advantage over lengthy lab-based assays in that atypical results are iden-
tified immediately and can be corrected, thus addressing contamination issue in a timelier manner. 
5.7	 Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
The heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) system is a critical element of the contamina-
tion control strategy as it is the primary system that attains the appropriate environmental quality. In 
addition, isolators or other barrier technology should be used to protect sterile products.
Correct operation of the HVAC system ensures appropriate air quality by:
•	
Introducing preconditioned air of the right quality
•	
Distributing clean air while removing contamination via strategically placed HEPA filters and air returns 
•	
Establishing the air pressure cascade to prevent ingress of contaminants from less-controlled areas 
•	
Maintaining the temperature and relative humidity to prevent microbial growth and provide opti-
mal working conditions for operators (e.g., to avoid sweating, shivering, and distracting discomfort) 
To achieve this state, the HVAC environmental controls should be optimized and qualified to main-
tain the appropriate level of environmental quality. (Section 7.0 further discusses environmental qual-
ification and monitoring.) To prevent process contamination, the other elements of the CCS, includ-
ing the traffic of personnel and materials, cleaning and disinfection program, and specific hazards in 
each area, should be considered. For example, an area with heavy personnel traffic will require more 
air changes than a lightly used area, and an area that is routinely exposed to steaming operations may 
require active temperature and humidity control and a robust exhaust system. 
5.8	 Gases
Compressed gases are often introduced into the manufacturing process stream and into production 
equipment after point-of-use filtration. Noncritical support gases that are not product-contacting may 
also warrant strong control because they can impact other critical systems. 
Procedures for the qualification, maintenance, and monitoring of gas systems should be created using 
QRM principles. Once qualified, a routine monitoring program should be put in place that includes 
physical and microbiological parameters. Moisture is a critical parameter because moisture can lead 
to microbial proliferation, especially for molds, which require less moisture than bacteria and yeasts. 
GMP regulations from the EU and U.S. mention that compressed gases should have similar or better 
physical and microbiological quality than the cleanroom air where the gases are used. However, gases 
that enter a closed process stream should meet the air quality demanded by the process. For example, 
a low-bioburden process that is only exposed to a Grade A air supply when open processing occurs 
should be fed gas that meets Grade A air-supply quality.
More information about gases is provided in ISO 8573-1: 2010 Compressed Air — Part 1: Contami-
nants and Purity Classes, ISPE’s Good Practice Guide: Process Gases, and the major pharmacopeias. Infor-
mation about gas filtration can be found in PDA Technical Report No. 40: Sterilizing Filtration of Gases.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
20
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
6.0 
Raw Materials
Raw materials can introduce contaminants to the process stream and final drug products, so ensuring 
that raw materials are of appropriate quality is crucial to the CCS. 
Raw materials are any substances, active or inactive, that are used during the manufacturing process of 
a drug. Pharmaceutical excipients are the raw materials, aside from active pharmaceutical ingredients 
(APIs), that are used to formulate final drug products. Water is considered a significant raw material 
and excipient (see Section 5.4.1). Consumables and other product-contact materials also require strict 
control. Primary packaging materials are discussed in Section 10.0. 
The contamination risk profile of a raw material is a direct outcome of the origin and subsequent pro-
cessing of the source material. A quality risk assessment should be performed to identify the risks from 
each raw material, identify which materials are critical, and establish the control measures needed to 
support the CCS, such as testing and processing. Development of a strong collaborative relationship 
with the raw material supplier can ensure transparency, knowledge-sharing, and risk mitigation on an 
ongoing basis for contamination control (see Section 6.7). 
6.1	 Specifications
Raw material specifications are often developed by the material manufacturer and relate to the amount 
of control that is understood by the manufacturer, from the material’s origin through its processing. The 
largest end-user of materials is often not the pharmaceutical manufacturer, thus supplier-derived speci-
fications may not be entirely relevant. Pharmaceutical manufacturers should develop relevant specifica-
tions that consider the risk profile of the material based on its origin, the material’s manufacturing pro-
cess, and the level of quality needed for the drug manufacturing process. For excipients, it is also critical 
that the specifications be aligned with the intended final product specifications and dosage use (4-5). 
Pharmacopeias are a good source to obtain benchmark starting-specifications because they contain 
monographs and criteria for many common materials. If no monograph exists for a material, develop-
ing a decision tree to determine microbiological criteria could prove useful; Decision Tree #6, in ICH 
Quality Guideline Q6A: Specifications: Test Procedures and Acceptance Criteria for New Drug Substances 
and New Drug Products: Chemical Substances, provides a model approach. 
Excipients that are used to formulate sterile products should be tested for bioburden and bacterial endo-
toxin levels. Acceptable bioburden levels and types should be based on their presence in the final product 
formulation and how the product will be sterilized, for example, terminal sterilization or aseptic filtration. 
Both bioburden level and identification of spore-producing bacteria are considerations for terminally ster-
ilized products; bioburden levels alone are considered for aseptically filtered products. Minimally, accept-
able bacterial endotoxin levels should be based on the USP <85> calculation, which relates to product 
maximum dose, along with final product formulation and administration considerations (6).
Some raw materials used in low bioburden processes may also warrant microbiological testing based 
on risks to the process and the material risk profile. 
Animal-sourced materials have a higher risk of introducing adventitious agents and should be avoided, 
unless necessary, for the pharmaceutical manufacturing process. If used, animal-sourced excipients 
should be certified by the supplier to be free of contaminants relevant to the excipient origin, for ex-
ample, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) (7).
6.2	 Biological Contamination Risk 
A formal risk assessment is needed to establish the appropriate control measures for raw materials, 
considering the material properties, origin, supplier history, intended process use, handling, storage, 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
21
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
sampling, and testing. The output of this risk assessment is a test plan that establishes the type and 
frequency of microbiological testing needed to monitor the supplier controls and the possible need for 
additional treatment and controls by the end user.
The origin of a raw material is the first factor considered to determine the microbiological risk. The ori-
gin can predict the scope of possible inherent bioburden and other adventitious agents. Geographical 
and climate-type information on the origin can indicate a higher risk of inherent bioburden. Biological 
origin (plant, animal, or mineral-derived) can indicate that an excipient carries bioburden, viruses, or 
prions as compared to chemical or physical origin (synthetic or semisynthetic processing) (8-9).
Choosing raw materials that are inherently not growth-promoting for microorganisms reduces the 
contamination risk and should result in less material testing. 
6.3	 Sources of Extraneous Bioburden 
Contamination control is most effective when preventive measures are in place; this principle applies 
across the CCS elements and especially to raw materials. Harvesting, handling, processing, and storage 
of raw materials can lead to microbiological contamination that becomes part of the inherent biobur-
den of incoming raw materials. 
Therefore, contamination control should begin with the supplier, not waiting for incoming inspection 
and testing by the pharmaceutical manufacturer. Suppliers can take many steps to reduce the micro-
biological risk using contamination control principles, for example: 
•	
Maintaining good housekeeping and using clean equipment to prepare materials
•	
Treating materials to reduce bioburden (e.g., heat, radiation), however, such treatment should be 
demonstrated to not lead to irreversible degradation of the material’s quality attributes.
•	
Packaging materials in clean, single-use containers with wipeable surfaces 
•	
When controls are put in place by the supplier, receiving higher quality raw material more con-
sistently is possible prior to use in pharmaceutical products.
6.4	 Other Contaminants
Material inspections should be performed by the supplier and, upon receipt, by the drug manufacturer 
to identify such nonmicrobiological contaminants as insects, pest residue, machinery residue, and 
other foreign particulate contaminants. Inspection of the finished product should also be performed 
to identify particulate contaminants after the product and packaging components are combined.
6.5	 Sampling of Raw Materials and Excipients for Testing
Key aspects to consider when sampling raw materials for microbiological testing are technique, loca-
tion, tools, method, and storage. Microbiological contamination, if present, is commonly found to 
be heterogeneously distributed in materials as well as in the environment. Considering this, the fre-
quency, quantity, and location to sample should be chosen to obtain the most representative samples. 
Sampling from each received container (e.g., drum) in a batch is a good practice to perform repre-
sentative sampling for use in sterile product manufacture. After supplier testing, any handling and 
sampling performed by a pharmaceutical manufacturer in their own facility should be controlled to 
prevent extraneous contamination. Specifically, handling should limit the exposure of raw material 
and excipients to the same environmental classification to which the product will be exposed dur-
ing the manufacturing step where that material will be used. For sterile raw materials and excipients, 
sampling should be closed. When closed sampling is not possible, sampling should be conducted in 
the same environmental classification as production. Otherwise, the sampled unit should be excluded 
from production use.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
