29
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
set of critical tasks that they would perform during batch production, and the result of the process 
simulation was successful. Where there are practical limitations or an aseptic process simulation is not 
required, operators can be qualified outside of an aseptic process simulation provided the qualification 
exercise is representative of worst-case process conditions.  
After an operator has been initially qualified, the facility should schedule an annual refresher training 
program as well as participation in routine aseptic process simulation (i.e., media-fill study). Access 
to the aseptic processing area should be controlled (e.g., badge access, etc.) and a procedure should be 
established for disqualification and timely revocation of access. 
Disqualification should result in retraining and requalification, reassignment, or permanent removal 
from the cleanroom. Personnel would be considered disqualified from performing in an aseptic filling 
process if they had participated in a media-fill study that resulted in the detection of positive (failing) 
units and the root cause is determined to be inappropriate aseptic behavior. Additionally, disqualifica-
tion should be considered if personnel participate in a commercial production lot that does not meet 
the requirements for sterility testing and the root cause is determined to be inappropriate aseptic be-
havior. In addition to training and qualification/disqualification, there should be regular oversight of 
personnel following established, written procedures and performing good cleanroom behaviors and 
aseptic technique during manufacturing operations. Routine oversight through an observation pro-
gram of aseptic operators should form part of the aseptic-operator training and qualification.
8.4.2	 Aseptic Observer Program
An aseptic-observer program is a structured process through which aseptic operators are trained to 
routinely assess and evaluate one another’s performance and compliance to all aspects of training and 
qualification, especially with respect to cleanroom behaviors and aseptic practices. The aseptic-observ-
er program not only identifies areas for improvement but also reinforces observed best practices. An 
aseptic-observer program can follow the seven simple steps illustrated in Figure 8.4.2-1.
Figure 8.4.2-1	 Aseptic-Operator’s Observation 7-Step Program 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
30
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Step 1: Qualify Operators
All personnel included in the aseptic-observer program should be fully qualified.
Step 2: Identify and Train Aseptic Observers
Aseptic-behavior observers are trained individuals with experience in aseptic behaviors and practices 
who are respected by the operators. 
Step 3: Observe Aseptic Behaviors
Observers use a defined expectations list of behaviors as described in Section 8.4. Behaviors and in-
terventions performed during manufacturing should be consistent with interventions qualified during 
aseptic process simulations.
Step 4: Report and Provide Feedback
Observers should immediately give feedback to operators on their behaviors as part of continuous 
improvement. Observations discussed with personnel and frontline management should include over-
all observations, identification of any observation trends, and potential corrective actions. Potential 
corrective actions might include refresher training, procedural revisions for clarification, equipment 
modifications, or use of tools.
Step 5: Improve Aseptic Processes and Behaviors
Barriers to improvement (e.g., process/line configuration, material availability, procedure) should be 
addressed, and corrective actions should be identified and implemented.
Step 6: Analyze and Trend Observations
Periodically, long-term trending should be performed to determine root cause and to proactively ad-
dress the most frequent observations. Trend results should then be communicated to operators, man-
agement, and support personnel according to site practices. An overall risk assessment tool may also 
be used for this purpose.
Step 7: Maintain Program 
Periodically, the observation program itself should be reviewed to determine if changes are needed to 
adapt to personnel, facility, and/or process changes. Modifications may include updates to the defined 
expectations list of behaviors (see Step #3), communication of results, data trending, or effectiveness 
of corrective actions.
9.0 
Equipment Design, Validation, and Ongoing Control
For the CCS, equipment design, validation, and ongoing control considerations should all be devel-
oped with the goal of reducing the risk of contamination (Section 15.0, Table 1, Table 3, and Table 
4). To be effective, these elements should be built in a holistic manner, that is, all the elements should 
work together as interwoven and successively linked events with the common goal of preventing con-
tamination. Table 9.0-1 outlines a holistic approach to equipment considerations.
9.1	 Equipment Design
Process contamination risks that are not controlled by equipment design may result in additional risks 
that need to be mitigated by other controls, such as creation of procedures, use of sterile tools, segrega-
tion, or shorter hold times. Not putting these other controls in place could lead to higher operational 
costs and higher risk for the life of the product.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
31
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
For example, if the decision is made during process development to leave an in-process step as manual 
and open, all the surrounding control elements, including the personnel controls and all environmental 
controls (e.g., cleaning, gowning, flow), should be intensively built up to prevent contamination. In 
addition, more quality control testing/monitoring will be required at that step, and EM will need to 
be done every time that step is performed. The CCS should be reevaluated for risk mitigation from 
development to commercial phase to improve the controls as manufacturing scales up. 
Items to be considered during the equipment design phase of CCS include:
•	
Equipment is a closed system wherever possible
•	
Equipment is for sanitary use (e.g., 316SS versus a lower grade of stainless steel, avoid any parts 
that may generate particles)
•	
Fixed probes (e.g., for active viable air and total airborne particle sampling in an isolator) loca-
tions determined by an EM risk assessment and airflow visualization studies
•	
Surfaces are smooth and easy to clean
•	
Equipment is designed to minimize routine human intervention in critical areas
•	
Barrier equipment designed with interlocks to prevent operator mistakes and/or alert operator 
about component malfunction.
•	
Ease of access and compatibility with operator access (in isolator or RABs) during aseptic assem-
bly, as well as when performing interventions, to prevent operators leaning over open product or 
components
•	
Parts are designed to be sterilized as a unit to minimize connections during setup
•	
Sterile pathways covered during setup, removing covers only at the end
•	
Mechanical and electrical adjustments designed to be made outside the aseptic processing area 
•	
Are plans for pipes, ducts, and other utilities to be installed designed to not create recesses or 
have unsealed openings and/or surfaces that are difficult to clean? 
•	
Through-the-wall passages for pipes and tubing sealed or gasketed, with no openings that expose 
wall interiors
•	
All designs result in slopes for drainage
•	
Exhaust filters allow exhaust to meet area classification where it is being discharged (e.g., Grade A or B)
•	
Source air for air-break filters on autoclaves or lyophilizers drawn from the cleanroom rather 
than from the plant area
•	
Electronics are covered or provided with a wipeable surface that is resistant to disinfectants (e.g., 
equipment computers or keyboards)
•	
Equipment can be easily protected during storage
•	
Ways to measure alert/action alarm conditions for all critical operating parameters
9.2	 Equipment Cleaning Validation
Cleaning validation is essential, but it is also limited in its value to predict microbial control over the 
lifespan of equipment due to the timing and amount of validation testing and the limitations of tradi-
tional microbiological testing. Historically, cleaning validation has primarily focused on the removal of 
Table 9.0-1		
Holistic Approach to Equipment Considerations
Non-Holistic Approach 
Holistic Approach
Nonsterile equipment is always appropriate for 
nonsterile processes
Design the equipment controls to prevent and reduce contamination risk under 
worst-case circumstances 
Cleaning is validated and therefore cannot be a root 
cause or contributing factor for contamination
Design the equipment handling procedures with the understanding that validated 
cleaning practices can be overchallenged by poor equipment hold practices; 
nonsterile equipment with any residual moisture will foul with biofilm over time
Perform only testing after a clean hold time is 
exceeded but do not reclean
Perform full cleaning after a clean hold time is exceeded to reduce any build-up of 
biofilm, which can be more difficult to remove later
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
32
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
product residue and less on prevention of biofilms. Additionally, sampling techniques and culture-based 
microbiological testing are known to have limited detection power for a range of microorganisms.
Equipment validation is often performed on new equipment that has not been exposed to the broad 
range of factors that can reduce the effectiveness of cleaning. Existing equipment is revalidated on a 
defined schedule and/or if the validated conditions are no longer relevant (e.g., new product intro-
duction, new equipment configuration). Factors that reduce the effectiveness of a cleaning procedure 
include biofilm-producing organisms, years of residue build-up, normal wear, and surface damage. 
Some cleaning regimens can be effective for years until a worst-case biofilm-forming organism is in-
troduced, for example, Arthrobacter russicus, which can develop a biofilm that is difficult to remove in 
a low-nutrient environment in as little as three days. PDA Technical Report 69 provides a thorough 
guideline on biofilm prevention, including scenarios of contamination from equipment. Practical con-
siderations for equipment cleaning are presented in Section 15.0, Table 8. For further information on 
cleaning validation, refer to PDA Technical Report 29 and PDA Technical Report 49. 
9.3	 Equipment Ongoing Control
While equipment can be well designed and validated, routine and ongoing control of equipment 
during use is also an important consideration in the CCS strategy. Equipment that is not controlled 
effectively can contaminate the product, harbor biofilms of microorganisms and act as a reservoir for 
microbial contamination, which can be directly introduced into the process stream.
Contamination control considerations for the control phase include:
•	
Prior to use, are processing vessels and components cleaned and sanitized? How is the clean status of 
equipment identified and verified? Is the cleaning/sanitization status readily identified with labels/
tags on each piece of equipment? How do operators know the clean hold time of the equipment?
•	
Are sterilized holding tanks and any contained liquids held under positive pressure or appropri-
ately sealed to prevent microbial contamination?
•	
Is sterilized equipment discarded or removed from the area when the packaging or cover is not 
integral, as evidenced by holes, rips, or tears or when unexpected condensate is present? Do site 
procedures for aseptic filling-line setup include a check for the presence of wet components and 
state that these should not be used?
•	
Is the equipment included in the preventive maintenance program? Does the program include 
elastomer management and replacement?
•	
Has the time interval between the washing, drying, and sterilization of components, containers, 
and equipment been qualified, as well as the time interval between their sterilization and use?
•	
Is the equipment visually confirmed to be dry prior to wrapping or covering?
•	
Are appropriate protective coverings applied to items for sterilization/depyrogenation so that 
sterility is maintained post-sterilization?
•	
Is sterilized equipment clearly differentiated from nonsterilized items (e.g., color-change indicator)?
•	
Are presterilized materials that cannot be sterilized via passage into the Grade A space (e.g., via 
double-door autoclave, dry heat oven) double-wrapped, at a minimum, allowing layer removal 
when transferred into the clean areas? Are sterile surfaces exposed only in the critical area?
•	
Is dirty equipment removed as soon as possible and cleaned within the dirty equipment hold time? 
•	
Are doors to RABS open only when necessary and for the shortest duration? Is there a validated 
recovery time set for airflows?
•	
Is there a transfer plan in place to ensure equipment storage does not result in the introduction 
of contamination when returning it to the manufacturing area? 
9.4	 Special Equipment Considerations
Section 15.0, Table 1 provides a concise overview of the items discussed in Section 9.4. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
