2
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
2.0  Glossary and Abbreviations
Action Limit
An established value that, when exceeded, indi-
cates a process is outside of its normal operating 
conditions. A response to such an excursion re-
quires a documented investigation, product im-
pact assessment, and corrective actions based on 
the results of that investigation. 
Alert Level
An established value that, when exceeded, pro-
vides an early warning of a potential drift from 
the normal operating conditions and validated 
state. This type of warning does require an ap-
propriate documented investigation (e.g., trend 
analysis) and may require corrective actions de-
pending on the results of the investigation. 
Aseptic Filling
Part of aseptic processing in which a presterilized 
or aseptically manufactured product is filled and 
sealed into sterile containers in a critical area, 
RABS, or isolator.
Aseptic Processing
Handling of product, packaging materials, and/
or processing equipment in a controlled environ-
ment in which the air supply, materials, equip-
ment, and personnel are controlled to maintain 
product sterility.
Bioburden
The type and number of microorganisms per 
unit of material.
Cleanroom 
A room designed, maintained, and controlled to 
prevent particle and microbiological contamina-
tion of a drug or medical device. Such a room is 
assigned and reproducibly meets an appropriate 
air cleanliness classification.
Closed System
A system in which the sterile product is not ex-
posed to the surrounding environment.
Contamination
The undesired introduction of impurities of a 
chemical or microbiological nature or of foreign 
matter, into or onto a material or product during 
production, sampling, packaging or repackag-
ing, storage, or transport.
Contamination Control Strategy
A planned set of processes and measures for the 
identification, assessment, control, and monitor-
ing of contamination risks that include microor-
ganisms, pyrogens/endotoxins, and foreign par-
ticles, derived from current product and process 
understanding, that assures process performance 
and product quality. 
Control Measure
A step taken to minimize the risk of contamination.
Critical Area/Critical Zone
An area/zone designed to maintain the sterility 
of materials where sterilized product, containers, 
closures, and equipment may be exposed to the 
manufacturing environment.
Decontamination
The overall process of removal or reduction of 
any contaminants (chemical residue or micro-
organisms) from an area, processing equipment, 
or person. The method of decontamination used 
(e.g., cleaning, disinfection, sterilization) should 
be chosen and validated to achieve a level of 
cleanliness appropriate to the intended use of the 
item decontaminated.
Disinfection
The process by which the reduction of the num-
ber of microorganisms is achieved by the irre-
versible action of a product on their structure or 
metabolism, to a level deemed to be appropriate 
for a defined purpose. 
Grade A Air Supply
Air which is passed through a filter qualified as 
capable of producing grade A total particle qual-
ity air, but where there is no requirement to per-
form continuous total particle monitoring or 
meet grade A viable monitoring limits.
Isolator
An enclosure capable of being subject to repro-
ducible interior bio-decontamination, with an 
internal work zone meeting grade A conditions 
that provides uncompromised, continuous isola-
tion of its interior from the external environment 
(e.g. surrounding cleanroom air and personnel). 
Closed Isolator systems exclude external 
contamination from the isolator’s interior 
by transfer of material via aseptic connec-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
3
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
tion to auxiliary equipment, rather than 
using openings to the surrounding envi-
ronment. Closed systems remain sealed 
throughout operations.
Open Isolator systems are designed to 
allow for the continuous or semicontinuous 
ingress and/or egress of materials during 
operations through one or more openings. 
Openings are engineered (e.g., using con-
tinuous overpressure) to exclude the entry 
of external contamination into the isolator.
Restricted Access Barrier System (RABS)
System that provides an enclosed, but not fully 
sealed, environment meeting defined air qual-
ity conditions (for aseptic processing grade A), 
and using a rigid-wall enclosure and integrated 
gloves to separate its interior from the surround-
ing cleanroom environment. The inner surfaces 
of the RABS are disinfected and decontaminated 
with a sporicidal agent. Operators use gloves, 
half suits, RTPs and other integrated transfer 
ports to perform manipulations or convey ma-
terials to the interior of the RABS. Depending 
on the design, doors are rarely opened, and only 
under strictly pre-defined conditions.
Sanitization
Process of reducing the number of all forms of 
microbial contamination including fungi, viruses, 
and bacteria (1).
Sterilization
A process used to render a system free of viable 
microorganisms with a specified probability (2). 
2.1	 Abbreviations
API	
Active pharmaceutical ingredient
CCS	
Contamination control strategy 
FMEA	
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis
HACCP	
Hazard Analysis and Critical 
Control Points
HVAC	
Heating, ventilation, and air 
conditioning
RABS	
Restricted Access Barrier System
QRM	
Quality risk management
3.0  Elements of a Contamination Control Strategy
The CCS is a combination of interwoven and successively linked elements, which includes many ele-
ments of a pharmaceutical quality system and GMP measures. Figure 3.0-1 illustrates this concept, 
the elements of which are described in this section. 
The foundational elements—scientific knowledge, quality risk management, and personnel awareness/
quality culture (dark blue)—inform and influence every other aspect of the CCS. These elements are 
described in more detail in Section 3.1.1. These foundations of CCS align well with the enablers de-
scribed in ICH Quality Guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical Quality System.
The individual control elements (red) are designed using the foundational elements, validated to show they 
can reasonably achieve the appropriate level of control (green), and then monitored to verify they achieve 
ongoing control (purple). The individual controls in the red row do not comprise an exhaustive list. 
The quality systems, such as investigation, change control, and corrective and preventive actions 
(CAPA)—feedback loops—provide the mechanisms to continuously refine and improve controls and 
respond to unexpected events. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
The governance (light blue) assesses the output of each CCS element (e.g., monitoring data, validation 
results, investigations, change controls) to ensure the overall CCS remains holistic and effective. A 
weakness in any of these elements or a mismatch between elements can lead to an ineffective CCS and 
therefore, contamination.
3.1	 Foundations of a Contamination Control Strategy
Understanding the foundational elements of scientific knowledge, quality risk management, and per-
sonnel awareness/quality culture is crucial to the development of an effective CCS.
3.1.1	 Scientific Knowledge Foundational Element
Both scientific knowledge of the process and technical knowledge of preventing contamination are the 
foundations of the CCS. They are used to inform the quality risk management (QRM) foundational 
element of the CCS, including the elements outlined below. These elements should be summarized 
and/or referenced in the CCS document. When establishing the CCS, knowledge of how to prevent 
contamination for each step of a manufacturing process should also be considered (references to help-
ful technical knowledge guidances are included here as well as in Section 14.0): 
Process Knowledge
•	
Potential ingress points for contaminants to enter the process stream including particulates, mi-
croorganisms, viruses/bacteriophages, spores, endotoxins, and other microbial by-products (e.g., 
exotoxins, proteases, and other metabolites)
•	
Potential proliferation points for microorganisms and viruses, including bacteriophages, to grow 
in the raw materials, solutions, process equipment, and process stream, thereby, allowing forma-
tion of undesirable microbial by-products
Figure 3.0-1	
Elements of a Contamination Control Strategy (courtesy of Sanofi)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
•	
Microbial growth potential identified for each process step by assessing attributes such as pH, 
temperature, nutrients, water activity, and duration of exposure and/or by performing a profiling 
study of process matrices such as the antimicrobial effectiveness test
•	
Viral proliferation potential identified for each process step considering the presence of viral/
bacteriophage cell hosts  
•	
Process removal or reduction capability for potential contaminants (e.g., filtration, heating, and 
chromatography)
•	
History of contamination events and trends (from microbial, viral, or foreign particulate matter), 
microbiological and endotoxin concentration, and microbial flora profile for existing processes
Note: The viral aspects noted above are only applicable for processes that use living cell systems.
Technical Knowledge 
•	
Microbial attributes, behavior, and biofilm development (PDA Technical Report No. 69: Biobur-
den and Biofilm Management in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Operations)
•	
Aseptic processing (PDA Points to Consider for Aseptic Processing, Parts 1 and 2)
•	
Viral attributes, behavior, and host infection (PDA Technical Report No. 83: Virus Contamina-
tion in Biomanufacturing: Risk Mitigation, Preparedness and Response)
•	
Process design principles (PDA Technical Report No. 41 (rev. 2008): Virus Filtration; Technical 
Report No. 42: Process Validation of Protein Manufacturing; Technical Report No. 44: Qual-
ity Risk Management for Aseptic Processes; Technical Report No. 45: Filtration of Liquids Us-
ing Cellulose-Based Depth Filters; Technical Report No. 60: Process Validation: A Lifecycle Ap-
proach; Technical Report No. 81: Cell-Based Therapy Control Strategy; PDA Points to Consider 
for Aseptic Processing, Parts 1 and 2)
•	
Facility and utility design principles (ISPE Baseline Guide: Volume 3 – Sterile Product Manufac-
turing Facilities; PDA Points to Consider for Aging Facilities)
•	
Equipment design principles (PDA Technical Report No. 34: Design and Validation of Isolator 
Systems for the Manufacturing and Testing of Health Care Products; PDA Points to Consider for 
the Aseptic Processing of Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators)
•	
Cleaning, disinfection, decontamination, sanitization, sterilization principles (PDA Technical Re-
port No. 1 (Rev. 2007): Validation of Moist Heat Sterilization Processes: Cycle Design, Develop-
ment, Qualification and Ongoing Control; Technical Report No. 3 (Rev. 2013): Validation of 
Dry Heat Processes Used for Depyrogenation and Sterilization; Technical Report No. 26 (Rev. 
2008): Sterilizing Filtration of Liquids; Technical Report No. 29 (Rev. 2012): Points to Consider 
for Cleaning Validation; Technical Report No. 48: Moist Heat Sterilizer Systems: Design, Com-
missioning, Operation, Qualification and Maintenance; Technical Report No. 49: Points to Con-
sider for Biotechnology Cleaning Validation; Technical Report No. 61: Steam In Place; Technical 
Report No. 70: Fundamentals of Cleaning and Disinfection Programs for Aseptic Manufacturing 
Facilities; U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) General Chapter <1072> Disinfectants and Antiseptics)
•	
Raw material quality (ICH Quality Guideline Q7A: Good Manufacturing Practice Guidance for 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
