6
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
•	
Quality Risk Management principles (PDA Technical Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality 
Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations; ICH Qual-
ity Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Management)
3.1.2	 Quality Risk Management Foundational Element
To achieve contamination control, the design of new and existing manufacturing processes and facili-
ties should employ QRM principles to identify and assess risk with the intent to prevent and control 
contamination. 
The CCS should be designed with redundant individual control elements so that no single fail-
ure in one element will result in contamination. If any contamination risks are not well-controlled 
through process design or engineered into the facility design, this will result in other CCS elements 
(e.g., procedural controls) being built up to compensate, thereby increasing the overall cost and com-
plexity of manufacturing throughout the life of the product.
For example, a process step that is designed to be manual and open (exposed directly to the environ-
ment) requires all the surrounding CCS elements to be more robust than if the process were closed, 
including additional technical and procedural measures (e.g., local unidirectional flow protection, 
personnel and material movement controls, environmental controls such as cleaning, disinfection, 
environmental monitoring, in-process testing of that step, and validation).
For new processes, existing contamination control technologies and procedures that have proven ef-
fective in processes with similar risk profiles can be used as a model (e.g., connections, sanitization or 
sterilization practices, sampling methods). New contamination control technologies and procedures 
that are not yet proven effective in a relevant CCS, should be designed and assessed using QRM prin-
ciples to reduce the risk of contamination.
New construction or renovation of production areas are ideal opportunities for innovation. This should 
involve an evaluation of the existing CCS for any ways to improve contamination control through in-
novative technologies, such as closed or barrier systems, automation, and advanced monitoring and 
detection methods.
3.1.3	 Personnel Awareness and Quality Culture Foundational Element
The health of the quality culture and level of personnel awareness around contamination controls have 
a direct and significant impact on the success of the CCS. 
Contamination control should be a priority that is reflected in the goals of the firm. A dedicated 
champion or team should oversee the performance of the CCS (see Section 11.7 Governance and 
Oversight). 
The hallmarks of a robust quality culture that promotes contamination control are:
•	
Focus on preventing contamination and other quality hazards 
•	
Willingness to proactively invest time and resources to improve quality and prevent contamination
•	
Strong response to contamination events that corrects true root cause(s) and prevents reoccurrence 
•	
Management that appreciates and values the contributions and skills of employees
•	
Strong, supportive community of practices and network of subject matter experts (SMEs) who 
focus on continuous improvement—good cross-department and cross-site communication and 
application of best practices and lessons learned 
•	
Employees who feel ownership over the quality of the product and process, including contami-
nation prevention
•	
Employees who understand their responsibility to highlight quality risks and work toward solutions
•	
Non-blaming culture
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
7
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Firms should maintain an ongoing campaign to promote contamination control awareness among all 
employees engaged in GMP activities, including shop floor and management staff. One-time or an-
nual training does not ensure ongoing awareness.
Shop floor personnel are the true guardians of contamination control because they directly perform 
processes and operate equipment according to procedures to deliver contaminant-free process inter-
mediates and products. 
Personnel awareness is achieved through a combination of training, education, and ongoing diligence. 
Training addresses what a task is and how it is done; education addresses why it is done.
Table 3.1.3-1 outlines an example set of roles and responsibilities related to CCS.
Table 3.1.3-1	 Example: Personnel Roles and Responsibilities Related to CCS 
Leadership Role
Makes contamination prevention a priority
Advocates and practices non-blaming culture
Assigns personnel with appropriate knowledge and mindset 
Understands the benefit of contamination prevention
Expert Role Sterility Assurance / Contamination Control (Governance)
Oversees the performance of contamination controls
Escalates contamination hazards 
Provides technical leadership to continuously improve 
Shop Floor Operator / Technician Role
Performs contamination control and acts as guardians
Escalates contamination hazards
Provides technical expertise on individual CCS elements
4.0  Process Design, Microbial Control, and Monitoring
Manufacturing processes should be designed, commissioned, qualified, and monitored by personnel 
with appropriate process, engineering, and microbiological knowledge. The manufacturing process 
should be designed and validated to prevent potential contamination from microorganisms, microbial 
byproducts (e.g., endotoxins), and foreign particulate matter.
CQAs can include a broad range of characteristics that must be controlled during the process. In this 
TR only microbiological and particulate attributes are addressed (see TR 60 for further discussion on 
establishing CQAs). The following sections address the location for testing and setting appropriate 
limits for assessing critical control points (CCPs).
Controlling the potential ingress of microbial contaminants throughout the drug substance and sterile 
drug product manufacturing processes is a key element to any contamination control program be-
cause contaminants can alter the process performance and adulterate the final product (e.g., clogging 
of process filters, degradation of process solutions or product molecule, unexpected impurities). For 
nonsterile drug products, elevated levels of microorganisms can lead to unwanted degradation and 
impurities; also, the presence of specific objectionable organisms can directly impact patient safety. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
8
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Risk-based process and monitoring plans for microbial control should be in place to address the spe-
cific product, process, and facility design. These plans may vary based on the type of product produced 
(e.g., sterile, nonsterile, biologic, small molecule), the stage of manufacturing (e.g., drug product, 
intermediate, drug substance), and the design of the facility (e.g., isolator, RABS, single-use, stainless 
steel, multiuse). The three main microbial contamination considerations for the risk assessment within 
the manufacturing facility, equipment, and processes are:
•	
Microbial Ingress: What are the sources of contamination and how are they gaining access to 
the manufacturing environment?
•	
Proliferation: Are there environmental factors or processing conditions that may increase the 
risk or extent of a contamination?
•	
Persistence: Are the cleaning, sanitization/disinfection/sterilization, and monitoring programs 
appropriate for all the product, contact equipment, systems, and facilities to ensure bioburden is 
being eliminated or kept in check? 
PDA Technical Report No. 69: Bioburden and Biofilm Management in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing 
Operations provides further guidance on these three considerations. 
These risk-based process and monitoring plans should consider that microorganisms may enter the 
manufacturing process from multiple sources—from incoming raw materials, facility design and in-
puts, and drug substance manufacturing, culminating in the final packaging of drug product. Figure 
4.0-1 displays a diagram of possible microbial contamination sources, and Section 15.0, Table 15.0-2 
and Table 15.0-7 provide further points to consider on bioburden controls for multiuse versus single-
product facilities. In addition, Section 4.1.1.2 provides an extensive listing of resources that address 
sterilization processes and other aspects of the diagram below. 
4.1	 Low-Bioburden Drug Substance Process Control 
Drug substances (DS) are active ingredients with pharmacological activity for the prevention and 
treatment of diseases. DS undergo additional manufacturing steps that may include formulation, ster-
Figure 4.0-1 Potential Sources of Microbial Contamination to Consider when Conducting a Microbial Control Risk Assessment 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
9
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
ilization, and filling; those that undergo sterile filtration are generally not monitored for the presence 
of foreign particulate matter. Maintaining microbial control while processing the DS is critical be-
cause, although potential bioburden may be filtered out in subsequent manufacturing steps, microbial 
contamination during the initial processing can introduce product variability. Inconsistency of the 
DS could impact (a) safety, due to the release of toxic by-products, including bacterial endotoxins; (b) 
potency, due to degradation or modification of the product by microbial enzymes; and (c) purity, due 
to changes in the impurity profiles from microbial by-products. 
DS and other process intermediates should be handled and stored under conditions that consider mi-
crobial ingress and proliferation and minimize the risk of microbial contamination. The probability of 
microbial ingress and its impact on product quality should be assessed case by case. The risk of impact 
on products stored frozen is low because organisms will not proliferate during storage. Microbial in-
gress in refrigerated products, however, may result in unacceptable bioburden levels during storage, so 
appropriate procedural controls should be in place to minimize it. For example, steps where a process 
stream is directly exposed to the environment may be performed under unidirectional Grade A air 
supply and a Grade C background may be sufficient based on the overall CCS.. 
Bottles containing the DS should be closed with a predefined torque that ensures the integrity of the 
seal and, at the same time, prevents cracking or damaging the bottle; in addition, sampling that in-
troduces a pipette into the bottle should be avoided to prevent microbial ingress. Single-use-systems 
(SUS) should be certified sterile by the vendor; single-use bags should be handled in a manner that 
prevents leaks, and the bags containing the product should be inspected for leaks before use. Bags that 
are frozen during storage may warrant additional integrity checks. Mobile stainless-steel vessels should 
be sterilized; vessel integrity may be validated using a hold study with a growth-promoting solution. 
The length of the hold may be included in the risk assessment, as it may be impractical to conduct the 
study for the complete length of the proposed storage time. 
4.1.1	 Viral and Mycoplasma Considerations 
Viral and mycoplasma contaminations in cell cultures (where applicable) are much less common than 
bacterial or fungal contaminations, but they can significantly interrupt manufacturing operations that 
result in a facility shutdown and product supply shortage. 
Virus contamination of biological products can originate from contaminated cells with endogenous 
retroviruses or a latent infection or from cells contaminated during manipulation. Adventitious viruses 
can also be introduced from extraneous sources, including personnel, poorly designed processes or 
facilities, contaminated raw materials, and cross-contamination. For example, contamination with 
minute mouse virus has been traced to the presence of rodents in the facility. Since virus particles are 
not retained by 0.1-µm or 0.2-µm filters, filtration of the media or culture is not effective in removing 
them. Absence of adventitious viruses contaminating the final product is achieved by a combination 
of preventive measures, for instance, the use of appropriate sources of raw materials, heat inactiva-
tion or irradiation of the media, virus detection measures such as adventitious agent testing, and viral 
clearance measures in the process. PDA Technical Report 41(Revised 2022): Virus Retentive Filtration 
provides further guidance on this topic. 
Most of the sources of mycoplasma contamination are the same as viruses, so contamination control 
measures against viral contamination also reduce the challenges of mycoplasma contamination. In-
discriminate use of antibiotics during cell culture has also been reported to increase the probability 
of mycoplasma contamination because it may lead to less rigorous aseptic technique. Mycoplasmas 
are resistant to commonly used antibiotics, and they cannot be detected by turbidity or standard mi-
croscopic techniques. Of note, 0.1-µm filters are effective at reducing mycoplasma and have become 
commonplace for media filtration.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
10
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
One advantage to testing for virus and mycoplasma early in the process is the ability to respond 
promptly to a confirmed contamination event. Having a strong remediation plan in place in the event 
of a contamination and all critical personnel well trained on the plan to ensure prompt execution is 
very important. Additional information on virus contamination is available in PDA Technical Report 
No. 83: Virus Contamination in Biomanufacturing: Risk Mitigation, Preparedness, and Response.
4.2	 Sterile Drug Product Process Control 
The manufacturing process of most parenteral drug products (DPs) includes steps before and after product 
sterilization. The complete process should be under microbial control prior to sterilization, and sterility as-
surance of the product should be demonstrated through the cumulation of controls after product steriliza-
tion. Microbial control of DP prior to the sterilization step is critical because bioburden may impact safety, 
potency, and purity in the same manner as it does DS. Contamination of the DP after the sterilization step 
may result in infections, which could impact patient safety. Table 4.2-1 describes control elements and 
measures that prevent microbial contamination throughout the manufacturing process.
Table 4.2-1		
Process Control Considerations 
Category
Controls 
General
•	
Facility, equipment, and manufacturing process designed and qualified to  control bioburden:
—	 Facility design (e.g., pressure differential, temperature control, smooth materials, sufficient workspace)
—	 Manufacturing process design (e.g., barrier technology, closed vs. open system, process and 
product segregations, automation)
—	 Equipment design (e.g., closed vs. open system, drainability, materials of construction, automation)
—	 Equipment optimized to prevent microbial ingress and to be cleaned easily and sterilized using 
validated cycles, where applicable (e.g., closed equipment, SUS, closed bioreactors and vessels, 
aseptic connections for media, culture, buffer, and intermediate transfers, closed sampling systems)
—	 Design of critical utilities (e.g., water, compressed gases)
•	
Procedures in place to cover major aspects of contamination control (e.g., entry of personnel and 
materials into the manufacturing areas, personnel gowning, facility cleaning and disinfection, 
equipment sterilization, cleanroom behavior training)
•	
Use of water for injection (WFI) or endotoxin-reduced purified water (PW) for nonsterile process steps for 
endotoxin control in parenteral products
•	
Procedures in place to inspect for and detect potential leaks in equipment (e.g., daily walk-throughs, 
receipt inspection, pre-use checks, automated leak detectors), including procedures in place for a risk-
based leak response 
•	
Maximum hold times established and validated (sterile equipment, buffers/media, in-process hold 
during cell culture, purification, and drug product manufacture) 
—	 Hold times during routine operations should be minimized
—	 Refrigerated storage will reduce microbial proliferation 
—	  Storage of sterile media at room temperature prior to use may allow for visual observation of 
potential contamination 
•	
Monitoring controls to prevent bioburden in process (e.g., incoming raw materials) or before process 
bioburden reduction steps
Cell Expansion, 
Fermentation, Cell 
Culture, and Harvest
•	
EM and personnel monitoring during any critical operations inside biosafety cabinet (BSC)
•	
Controls during cell bank/cell expansion operations, including performing open processes under BSC, 
aseptic techniques and cell transfers using a closed system 
•	
Avoid use of animal-based raw materials to prevent virus or mycoplasma contamination (insect or plant-
derived materials may also introduce mycoplasma and should be appropriately controlled)
•	
Use heat-inactivated or gamma-irradiated medium, when possible
•	
Heat-sterilization of media using validated sterilization cycles, filter-integrity testing of filter-sterilized media 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
11
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Category
Controls 
Purification
•	
Bioburden-reduction filtration of in-process pools and product-contact buffers using integrity-tested 
filters with sufficient capacity
•	
Viral clearance steps, when applicable, established and validated
•	
Endotoxin limits of product-contact buffers (e.g., formulation, elution buffers) consistent with process 
intermediates
•	
Microbial control of chromatography resins and ultrafiltration/diafiltration membranes 
—	 Throughout their lifetime and during storage 
—	 Validation of effectiveness of sanitization and storage solutions
—	 See PDA Technical Report 14 Validation of Column Chromatography
Drug Product
•	
Terminal sterilization of drug product, if applicable, validated to demonstrate sterility assurance level 
(SAL) of 10-6 (see PDA Technical Report No. 1 (Rev. 2007): Validation of Moist Heat Sterilization Processes)
•	
Validation of the sterilizing filter, if applicable, to demonstrate bacterial retention of 107 CFU/cm2 using 
worst-case conditions (see PDA Technical Report No. 26 (Rev. 2008): Sterilizing Filtration of Liquids)
•	
Point of final filtration should be located as close to the filling needle as possible (see EU GMP Annex 1 
Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products)
•	
Avoidance of activities that increase the risk of contamination to sterile bulk drug product, such as: 
—	 Sampling of the sterile bulk product
—	 Storage in low-classified areas
—	 Long hold times 
•	
Sterilizing filter integrity-tested before (PUPSIT) and after use, as required
•	
Sterilization of equipment and components contacting the sterile product, both directly and indirectly, 
validated to demonstrate SAL of 10-6
•	
Use of filling isolators with validated decontamination cycles and/or RABS 
•	
Use of rapid transfer port (RTP) to transfer sterile materials into isolators
•	
Fill-line aseptic process simulations (media fills) conducted periodically using relevant or worst-case 
processes, equipment, containers, and post-filtration hold times (see PDA Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 
2011): Process Simulation for Aseptically Filled Products)
•	
Demonstration of container closure integrity throughout the process using worst-case process parameters
—	 Container closure integrity should also be considered at the drug substance stage
•	
All products labeled as sterile passing a sterility test unless the product is approved for parametric release 
(per relevant regional guidance or PIC/S Annex 17) (10, 11)
•	
Particle control achieved through equipment and environmental controls and verified through 100% 
inspection (see PDA Technical Report No. 85: Enhanced Test Methods for Visible Particle Detection and 
Enumeration on Elastomeric Closures and Glass Containers and Technical Report No. 86: Industry Challenges 
and Current Technologies for Pharmaceutical Package Integrity Testing) (12, 13) 
Nonsterilizable Biological 
Products
•	
Category includes cell therapy products, certain gene therapies and vaccines, and other specialized 
products
•	
End-to-end aseptic processing conditions that should be applied throughout the process 
•	
CCS designed to minimize ingress of foreign particulate matter from all solutions and product contact 
surfaces, e.g., consumables (see PDA Technical Report No. 81: Cell-Based Therapy Control Strategy and 
Technical Report No. 79: Particulate Matter Control in Difficult to Inspect Parenterals) (14, 15)
Table 4.2-2 provides examples on how microbial control throughout the manufacturing process is 
addressed by using a holistic approach. 
(Table 4.2-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
12
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Table 4.2-2		
Holistic Approach to Process Considerations 
Non-Holistic Approach
Holistic Approach
Environmental excursions do not impact the DP batch if the 
final sterility test is passing.
Any failure in a contamination control may indicate a loss of sterility 
assurance during batch manufacture and requires investigation and 
assessment for product impact. 
The background environment to barrier isolator or RABS is 
not important because the interior of the barrier system is 
decontaminated. 
Environmental failures in the background may over-challenge the barrier 
contamination controls and indicate a loss of sterility assurance that 
requires investigation and assessment for product impact.
Sterility failures cannot happen if the operators and 
interventions are qualified via an aseptic process simulation 
(APS).
The APS evaluates the capability of the process to be aseptic, but is limited 
in its ability to predict impact of future errors, especially where manual 
interventions are performed.
The DS manufacturing process is not sterile; therefore, 
the only requirement is to meet the final DS bioburden 
specification.
Maintaining microbial control at every step of the process helps ensure that 
a safe, pure, and potent product is consistently manufactured.
Low levels of contamination during early upstream 
manufacturing steps are a low risk because there is removal 
downstream.
Contamination during early upstream steps adds an uncertain level of risk 
and severity that cannot be resolved through testing. 
Noncontrolled environments are adequate when 
conducting closed manufacturing operations. 
Closed manufacturing operations lower the risk of microbial ingress in the 
process; however, most operations considered closed are still vulnerable 
to breaches (e.g., leaks may occur). Environmental controls will provide 
for redundancy in the control strategy and further mitigate the risk of 
contamination 
Testing of raw material is not necessary because the process 
intermediate will eventually be tested.
Testing of raw materials and buffers will prevent the use of contaminated 
raw materials that may result in excursions of in-process intermediates, 
which may impact product quality and result in long and expensive 
investigation. 
WFI is only used in the last step of the DS manufacturing 
process because potential endotoxin of PW will be removed 
during the purification step.
While PW may be used in upstream processes, the use of PW in later steps 
that have an endotoxin action level may result in excursions of in-process 
intermediates. This may impact product quality and result in long and 
expensive investigations.
In-process filtrations will eliminate contaminations from 
the intermediates; therefore, in-process bioburden is 
irrelevant.
Unacceptable levels of bioburden in the process may result in impurities 
and in degradation of the product and impact product quality, even if the 
microbial cells are removed by filtration. 
Validation of microbial control at the end of the maximum 
hold is not necessary because the intermediate will be 
routinely tested at the end of the hold. 
Microbiology hold-time validation studies will provide process knowledge 
and lower the risk of contamination due to inappropriate hold times.
Sanitization of chromatography resins is adequate because 
the sanitizing solution results in a 3-log reduction of 
microorganisms.
Chromatography resins are porous and contact between the 
microorganisms and the sanitizing solution is limited; therefore, 
sanitization and storage of resins should be validated and monitored on an 
ongoing basis.
Microbial control of the resins is demonstrated in the three 
process performance qualification batches.
Resins at the end of their lifetime may be more prone to contamination 
than fresh resins because sanitization is not 100% effective, and 
spore-forming organisms and biofilm may be difficult to remove during 
sanitization. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
13
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.3	 Nonsterile Drug Product Process Control
Effective CCS is also important for nonsterile finished products that are susceptible to contamination. 
Microbial contamination can lead to degradation of the product, loss of potency, and potentially un-
safe levels of microorganisms and by-products being administered to the patient. Consider that many 
nonsterile products are available without prescription to a broad population of people with a range of 
underlying ailments or immune-compromising conditions. Nonsterile products and their intermedi-
ates should be handled and stored under conditions that limit the risk of microbial contamination 
considering the specific hazards of microbial ingress and proliferation. 
Liquid and semisolid nonsterile products, such as syrups, creams, and ointments, are inherently prone 
to contamination due to the water activity levels that support microbial growth. For these products, 
preservatives are often added to avoid fouling during the shelf life. Preservatives are rarely effective 
against all potentially contaminating species or high levels of bioburden and may lose effectiveness over 
the product’s shelf life, so microbial control is also important to prevent and detect microorganisms 
during the process. 
Solid dosage products, such as tablets and dry powders, are generally less prone to contamination due 
to lower water activity; however, they are not contamination-proof. Specific contamination hazards 
should be identified in the manufacturing process and in the handling and distribution of nonster-
ile products. Some process operations can introduce unacceptable levels of contamination, such as 
tablet-coating, and there is potential for contamination during handling and dispensing activities, for 
example, blister packs protecting the product until administration.
Foreign matter, such as particulates, should also be controlled in nonsterile products because foreign 
matter can include toxic materials that leach into the product, can introduce microbial contamination 
that degrades the product, and can lead to product rejection for cosmetic reasons.
Raw material and equipment controls are particularly important for nonsterile products that are often 
made on a large scale. Raw materials can be a source of very high levels of microorganisms and their 
byproducts into the process and may overchallenge the process controls, resulting in final product 
contamination. Process water is one of the most abundant raw materials and is well known for in-
troducing contaminants, including those that may be resistant to preservatives and difficult to detect 
with traditional microbiological testing, such as Burkholderia cepacia. Equipment often includes large 
vessels that are potential sources of high levels of microorganisms. Equipment must be cleaned and 
drained when not in use to prevent fouling with biofilms. For equipment designs that may prevent 
the cleanability or drainability, additional actions should be undertaken periodically to reduce the 
occurrence of biofilm (see PDA Technical Report 69 for further details). In addition, the process con-
siderations in Tables 4.2-1 and 4.2-2 can be useful for nonsterile products to extrapolate from and 
customize to the organization’s operations.
Process monitoring for nonsterile products often includes methods to detect total microbial numbers 
as well as specific microorganisms that are considered objectionable for that product, and potentially 
the patient population, based on its route of administration. In-process monitoring of nonsterile prod-
uct manufacture, which is generally less frequent for low-bioburden drug substance processes, should 
be conducted where specific hazards exist in the nonsterile production process.
4.4	 In-Process Monitoring 
In-process monitoring provides information about the state of control of the process, facility, and 
product. A holistic control plan includes monitoring for microbial control of the process, facility, and 
product, including intermediates. Mycoplasma and viruses are also included in the monitoring plan 
of biological products with cell systems that can propagate those contaminants. Particle monitoring is 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
14
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
included for the environment, and visual inspection of product-contacting equipment, consumables, 
and solutions is conducted where a foreign particle risk for the product exists. 
A strategic sampling plan should take into consideration the criticality of the process steps, the suscep-
tibility to microbial ingress, the growth-promoting ability of the process intermediates and solutions, 
and the downstream particle-removal steps. The collection and handling of in-process samples should 
ensure the chain of custody from collection to final review of the test results. Table 4.4.1-1 provides 
more detail on monitoring plans.
4.4.1	 Bioburden/Endotoxin Monitoring 
The control and monitoring of bioburden and endotoxin levels throughout the manufacture of DS 
and DP are important elements of the overall microbial control program. Process monitoring provides 
valuable insight into the microbial status of the manufacturing process, which in turn leads to the mi-
crobial quality of the final product. A risk-based assessment involving the process mapping of potential 
ingress sites and operational steps that are susceptible to bioburden growth should be used to develop 
the monitoring plan. The assessment should include an evaluation of the contamination risks and the 
capability of the process at each process step to mitigate each risk. Recurring sporadic contaminations 
should be investigated as they may be indicative of biofilm present in product-contact surfaces of the 
equipment or of pervasive environmental contamination in the process areas. PDA Technical Report 
69 contains additional information on biofilm. 
Several aspects should be considered when developing a bioburden and endotoxin monitoring plan. 
What, when, and how to monitor should be well planned, based on the risks to the process and prod-
uct, while at the same time ensuring the sampling process does not contaminate the process or produce 
false-positive results. A sensible approach includes mapping of the process based on the steps with the 
likelihood of microorganism ingress; susceptible locations where residual risks cannot be mitigated 
should then be monitored based on that mapping. In general, performing bioburden monitoring 
should be considered before bioburden reduction steps are conducted. Inputs range widely from sterile 
raw materials to highly growth-promoting media used for production. The manufacturing facility and 
processes may include a multitude of manufacturing risk levels, including the design and classification 
of the area and its EM history. That history should include contaminations that spread or are persistent 
and difficult to eliminate, growth-promotion properties of the in-process intermediates, and the type 
of equipment—from open tank processes and single-use bag systems to bioreactors with intricate pip-
ing and valve configurations (16). 
Dealing with the data produced can also be challenging. As in-process bioburden counts are typically 
low and not normally distributed, classical statistical approaches (e.g., parametric or ±3 standard devia-
tions) cannot be used for establishing meaningful limits. Therefore, a scientific, risk-based approach 
should be employed to set limits that can be further evaluated upon gathering sufficient historical data 
from longer-term manufacturing. Also, a robust metric control plan should be developed that covers 
the facility and the overall network to ensure there is appropriate senior management visibility to the 
microbial/endotoxin state of control. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
