15
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.4.1-1	 	
In-Process Monitoring Considerations
In-Process Monitoring – Bioburden and Endotoxin
Type of 
Monitoring
Bioburden monitoring should be considered for any steps susceptible to microbial ingress and proliferation of 
microorganisms. In some cases, bioburden monitoring is mandatory per regulatory requirements (e.g., pre-sterile 
filtration).
Anaerobic bioburden monitoring should be considered based on the type and stage of processing.
Specialized biologic products (e.g., spore forming or anaerobic organisms like Clostridium-based systems) may need 
additional bioburden tests (e.g., absence or presence of spores or tests for anaerobes). 
Endotoxin testing plans should be developed for raw materials, product-contact buffers, intermediates, DS and DP for 
parenteral or intrathecal use.
In-process endotoxin testing can provide complementary information to bioburden monitoring, and the results can be 
provided at-line or in-line or within hours in a laboratory. 
Location of 
Monitoring
Sampling plans should be developed based on worst-case locations that consider the process, type of operations (open 
or closed), hold times, location of bioburden-reduction filtrations, and growth-promoting properties of solutions.
Samples should be taken prefiltration at conclusion of the longest holding period, if the solution is not microbiostatic or 
microbiocidal.
Sampling methods should be designed to limit extrinsic contamination (e.g., closed sampling system).
For biologic products, bioreactor unprocessed bulk should be monitored and found axenic.
Monitoring 
Frequency
Monitoring frequency should be established case-by-case, depending on the process and contamination risk. Too little 
monitoring may result in undetected contamination, underestimating contamination risks, or missed early signals of 
out-of-trend issues and impending contamination risks; excessive monitoring can be burdensome, uninformative, and 
costly and may introduce contamination risk to the process.
Alert Levels 
and Action 
Limits 
Microbial action levels should be based on process capability and current industry standards and not exceed regulatory 
requirements, where applicable. Action level excursions should be investigated. 
Alert levels should be based on the historical data, and an adverse trend should be investigated to prevent consequences related to 
process, product, and facility contamination. Any organisms recovered from critical zones (A/B) should be investigated. 
In-process endotoxin excursion levels should take into consideration the product specifications as well as the endotoxin 
levels of the inputs (e.g., raw materials, WFI). In addition, as endotoxins are indicative of certain types of microbial 
contamination, action and alert levels should be within the expectations for a process under microbial control.
Bioburden action levels should be established case by case. Current expectations for biological products are:
•	
Bioreactor ≤10 CFU/10 mL (mammalian processes)
•	
Culture purity (microbial fermentations)
•	
Downstream process ≤100 CFU/10 mL
•	
For DP processes, the DP bulk should contain ≤10 CFU/100 mL prior to the sterile filtration step, though other 
volumes may be used if scientifically justified.
Process monitoring investigations should consider the characteristics of recovered microorganism(s) when assessing 
the impact of a contamination to product quality. For example, by-products such as proteases and toxins should be 
considered. These by-products may pass through the bioburden-reduction filters and alter the potency, efficacy, or safety 
of the drug. Accelerated stability studies may be performed to evaluate potential impact from protease activity of an 
in-process excursion. Bacillus cereus is a common bioreactor contaminant that can produce various by-products that may 
be harmful to humans. Refer to Appendix II for examples of microbial impact assessments.
4.4.1.1	 In-Process Monitoring — Viral and Mycoplasma Testing for Drug Substance
Adventitious viruses are tested from the unprocessed bulk prior to further processing, such as filtration 
or clarification, unless testing is more sensitive by initial partial-processing. A program based on an 
assessment of adventitious viruses from the unprocessed bulk during routine manufacturing should 
take into consideration the cell line used, testing conducted during cell-line qualification, raw material 
sources, and results of the viral clearance study. Detection of the selected viruses are usually conducted 
using in vitro testing by inoculating the harvest material into host detector cells, and it may include 
rapid detection methods such as polymerase chain reaction-based methods.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
16
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Routine testing of mycoplasma is performed on the unprocessed bulk of every lot; biological products 
made in insect cells should be tested for Mycoplasma and Spiroplasma contamination. Mycoplasma tests 
should be able to detect cultivable and uncultivable species. The current Mycoplasma detection meth-
ods include the agar-and-broth media procedure and the indicator-cell culture procedure; however, 
alternative rapid detection methods can be used, provided they are adequately validated (17).
4.4.1.2	 Considerations for Cell and Gene Therapy Products/Advanced Therapeutic Medicinal Products
CCS plays a critical role for ATMPs (or CGTPs ) due to the nature of the product and its impact on pa-
tient safety. In addition, CGTPs are often manufactured using materials that promote microbial growth.
Some gene therapies are manufactured using processes similar to traditional biologics (proteins and 
antibodies) that involve purification steps, including final sterilization (filtration) of the DP. 
The manufacturing process for cell therapies involves many operator-dependent manual aseptic manipu-
lation steps and no viral removal/inactivation steps, and the final product cannot be sterilized; thus, the 
risk of microbial contamination and its by-products is very high. For autologous cell therapies, the batch 
volume can be very low, therefore the sample plan may need to be reduced due to practical limitations. 
This sample plan should be based on quality risk management principles. Because of the short shelf life of 
many of these products, traditional microbiological test methods may not be suitable for detecting con-
tamination in the product before it is administered to a patient. All these limitations pose additional risks 
to patient safety; thus, proactive contamination control is of paramount importance. Risk analysis should 
include open versus closed manipulation and the handling and manufacturing of the critical starting ma-
terials (e.g., plasmids, cell banks, apheresis material) as they can contaminate the final DP (18).
5.0 
Facilities and Utilities
5.1	 Facility Design
Key elements of the CCS should be decided during the design phase of a production facility to mini-
mize the risk of contamination based on the specific process design and hazards. Facility designs pro-
vide environmental control through air pressure cascades, area classifications, cleanability, physical 
segregation, and flows based upon Good Engineering Practices (GEPs). These design features establish 
the structure-based barriers that reduce the airborne movement of contaminants into the manufactur-
ing areas and enable the removal of contaminants that do enter. 
QRM is critical for the design and management of new and existing facilities, equipment, processes, and 
manufacturing activities. Appropriate use of QRM tools should identify the contamination risks to the 
product and environment, and then mitigate those risks using appropriate contamination control mea-
sures. Risk mitigation for contamination ingress should be incorporated during equipment design (3).
Special consideration should be given to prevent adventitious agent contamination from other prod-
ucts, for instance, when multiple viral products are manufactured in the same facility. In this case, the 
facility design should consider the biosafety level(s) of the viral products to identify such segregation 
and containment measures, personnel and material flow, personal protective equipment, disinfection 
strategy, physical separation of rooms including the corridor and testing labs, and segregation and 
dedication of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC). These elements should be included 
in a risk assessment that supports existing facilities and the facility design phase where possible. The 
ISPE Baseline Guide: Volume 7 – Risk-Based Manufacture of Pharmaceutical Products (Second Edition) 
provides information on a risk-based approach to manage the risk of cross-contamination. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
17
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Closed or functionally closed processes are the most effective contamination control measures to create bar-
riers between the product and the environment.  These principles apply to single or multiuse equipment. 
PDA Technical Report No. 54-5: Quality Risk Management for the Design, Qualification, and Operation of 
Manufacturing Systems provides a detailed and thorough guideline for manufacturing systems design. PDA 
Technical Report 69 also details how facility design and environmental control contribute to contamina-
tion control. Table 5.1-1 highlights some characteristics of the holistic approach to facility considerations.
Table 5.1-1 Holistic Approach to Facility Considerations 
Non-Holistic Approach 
Holistic Approach
Facility and equipment design 
flaws or issues do not require 
additional control measures if 
the environmental monitoring 
results are below action levels
•	
Environmental monitoring is a detection control and is only a single indicator of performance
•	
Emphasis should be on robust engineering controls, monitoring critical facility parameters, establish-
ing alert levels, and ensuring that there is a process to monitor and remediate alert level events
•	
Known facility and equipment issues should be proactively evaluated by QRM principles to identify 
additional controls
•	
Sub-alert level trends also warrant evaluation
•	
Focus should be on recovery rates (especially in the critical zones) rather than exceeding action levels
5.2	 Personnel Flow
During the design phase of any facility, the movement or “flow” of personnel, material, and wastes 
should be established using QRM principles. People are the primary source of microorganisms in 
cleanrooms, so personnel flow is critically important to contamination control. 
Where the process is exposed and inherently at risk of contamination from the environment, requiring 
unidirectional movement of personnel and limiting areas where people congregate can minimize potential 
contamination. For an existing facility where unidirectional flow is not achievable, additional procedural 
and design controls are often needed to prevent people with different levels of gowning from comingling. 
Gowning and behavior are key controls to limit contamination from personnel; they are discussed in 
Section 8.0.
5.3	 Material and Waste Controls 
Flow paths of material and waste are important to control because they can carry contaminants into and 
around the facility, and the movement of waste out of the facility may cause contamination as it exits. Facility 
design should minimize the movement of material and waste and separate them from the flow of personnel 
between areas of different classifications. These separate and dedicated pathways will also help prevent cross-
contamination between products. Receiving and storage areas must be of sufficient size and managed to ac-
count for materials and wastes in transit to prevent particulate and microbial contamination from personnel 
as they navigate the clean zones. Additionally, a defined spill response is important to prevent contamination.
Proper material transfer is essential to limiting the ingress of contaminants to classified environments. 
Consider that external packaging (e.g., cardboard, plastic) are heavily laden with microorganisms from 
the outside environment, especially mold and bacterial spores. Some of these microbes are attracted by 
the electrostatic charge of the packaging materials or are inherent to the packaging material and should 
not be allowed to enter classified areas.
While there are several approaches to contamination control for material transfer, the three most com-
mon are chemical disinfection, shedding layers of packaging, and direct transfer through a sterilization 
system (e.g., pass through autoclave, e-beam system) or through a sterile-designed connection (e.g., rapid 
transfer port). Chemical disinfection is the process of using a validated chemical agent to treat material 
or equipment before transfer into a classified area; it should include physical application (i.e., wiping) to 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
18
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
achieve mechanical removal as well. This process should be qualified and include a validated minimum 
contact time with the disinfection agent. Purchasing or preparing items with multiple layers of sterile 
packaging or bags is another strategy, whereby a layer is removed at the transition to a higher-grade area. 
An equipment flow should be clearly defined for the facility, including a map showing entry and exit 
and from storage to the area of use, with protection from the areas of greatest risk where contamination 
can occur (e.g., unidirectional material air locks). The surfaces of portable and nondedicated equip-
ment should be maintained, cleaned, and disinfected and staged appropriately.
5.4	 Cleaning and Disinfection for Facilities
The cleaning and disinfection program is essential for an effective CCS. Refer to PDA Technical Report 
No. 70: Fundamentals of Cleaning and Disinfection Programs for Aseptic Manufacturing Facilities for 
further information and details on developing an effective program.
5.5	 Utility Design, Control, and Validation
Critical utility systems, including water, steam, HVAC, and gas systems, are important elements of the CCS 
because they come in direct contact with the product stream. This may also apply to noncritical “support” 
utilities that are not in product contact, such as cooling and vacuum systems and pretreated feed water. 
When running well, critical utility systems appear to fade into the background, but if not designed, main-
tained, operated, and monitored properly, they can lead to a shutdown of production or even adulteration 
of products. Table 5.1.4-1 highlights some characteristics of the holistic approach to utility considerations.
Table 5.1.4-1	 Holistic Approach to Utility Considerations
Non-Holistic Approach
Holistic Approach
A critical utility is a standalone piece 
of equipment 
Critical utilities are a major part of the overall CCS; they can introduce contamination into the 
facility, equipment, and process stream that are very difficult to correct.
Microbial contamination cannot 
occur if the utility monitoring test 
results are passing
Microbiological testing has known limitations; the physical parameter data for HVAC, water, 
and gas offer early warning signs of performance issues that can lead to serious contamination. 
Physical parameters are monitored, and atypical trends are responded to in a timely manner.
Only action-level results require 
investigation and CAPA
Any atypical result or trend, including sub-alert level results, can be an early warning sign and 
may warrant investigation.
5.6	 Water and Steam
Several detailed guidelines exist for contamination control of water systems because water is one of the 
main raw materials used in drug manufacturing. Valuable information is available in PDA Technical 
Report 69, USP <1231> Water for Pharmaceutical Purposes, ISPE Baseline Guide Vol. 4: Water & Steam 
Systems, 3rd Edition, and EMA Guideline on the Quality of Water for Pharmaceutical Use. Steam is derived 
from process water and used for sterilization activities, which are critical to the CCS. Qualification and 
management strategies should be formed by an interdepartmental team that includes a microbiologist 
experienced in monitoring and contamination control. Water systems undergo an extensive qualifi-
cation to ensure seasonal variation is monitored. During the entire qualification period, all results, 
including sub-alert level results and species identification, should be reviewed for adverse trends by an 
appropriate SME. This interdisciplinary approach has proven successful at catching and preventing ma-
jor problems later in routine operations which, in turn, can impact the contamination control program. 
Viewing new water systems as “inherently risky” is useful. Unknown flaws in the design, assembly, or 
management of the system can allow microbial biofilm to develop, which may present as sporadic, sub-
alert results. PDA Technical Report 69 contains further details on preventing and reducing biofilm. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
