37
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 10.2.3-1	 Functional CCI Considerations
CCI Aspect
Functional Considerations
Component Specifications
Success of the CCI relies upon the provision of components within the tolerances of established 
specifications. Where components are provided by vendors, appropriate qualification of the vendor 
and the supply chain of components is essential. Vendors should share the same quality culture as the 
pharmaceutical manufacturer.
Conditions of Component 
Preparation
Cleaning, depyrogenation, siliconization, and sterilization of containers and closures may result in stress 
to the material, which may impact CCI. CCI should be demonstrated after maximum exposure to those 
conditions, yet within the validated parameters.
Terminal Sterilization
Terminal sterilization of finished DP may result in stress and may impact CCI. CCI should be demonstrated 
using maximum sterilization exposure within the validated parameters.
Vial Crimping
Vial crimping includes application of forces to the top and sides of the vial seal to exert pressure on the 
stopper, close the edge of the seal, and keep it in place. Excessive pressure during crimping may crack the 
vial, and insufficient pressure may result in a poorly sealed vial (24). Vial CCI should be demonstrated 
using the process parameters that result in the highest and lowest crimping forces. 
Sterile Products using Blow-
Fill-Seal (BFS) Technology
CCI should be validated as part of the machine or mold qualification. In addition, the leak-detection 
machine process parameters should be challenged across multiple container size ranges. For BFS drug 
products or where a vacuum is pulled (e.g., during lyophilization), deterministic leak detection methods 
should be considered and 100% of the batch should be evaluated for leaks.
Secondary Assembly
Prefilled syringes and cartridges may be assembled into devices, such as autoinjectors and safety needle 
devices, or they may require the insertion of plunger rods. The assembly process includes manipulation 
of the primary CC that may result in a loss of CCI; therefore, CCI should be demonstrated after secondary 
assembly of prefilled syringes. 
Storage
The CCS should be selected and validated for its ability to maintain integrity under worst-case storage 
conditions (e.g., frozen).
Handling and Shipping
CCI may be compromised due to mechanical stress during shipping, so functional adequacy of CCI should 
be included in the shipping validation plan. Worst-case shipping conditions, in addition to actual shipping, 
may be simulated to account for hazardous elements that may be encountered during shipping. During 
shipping studies, the potential for disruption or movement of the physical interfaces between components 
due to physical or environmental influences (e.g., changes in temperature or pressure) should be explored.
10.2.4	 Container Closure Monitoring and Testing
CCIT should be considered throughout the lifecycle and shelf life of the product and should be based 
on the conclusion of manufacturing and shipping risk assessments. Direct CCI testing of the finished 
DP is only one of the many means of assuring functional integrity, and it should be complemented by 
a robust validation of CCI during the complete manufacturing process. The receipt testing of statisti-
cally valid sample sizes of components, for example, using the ANSI/ASQ Z1.4-2008 or ISO 2859 
standards is one important means of assuring CCI and reducing reliance upon end-product testing. 
During the fill-and-finish process, such continuous monitoring as in-line stopper detectors and other 
100% testing technologies may be considered. Where design, development, vendor, component re-
ceipt processes, preparation and handling controls, and qualifications are robust and with a proven 
history, the extent of finished product testing may be significantly reduced (25). Any reduction in test-
ing should be justified on these design controls and objective assessments of risk. However, CC system 
fused on the filling line require 100% integrity testing (26).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
38
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
11.0 
Quality Systems
This section addresses how quality systems provide the framework that drives proper function of all 
aspects of the CCS, including trending and metrics, investigations, corrective and preventive actions 
(CAPA), change control, QRM, quality agreements, and governance. ICH Q10 provides further de-
tails and implementation strategies.
11.1	 Trending and Metrics
Metrics, including key performance indicators (KPIs), permit firms to respond to signals from the 
CCS. Metrics should effectively assess the holistic performance of the CCS and include both predictive 
and reactive measurements. Each metric should be assessed during the periodic review; Table 11.1-1 
presents some examples. 
Table 11.1-1	
Examples of Metrics to be Assessed during Periodic Review
Predictive Metrics
Reactive Metrics
KPIs related to quality culture
Facility nonconformances related to controls within the CCS (e.g., 
EM deviations)
Capital reinvestment focused on contamination control including 
new control and measurement technologies
Process nonconformances related to controls within the CCS (e.g., 
DS or raw material pyrogen/endotoxin levels)
Mitigation of contamination control risks uncovered through QRM 
activities
Product nonconformances related to controls within the CCS (e.g., 
sterility test failure)
CAPA effectiveness and on-time implementation
Process capability and machine performance
Conformance to schedule for planned contamination control 
qualifications and validations
EM trending across the site and deviations, root cause analysis, risks 
assessments, and mitigations in response to adverse trends
Conformance to schedule for planned contamination control risk 
assessments
Other deviations associated with contamination control including, but 
not limited to, control failures, training gaps, faulty knowledge transfer
Conformance to schedule for maintenance activities related to the CCS
Unplanned/corrective maintenance 
The goal of trending is to permit a holistic analysis of control information over a period of time or 
across different circumstances. Such analysis facilitates identification of patterns, potential influences, 
and genuine root causes of nonconformances.
Metrics, KPIs, and data relevant to routine monitoring should be categorized and trended to monitor 
the holistic performance of CCS, for example:
•	
Root causes of nonconformances (e.g., control designs, training, knowledge, communication)
•	
Control charting of both variable data (e.g., numerical quantities and composition of microbial 
flora recovered in lower classification cleanroom) and attribute data (e.g., presence or absence of 
colonies recovered in Grade-A location monitoring)
11.2	 Investigation
Investigations related to CCS may arise from multiple sources for e.g. product complaints, product or 
process testing, process validation, cleaning validation, technical studies, environmental or utility moni-
toring excursions, data trending, or other deviations. Investigation is one feedback loop of the CCS 
that ensures continuous improvement and refinement of the CCS control elements (see Figure 3.0-1).
Investigations are used to identify sources of microbial contamination within the facility or detect a 
breakdown of the overall CCS and, as a result, they should be conducted in a holistic fashion, without 
a predetermined investigational outcome, even when perceived as one-off events. Where possible, 
investigation strategies should be standardized in a written plan to streamline the process and hasten a 
resolution (e.g., EM investigations). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
39
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Microbial risk assessments are an important component of the CCS and the investigation process. 
These should be used to understand potential weak points in the CCS and identify the root cause. 
The microbial risk assessment is a proactive measure used to support process understanding, especially 
during the investigational process. PDA Technical Report No. 88: Microbial Data Deviation Investiga-
tions in the Pharmaceutical Industry describes a detailed process for conducting microbial deviation 
investigations and the parameters surrounding them.
11.3	 Corrective And Preventive Actions
CAPAs are one of the feedback loops that enable ongoing improvement and refinement of the CCS 
based on the information gained during investigations and routine monitoring. Figure 3.0-1 provides 
a visual illustration of this concept. 
When determining the appropriate CAPAs, the entire CCS should be considered, including the ele-
ments that will be directly affected by the CAPA and all other CCS elements that may be indirectly af-
fected. CAPA effectiveness checks should be built into the majority of CAPAs and tracked as a quality 
metric. The most effective CAPAs will likely enhance multiple controls in the CCS across the facility 
and a range of processes and products. Effective CAPAs that truly strengthen the CCS and prevent 
contamination may also lead to a reduction in testing and oversight, for example, closing a process 
step. Incorporating any new knowledge and learning derived from the CAPA back into the CCS is an 
important step, one that can be taken during the periodic lifecycle review described in Section 12.0.
11.4	 Change Control 
There is an inherent risk of contamination when changes are made to any part of the CCS. Any change 
to product, process, or facility that may impact the level of risk related to CCS contamination controls 
warrants an ad-hoc risk review. When a change is made to product, process, or facility, the impact of 
the contamination should be evaluated by SMEs on the system being changed, contamination control, 
and quality. 
11.5	 Quality Risk Management
When initially developing a CCS, the organization should review the existing risk assessments that 
relate to all contamination control elements to understand what risks have been identified, how those 
risks are currently being reduced, and any mitigations that have been planned. Upon completion of 
this review, the firm should create a plan for performing risk assessments on the topics with the least 
amount of risk knowledge and the greatest potential of contamination risk based on the manufactur-
ing processes. The plan should be realistic, consider that risk assessments require a team approach and, 
as living documents, understand that they will require periodic reevaluation. This process is described 
in ICH Q9.
When performing new risk assessments, additional contamination risks will be identified along with 
mitigation plans that enhance the CCS. This creates a feedback loop where the CCS identifies the areas 
that need risk assessment, and the existing and new contamination risk assessments inform the CCS. 
Figure 3.0-1 shows QRM as one of the foundational elements, suggesting that the QRM element of 
CCS is a single document. In practice, QRM is a culmination of multiple, focused contamination-
control risk assessments that address different product lifecycle phases, processes, and levels of risk. No 
single risk assessment tool is appropriate for all risk questions; a combination of appropriate risk tools 
should be used to achieve an effective QRM. As an example, for the manufacturing process, a design 
FMEA would be the appropriate tool to identify the best process for preventing contamination and 
other failures; whereas a HACCP is appropriate to determine whether the surrounding control strate-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
40
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
gies are sufficient and to identify the in-process sample locations that will monitor the effectiveness 
of the design and controls. When changes are made, a less formal risk tool may be used as part of the 
change control process to assess whether the change will introduce new risks.
Table 11.5-1 presents examples of the detailed risk assessments that form the initial foundation of a CCS.
Table 11.5-1	
Examples of Foundational Risk Assessments that Support CCS
Contamination 
Control Elements
Risk Question
Risk Tool
Process
What is the risk of process contamination?
Process FMEA 
What is the risk of cross-contamination between 
processes in a multiproduct facility?
Cross-contamination FMEA
Personnel 
What is the risk of process contamination from 
personnel?
Process FMEA
Environment 
What is the risk of process contamination from the 
environment?
Process FMEA
Monitoring HACCP 
Materials, 
Consumables
What is the risk of process contamination from raw 
materials and single-use consumables?
Process FMEA 
Consumables FMEA (for novel or high-risk items)
Monitoring HACCP
Containers
What is the risk of process contamination from final 
product containers?
Process FMEA
Equipment
What is the risk of process contamination from 
equipment?
Process FMEA
Equipment FMEA (for novel or high-risk items)
Utilities
What is the risk of process contamination from 
product-contact utilities?
Monitoring HACCP
Other
Other targeted risk questions, as needed
Multiple
Other risk assessment tools (e.g., the Preliminary Hazard Analysis outlined in ICH Q9) can be em-
ployed as appropriate (27). 
11.6	 Quality Agreements and Vendor Management
To ensure that a firm’s contamination risks and controls from vendor-supplied materials and services 
are actively managed, quality agreements should be in place between the firm and the vendor. Quality 
agreements and the associated vendor management programs are critically important because a firm 
relies on a consistent supply of materials and on dependable, compliant services. The vendor’s CCS 
practices should be evaluated as part of the vendor qualification.
Once qualified and approved, vendors should be audited on a frequency commensurate with the 
criticality of the supplied materials or service. Vendor audits represent the means of monitoring within 
the contamination control architecture. Routine vendor audits should include those elements of their 
CCS that are fundamentally important to the material or service supplied. 
11.7	 Quality Controls
All quality control laboratories that generate data to measure or monitor contamination control ele-
ments should be governed by GMPs. The potential for erroneous results should be minimized and thor-
oughly investigated as part of any contamination deviation (see the Governance and Oversight section 
of PDA Technical Report No. 88: Microbial Data Deviation Investigations in the Pharmaceutical Industry). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
