57
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 16.3-1	
Microbial Impact Assessment Example 2
Event Conditions [italics are example text]
Microorganism Type (Genus, species): Sphingomonas paucimobilus
Amount Detected: 20 CFU/100 mL
Total number of microorganisms in batch:  
10 L/total batch x 200 CFU/L = 2x103 CFU/total batch
Process Step: UF/DF skid
Process Step Limit: 10 CFU/100 mL
Process Step Hold Time: < 24 hours
Hold Temperature: 2–8 °C
Material Matrix: 0.9% NaCl buffer
Attach Process Map, if appropriate, to indicate mitigation steps 
downstream
Microbial Hazards 
(examples)
Severity
Probability
Controls (Downstream Processing and 
Detection)
Risk  
(Severity × 
Probability × Controls)
Number of 
microorganisms
Medium
Low  
Hold time not conducive to 
growth of this organism
UF/DF process removes 
this size of organism, 
about 0.2 μm
Bioburden assays 
downstream are 
acceptable
Low
Endotoxin  
(if applicable)
Low
Low
Multiple purification 
steps downstream (e.g., 
TFF, column extraction) 
have removal capacity 
In-process 
endotoxin assays 
downstream are 
acceptable
Low
Other metabolites, as 
applicable (myco-
toxins, exotoxins, 
extracellular enzymes, 
e.g., proteases)
Low
Low
Levels and conditions 
(chemical treatment, low 
pH) do not result in produc-
tion of other metabolites 
[include references]
Final product 
protein patterns 
are typical, no 
changes
Low
17.0 
Appendix 3: Case Studies for Contamination Control
The following case studies provide real examples of contamination events that indicate weaknesses in 
contamination control strategies (CCS), particularly around maintenance controls, and the resulting 
root cause investigations (Cases 1–3). An example program to protect manufacturing processes during 
maintenance events, or “disruptions,” is also presented (Case 4).
17.1	 Case Study 1: Contamination Related to Equipment Maintenance
Reference: Case Studies of Microbial Contamination in Biologic Product Manufacturing by Kalavati Suvar-
na, PhD, Patricia Hughes, PhD, Richard L. Friedman; American Pharmaceutical Review, January 1, 2011
One case involved contamination of a fermenter used in the manufacture of a protein product secreted by 
a bacterial host. The contaminant was identified as Bacillus cereus (a Gram-positive spore-forming rod). A 
second case involved the contamination of a fermenter used in the manufacture of a recombinant protein 
by Paenibacillus curdlanolyticus (a Gram-variable spore-forming rod). A systematic approach was used 
during the investigations to identify the root cause of the contamination, which included several media 
simulations to aid in identifying the point of entry into the fermenter. In addition, the investigations 
involved the manufacture of engineering batches. After a lengthy investigation in both case studies, mul-
tiple potential root causes were identified, including problems with the sampling devices, addition valves, 
incorrectly fitted components, missing O-rings, incorrect installation and deformation of an air filter af-
ter sterilization, and/or inadequate slope of a condensate line. Immediate corrective actions included the 
replacement of valve diaphragms in fermenter addition ports, replacement of a membrane valve in the 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
58
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
sampling device, and replacement of O-rings on the measuring probes. Enhancements were also made to 
the sterilization processes of the fermenter and associated transfer lines. A preventive maintenance plan 
was developed for all fermenter valves. All valves were tagged using a detailed checklist to ensure correct 
installation. All SOPs were updated, and employees were trained on the revised versions. The investiga-
tions and corrective actions addressed all possible causes of contamination as an unequivocal root cause 
could not be assigned. In most cases, it is very difficult to identify a definitive assignable cause. Following 
a systematic approach to determine the root cause is highly recommended. Media simulations help in 
demonstrating that the sterility of the fermenter is not compromised. Recent microbial contamination 
events at several manufacturing facilities point to breaches in the sterile boundary caused by damaged 
vent filters, O-rings, diaphragms, and elastomers, and by improperly sloped condensate lines.
17.2	 Case Study 2: Contamination Related to Blow-Fill-Seal Equipment 
Design and Maintenance 
Reference: Commentary Aseptic Processing Contamination Case Studies and the Pharmaceutical Quality System by 
Richard L. Friedman; PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Vol. 59, No. 2, March–April 2005
Background: A firm experienced both sterility and media-fill failures. Stenotrophomonas maltophilia 
was identified as a sterility failure isolate. Media-fill isolates included Pseudomonas spp. and Acineto-
bacter spp. The prior sterility history of the blow-fill-seal (BFS) processing line was good. 
GMP Issues: Mold plates used to form the primary product container were chilled with cooling 
water. This demineralized potable water was held in a tank at a low temperature prior to use. When 
sampled, the cooling water yielded very high microbial counts. Leaks developed in the mold plates, al-
lowing contaminated water to infiltrate into the product, causing nonsterility. Based on this significant 
breach in equipment integrity, among the most relevant GMP deviations were the unsuitable process-
ing equipment and the lack of an adequate preventive maintenance program. 
Quality System Context: The facility and equipment system were the most deficient. The unsuitable 
equipment and inadequate preventive maintenance program were key factors in the product contamination. 
Outcome: Both the sterility failure and media-fill failure were attributed to contamination by cooling 
water. Pinhole leaks in the mold plates of the aseptic filling machine allowed cooling water to directly 
contaminate the product. The exact date the problem occurred was unknown, making the corrective 
and preventive action plan more difficult. Numerous lots were rejected. The firm concluded that fre-
quent visual inspections of BFS molds for leaks had not provided sufficient preventive maintenance, and 
it implemented corrective measures, including regular testing of molding equipment pressure integrity. 
17.3	 Case Study 3: Contamination Related to Facility Construction
Reference: Commentary Aseptic Processing Contamination Case Studies and the Pharmaceutical Quality System by 
Richard L. Friedman, PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Vol. 59, No. 2, March–April 2005
Background: A firm undertook major construction in a cleanroom next to the personnel gowning air 
lock. The construction occurred over a one-month period and coincided with continued drug product 
production. Following an initial media-fill failure, the firm’s investigation concluded that practices 
unrelated to the construction were the likely sources of the nonsterile units. The firm corrected the 
apparent root causes and then performed a repeat media fill. A second media-fill failure occurred. A 
second thorough investigation by the firm concluded that the contaminants in the media-fill vials had 
migrated from the area of the construction activity. Spore-forming bacteria (Bacillus sp.) were identi-
fied as isolates in both media fills. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
59
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
GMP Issues: The firm did not adequately assess the risk posed by construction activities. 
Quality System Context: The production system was most deficient in this case. With any change 
in normal, qualified conditions it is essential that it be carefully evaluated by production and quality 
management. The FDA has seen this scenario with surprising frequency: a firm performs construc-
tion in an area that is considerably removed from the aseptic processing room (in some cases, several 
rooms away) and presumes that the construction will not affect the sterility assurance of the product. 
Unfortunately, it is not uncommon for the contamination to ultimately migrate to the aseptic process-
ing room and into the product. Many sterility failures and media-fill failures have been attributed to 
contamination from nearby construction. For example, moving walls is a common culprit in the lib-
eration of spore-formers (most commonly fungi) into the cleanroom environment. These experiences 
should alert a firm to assess the potential impact of such deviations from normal conditions. Deviation 
and/or change control systems provide a formal mechanism for evaluating these issues. Written proce-
dures should address returning a facility to normal operating conditions when construction or other 
activities (e.g., maintenance) are considered to have a potentially adverse impact. In these cases, a firm 
should either elect not to manufacture product for a specific period or, where appropriate, implement 
special precautions and increase monitoring to detect any drift in environmental control. 
Outcome: Multiple lots were found to lack the assurance of sterility, and those already distributed 
were recalled. The firm temporarily suspended operations. The firm ultimately restored adequate con-
ditions and resumed aseptic processing following successful media fill-requalification.
17.4	 Case Study 4: Disruption Recovery Program 
Reference: The PDA TR-90 authoring team developed the following recovery program example based on 
their professional experiences.
Based on the CCS principle that impact to classified areas should be minimized whenever possible, 
every effort should be made to plan and schedule routine events such as preventive maintenance, 
calibration and validation activities, during shutdown periods or times when areas are not in use. The 
invasive disruption described below is considered an exception. 
Two levels of disruption are defined based on the severity of the event and their potential impact to 
the qualified state:
•	
Noninvasive disruption: An activity that does not breach the integrity of a controlled classi-
fied area or critical utilities systems and are performed when no activity is occurring in the room, 
for example, caulking repair, light-switch or outlet repair (no cutting), equipment calibration.
•	
Invasive Disruption: An activity that breaches the integrity of the controlled classified area or 
critical utilities systems and are performed when processing is occurring in the room, for example, 
opening an electrical panel in a classified area, welding or cutting pipes in critical utilities.
Disruption Recovery Plan: The following steps may be followed for the shutdown/startup process:
1.	 Develop a plan to contain the disruption and recover afterward through cleaning/disinfection 
and monitoring
2.	 Determine the environmental control measures for the equipment, facilities and personnel
3.	 Execute the activities in the plan
4.	 Confirm the completion of activities
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
60
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
5.	 Verify EM results to demonstrate the control and post-recovery environmental control measures 
(level of post-recovery measures should be commensurate with the risk; may be reduced for 
noninvasive disruptions) 
6.	 Resume manufacturing
Specific actions to be taken as part of the shutdown include:
•	
Create temporary barriers around the area (protect equipment and utilities and segregate the 
affected area)
•	
Determine which activities may continue, and which must be stopped
•	
Define a sequence of activities or steps to be conducted 
•	
Provide instructions for the alternative movement of materials, equipment, and people
•	
Train personnel involved in the shut-down activities how to prevent contamination 
Table 17.4-1 describes each level of disruption and offers examples. Specific actions to be taken as part 
of recovery activities are shown in the Table 17.4-2. The information in these tables is not all-inclusive 
but is provided as a guidance for consideration. 
Table 17.4-1	
Example of Categorization of Disruption 
Level
Description
1
Noninvasive Disruption
An activity that does not breach the integrity of a controlled classified area or critical utilities systems and is performed when 
no activity is occurring in the room/area. 
•	 Classified Areas, e.g., caulking repair, light switch or outlet repair (no cutting), spot painting (no sanding), calibration activities
•	 Critical Utilities, e.g., preventive maintenance, valve maintenance, calibration
2
Invasive Disruption
An activity that breaches the integrity of the controlled classified area or critical utilities systems and is performed when 
processing is occurring in the room/area.
Classified Areas, e.g., opening an electrical panel, equipment repair or maintenance, light bulb change, sprinkler cover replacement
Critical Utilities, e.g., cutting, welding, piping replacement, derouging, chemical cleaning
Table 17.4-2	
	
Example Recovery Plans
Level
Containment Recommendations 
Cleaning and Disinfection 
Recommendation
Monitoring Recommendation 
1
Over-gowning when exposing dirty 
surfaces – in addition to routine gowning, 
additional gloves, frock, booties may be 
applied during the work and removed 
directly after contact with dirty surfaces 
e.g., behind light switch or outlet
Daily cleaning / disinfection of the area 
and equipment 
Targeted cleaning / disinfection with 
sporicide if dirty surfaces (e.g., behind 
light switch or outlet) are exposed
Routine daily EM and critical utilities 
monitoring.
Particle counts may be sufficient to 
initiate activity in the area for minimally 
invasive work  
2
Over-gowning
Dust collection and temporary walls 
may be warranted depending on type 
of work
Construction clean-up (e.g., HEPA 
vacuum, dust horizontal surfaces) 
followed by cleaning and disinfection; 
should include sporicide per local 
procedure.
Specific EM program covering areas and 
locations that were impacted by the 
construction measures (both static and 
dynamic monitoring) for air and surfaces. 
Additional nonroutine samples should 
be considered. Air balancing/air change 
should be verified, as appropriate. 
3 (Utility) Isolate and limit access to the affected 
utility/portion of utility ports
Critical utilities should be sanitized to 
ensure system integrity.
Microbiological and chemical testing 
covering the impacted system
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
61
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
18.0 
Appendix 4: Illustration of CCS Variability based on Process
An effective CCS is tailored to the specific risks of a process, illustrated by the following three DS 
examples (Table 18.0-1). DS is used to illustrate this point because the processes vary widely across 
industry. This principle also applies to DP.
Table 18.0-1	
Illustration of CCS Tailored to Example Process
Process 1
Process 2
Process 3
Key Features
Open steps at start and end
Reusable equipment, complex 
piping
Synthetic product
Few open steps only at start
Single-use systems, manual connections 
via thermal welding & connectors
Biologic process, some animal-derived 
materials
No open steps
Single-use systems, pre-assembled 
kits – few manual connections
Biologic process, synthetic materials 
(other than host system)
Process 1
Process 2
Process 3
Key Features
–	 Risks for CCS
Controls to 
Enhance for CCS
Multiple open steps throughout
•	 Ingress from Environment & 
Personnel
•	 Stricter overall cleanroom 
classification 
•	 CCS Awareness Campaign & 
Coaching (alongside training)
Reusable equipment, complex 
piping
•	 Equipment maintenance issues
•	 Challenges to clean/sterilize
•	 Deadlegs/misalignments
•	 Conservative cleaning/ 
sanitization/ storage practices 
•	 Periodic equipment audits
Synthetic product
•	 Fouling during storage
•	 Temp, humidity control
•	 Cleanroom controls for material 
sampling
Few open steps, only at start
•	 Ingress from Environment & 
Personnel for open steps
•	 Stricter cleanroom classification for 
open steps
•	 CCS Awareness Campaign & 
Coaching (alongside training)
Single-use systems, manual 
connections via thermal welding 
& connectors
•	 Leaks, Personnel technique
•	 Vendor quality defects
•	 Targeted, hands-on training
•	 Inspection of consumables, on-site 
pre-use inflation of bags 
•	 Partner with vendors
Biologic process, some animal-
derived materials
•	 Adventitious agents, prions
•	 Expanded characterization
•	 Pre-use testing
•	 Treatment (e.g., gamma irradiation)
No open steps
•	 Risks from environment & 
personnel minimized
•	 Less strict cleanroom classification 
Single-use systems, pre-
assembled kits, few manual 
connections
•	 Vendor quality defects (e.g., 
possible leaks)
•	 Inspection of consumables, on-
site pre-use inflation of bags
•	 Partner with vendors
Biologic process, synthetic 
materials (other than host 
system)
•	 Adventitious agents, prions
•	 Expanded characterization
•	 Pre-use testing
•	 Treatment 
All CCS elements apply to each of the example processes, and the blue-highlighted elements in Figure 
18.0-1 warrant enhanced controls for risks that are specific to that process.
Process 1
Process 2
Process 3
Figure 18.0-1 Illustration of CCS Elements Highlighting those that Require Enhance Controls for Example Processes
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
62
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
19.0 
Appendix 5: Template Example for Contamination  
Control Strategy Document
Instructions for Template:
Text in gray is instructions for using this template. Delete from your final document. 
This short template is meant to serve as an example and should be tailored to the specific company’s 
processes and products. The template is designed to include brief example overviews with supporting 
references included, as applicable. Sections should be rearranged, omitted, or edited as required.
Tips for Contamination Control Strategy Document 
•	
Use factual, active voice. Describe the controls that do occur at the site, not what “shall” oc-
cur. State the rationale for these controls, especially when that rationale is critical to the overall 
strategy or not obvious/common. 
•	
Target 30-50 pages. Include visuals and avoid too many details. Instead, refer to other de-
tailed GMP documents (e.g., SOPs, Batch Records, site master file, reports, risk assessments). 
•	
Align the format to your company/site procedure requirements. 
•	
The Audience of the Contamination Control Strategy document is:
–	
Inspectors: This document will be given to inspectors to orient them to a site’s overall strat-
egy, procedures, and data related to contamination control.
–	
All GMP site employees: This document is a holistic overview to help readers understand 
the interconnectedness of all elements of the CCS and to ensure future changes do not 
adversely impact the state of contamination control.
•	
The Scope of your Contamination Control Strategy document: It may be facility-specific and/
or process-specific, depending on the organization. 
–	
The CCS should be prepared and owned by the responsible site for their portion of the sup-
ply chain. When multiple CCSs are needed to cover the full, end-to-end supply chain, they 
should reference one another.
–	
For multiproduct facilities, where the manufacturing processes are similar and the same 
CCS is employed (e.g., fill-finish operations), one strategy document may cover all process-
es/products at the site. 
–	
For multiproduct facilities, where manufacturing processes and/or associated CCSs vary 
widely (e.g., some drug substance sites, sites with liquid and solid products, nonsterile and 
sterile), separate strategy documents should be prepared for each product.
1.	 PURPOSE 
Step
Purpose
1.1
This document outlines a contamination control strategy to safeguard product quality from microbial, particulate, pyrogen/
endotoxin, and viral contamination. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
63
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
2.	 BACKGROUND 
Step
Background 
2.1
A Contamination Control Strategy (CCS) should be implemented across the facility in order to define all critical control points 
and assess the effectiveness of all the controls (design, procedural, technical and organizational) and monitoring measures 
employed to manage risks associated with contamination. The CCS should be actively updated and should drive continuous 
improvement of the manufacturing and control methods.
Contamination control and steps taken to minimize the risk of contamination from microbial and particulate sources are a series 
of successively linked events or measures. These are typically assessed, controlled and monitored individually but their collective 
effectiveness should be considered altogether. 
The development of the CCS requires thorough technical and process knowledge. Potential sources of contamination are 
attributable to microbial and cellular debris (e.g., pyrogens, endotoxins) as well as foreign particulate matter (e.g., glass and 
other visible and sub-visible particles). 
3.	 SCOPE 
Step
Scope 
3.1
This document describes, at a high level, the manufacturing process and associated contamination controls for  
<product/processes> at the <facility/area>. 
<Product> is a <type of product, e.g., chemically derived drug substance for an injectable drug product>. 
If this CCS is specific to one portion of the product, refer to CCS for the other portions of the supply chain if internal (or refer to QTA 
if externally sourced), for example: The API for <product name> is obtained from <external company, facility name>. This is 
governed by a formal Quality Agreement [Reference(s): [XXX]. Detailed guidance on contamination controls for the <API name> 
production processes is captured in a separate document owned by the <external company>.
3.2
The strategy is multifaceted and includes controls associated with the following:
Manufacturing process design, risk assessment, validation, monitoring
Facility design and environmental controls
Environmental monitoring
Equipment handling and cleaning controls
Equipment maintenance 
Utility design and controls
Alarm system
Personnel training and controls
Raw materials and components
Product containers and closures 
Vendor approval
Contamination and utility disruption response
Prevention: Quality systems and continuous improvement
Governance and oversight
4.	 RESPONSIBILITY
Step
Role
Responsibility
4.1
Quality 
Ensure this policy remains current
4.2
Site Employees involved in GMP activities
Ensure adherence to the principles and policies outlined in 
this document
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
64
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
5.	 CONTAMINTION CONTROL STRATEGY ELEMENTS: Sections may be rearranged as 
deemed appropriate by the site. Add other important site-specific controls where appropriate.
Step
Contamination Control Elements
All elements of the CCS are summarized or referenced in the following sections to illustrate how these individual controls work together to 
effect holistic control.
5.1
Manufacturing Process Design, Risk Assessment, Validation, and Monitoring (TR90 Sections 7.0, 8.0, and 9.0)
In this section, include a short description of the process. Add a process map that identifies important process contamination 
controls including antimicrobial agents, impurity removal steps, process hold times, and microbiological/particulate testing points. 
Add overview of how process design controls the potential for microbial ingress, survival and growth/proliferation, microbial removal 
steps, aseptic process simulation (APS), and risk assessments and validations related to these process contamination controls. 
Add rationale for process testing scheme and limits for microbial (bio and endotoxin), viral, and particulates. 
5.2
Facilities Design and Environmental Controls (TR90 Section 5.0)
Refer to current version of GMP drawings of facility maps with area classification outlined. 
Add overview of facility layout showing area classifications, areas of segregation, direction of flows (e.g., upstream, 
downstream, warehouse, raw material sampling). Include overview of areas of enhanced biosafety levels.
Add overview for major environmental controls: design, temperature and humidity, air pressure cascade, cleaning and 
disinfection, access control and facility flows, and pest control.
Add overview of barrier technologies, if applicable (e.g., isolators, RABS). 
NOTE: Environmental monitoring is in Section 5.3.
5.3
Environmental Monitoring (TR90 Section 7.0)
Add overview of environmental monitoring, limits, and status of environmental qualification and periodicity of requalification. 
5.4
Equipment Handling, Cleaning, and Sanitization/Sterilization (TR90 Section 9.2)
Add overview of reusable manufacturing equipment controls: segregation of clean/dirty (and live/non-live, toxic/detoxified, 
where applicable); cleaning and sanitization/sterilization methods, including water quality; clean equipment storage; column/
skid and UF/DF handling; and associated validation and risk assessment related to contamination control. 
NOTE: Equipment maintenance is in Section 9.5.
5.5
Equipment Maintenance (TR90 Section 9.5)
Add overview of equipment maintenance program, including how PM schedules are established and how maintenance events 
are contained to limit contamination to the process. 
5.6
Utilities Design and Controls (TR90 Section 5.4)
Add overview of controls of GMP utility systems (utilities that are used as raw material or have direct contact with product or 
product-contact surfaces), sanitary design, usage, sanitization, and monitoring, including sampling strategy, trending system, 
and potential for biofilm formation. Specifically, include cooling systems if placed in filling room.
5.6.1
Air Handling Units/HVAC (TR90 Section 5.4.2)
5.6.2
Water(s) (TR90 Section 5.4.1)
5.6.3
Clean Steam, if applicable (TR90 Section 5.4.1)
5.6.4
Compressed Air Gas (TR90 Section 5.4.3)
5.6.5
Other Gases (e.g., nitrogen) or Vacuum, if applicable (TR90 Section 5.4.3)
5.6.6
Other GMP Utilities (e.g., cooling system), if applicable (TR90 Section 5.4.2)
5.7
Alarm System (TR90 Section 9.1)
Add overview of facility and equipment alarm system and controls, limit strategy, and how excursions are handled. 
5.8
Personnel Training and Controls (TR90 Section 8.0)
Add overview of personnel health/hygiene/gowning requirements and associated training/certification, aseptic gowning and 
training, job training; highlight contamination control awareness campaign. Include how visitors are handled.
Include personnel training for visual inspection for particulates, if applicable. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
65
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Step
Contamination Control Elements
5.9
Raw Materials and Components (TR90 Section 6.0)
Add overview of raw material and components controls, including single-use systems (SUS), e.g., selection and qualification, 
categorization by criticality, establishing test plans and specification, receipt testing and inspection before use for consumables, 
and special provisions for endotoxin and/or particulate levels, if applicable. 
Include what types of raw materials undergo microbiological testing and what components and SUS systems undergo in-house 
preparation (e.g., depyrogenation/sterilization). 
Explain how data and complaints are trended and evaluated.
5.10
Containers and Closures (TR90 Section 10.0)
Add overview of containers and closures, selection, receipt testing, in-house controls (cleaning/depyrogenation/sterilization), 
and validation and control of container closure integrity. Include containers used for shipment and storage of large-volume 
solutions and final-product containers.
5.11
Vendor Approval (TR90 Section 11.6)
Add overview of vendor or subcontractor approval for raw material and consumables, depyrogenation/sterilization of components 
and SUS systems, or other outsourced services related to contamination control (e.g., cleaning and sterilization services).
5.12
Contamination and Utility Disruption Response (TR90 Section 7.2)
Add overview of contamination response (microbial, particulate, and viral, if applicable) and how to contain utility interruption 
events (e.g., maintenance shutdowns, invasive maintenance events, power outages).
5.13
Prevention: Quality Systems and Continuous Improvement (TR90 Section 11.0)
Add overview of quality systems related to contamination control (e.g., deviation investigation, trending, CAPA, change control, 
quality risk management). Describe how these quality systems are employed to strive for continuous improvement of the 
contamination control program.
5.14
Quality Controls (TR90 Section 11.7)
Add overview or reference on lab training, OOS program, APS, and specific testing aspects as appropriate.
5.15
Governance and Effectiveness Review (TR90 Section 12.0)
Add overview of how performance of contamination controls is monitored by governing body(s), and how the quality systems support 
the oversight and governance and the established escalation scheme (e.g., site quality management review).
6.	 GLOSSARY
Step
Definitions
6.1
<Add relevant site definitions in this document.>
7.	 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS 
Document Number
Title
Add relevant site SOPs, site validations, studies, risk assessments, and others mentioned in this document
8.	 REVISION HISTORY
Revision Number
Date Effective
Summary of Changes
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
