46
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
14.2.4	 Industry Associations
•	
ISPE Good Practice Guide: Process Gases 
•	
ISPE Baseline Guide Volume 3: Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities, Third Edition 
•	
ISPE Baseline Guide Volume 7: Risk-Based Manufacture of Pharma Products, Second Edition 
•	
ISPE Baseline Guide Volume 4: Water & Steam Systems, Third Edition 
•	
ASTM D4169–22: Standard Practice for Performance Testing of Shipping Containers and Systems 
•	
ANSI/ASQ Z1.4–2003 (R2018): Sampling Procedures and Tables for Inspection by Attributes
15.0 
Appendix 1: Practical Considerations of  
Contamination Control Strategy Elements
Tables 15.0-1–15.0-10 provide practical considerations for many elements of contamination control 
system (CCS) with an explanation of the relevant benefit of preventing contamination. 
Table 15.0-1	
Structure of the Manufacturing Areas
Closed 
Processes
Closed systems are a physical barrier between the environment and materials in a manufacturing process
Closed process provides protection from the introduction of contamination from the environment because introduction of 
materials into the equipment is restricted to closed connectors
A closed system prevents release of inherent contaminants into the manufacturing environment
Inherent bioburden of the process is contained
Prevent interaction of humans with the product or direct product contact surfaces
Isolator surfaces can be decontaminated with a validated process
Understand sequence operation to prevent downstream contamination
Open 
Processes
Open processes rely significantly on appropriate gowning and operator training/aseptic practices/hygienic behavior to 
protect process from human originating contaminates 
Multiple barriers are required to protect against contamination in open manufacturing systems
Design of facilities should consider flows of people, product, materials, equipment, and waste to prevent contamination 
and cross-contamination
For open processes that directly impact purity of materials from contaminant or adventitious agents, use of barrier technology is 
preferred over a unidirectional flow unit or biosafety cabinet (BSC) 
Appropriate use of a unidirectional flow unit or BSC is for reduced bioburden processing (or low or controlled); the purpose of the 
equipment is to provide Grade A quality air for critical processing steps
For products of biological origin, the matrix for microbial seeds or cell stocks should be sterile except for the microbe 
that produces the active substance or the mammalian cell line for cell stocks. It is not acceptable for contaminants or 
adventitious agents to be present in master seeds, working seeds, seed inoculums, or cell stocks. For sterile products, 
it is not acceptable for the test to be conducted in an environment at risk for environmental contamination. Thus, for 
manipulation of seeds/cell stocks and the conduct of sterility tests, isolator technology is the equipment of choice.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
47
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Single-Use 
Equipment
Single-use equipment simplifies cleaning validation
Single-use equipment ensures there is no introduction of cross-contamination of bioburden or viruses from incorrectly cleaned 
or sterilized equipment; cleaning would still require validation
Integrity of single-use disposable bag seams and connections is validated and tested 
A widely recognized test for integrity is microbial ingress having a sensitivity of detection of 1 µm to 3 µm
Manufacturers can validate assembly of a disposable bag that can be released by a recognized test for integrity
Reusable 
Equipment
Reusable equipment may be economical, but it may allow introduction of bioburden or endotoxins if not correctly 
cleaned and sterilized or depyrogenated
Reusable equipment may need to be dedicated to a process; otherwise, the practice of reusing equipment should be 
supported by cleaning validation
Risk of contamination for reusable equipment is increased by equipment design (e.g., multiple openings) and manual assembly
Equipment should be appropriately designed to meet process needs, but also to reduce the opportunity for introduction 
of microorganisms into the process
No convenient test exists to guarantee the integrity of the final assembled apparatus; pressure-hold tests that are typically used 
at the point of assembly do not affirm that the system is integral
Requires detailed procedures and well-trained operators to reduce the risk for contamination in the absence of physical barriers
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	 A closed process provides containment and an engineering control against contamination in the smallest area in which the barrier of containment is 
in direct contact with product and requires temporal or other procedural controls.
•	 In closed systems, humans, the most common source of contamination, are eliminated from direct product/process interaction.
•	 Single-use equipment simplifies contamination control of bioburden and viruses or adventitious agents
•	 Closed processing and/or single-use equipment are very powerful contamination control measures; an ideal end-to-end process design 
would include a closed system using single-use equipment from the step that removed contaminants, perhaps as early as DS, until the 
formulated DP is dispensed into primary packaging
Table 15.0-2	
	
Multiuse or Single-Product Facility
Multiuse Facility
Facility design should consider features that prevent introduction of harmful contaminants into products at every 
stage of the manufacturing process
Segregation of areas during manufacture of biologics where adventitious and viral control of downstream mate-
rial should be maintained
Single-Product Facility
Facility design should consider features that prevent introduction of harmful contaminants into products at every 
stage of the manufacturing process
Equipment may require segregation by process
Multiuse and Single-
Product Facilities
The difference between contamination in a single-use facility versus a multiuse facility is quite subtle. It is unac-
ceptable in either circumstance to introduce impurities inadvertently from an earlier upstream unit of operation. 
In both circumstances, if the intermediate or product is of an inferior nature, it is adulterated irrespective of the 
source of the contaminant.
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	 Single-product facilities minimize cross-contamination risk
(Table 15.0-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
48
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Table 15.0-3	
	
Storage of Materials and Equipment
Control of 
Materials
Stored in closed/sealed protective containers
Dispensed in controlled/monitored areas
Stored in temperature- and humidity-controlled areas
Storage conditions prevent microbial proliferation
Control of 
Equipment 
 
Equipment stored clean and dry and protected from the environment
Cleaning process validated and monitored
Sterilization processes validated
Sterile hold times defined and validated
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	 Materials and equipment are stored in a manner that prevents or minimizes introduction or proliferation of bioburden.
•	 Sampling and dispensing areas do not add bioburden to raw materials.
•	 Storage of clean equipment is qualified to ensure that bioburden or endotoxin levels do not increase.
Table 15.0-4	
	
Path of Materials, Equipment, or Waste
Materials and/or 
Equipment
Material air locks separate from personnel air locks
Qualified disinfection practices (including use of sporicides where appropriate) for transfer into controlled/classified areas
Shedding layers of packaging as items are transferred into controlled/classified areas
Unidirectional flow
Prohibited entry of packaging materials that cannot be disinfected and can shed particles and microbes into the facility 
(e.g., cardboard, wood, open-cell foam)
Material never contacts the floor 
During transfer across any classification border, carts, including the wheels, should be disinfected. Where possible, 
carts should be dedicated to one classification zone to further minimize the potential of contamination.
Path of Waste
Dedicated air locks for removal of waste materials
Use of pass-through autoclaves from decontamination of waste, placed in locations that minimize unnecessary 
exposure to the waste
Protection of the environment from waste contents
Waste path that does not overlap with incoming personnel or materials
Unidirectional flow
Removal of waste that is exiting the classified areas as soon as possible and without it contacting clean items
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	 Understanding the movement of incoming materials and waste facilitates prevents the introduction of bioburden, viruses, or 
adventitious agents.
•	 Separate air locks for personnel and equipment prevents shedding of bioburden onto materials or equipment moved into the facility.
•	 These concepts are control measures that prevent introduction of adventitious and viral agents into downstream processes.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
49
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 15.0-5	
	
Maintenance
Training of 
Maintenance 
Personnel
Conduct contamination control training, including behavior in the cleanroom, to ensure that those who have an 
impact are thoroughly familiar with and able to follow all the processes and procedures of a successful contamination 
control program while performing activities. This program should include employees and contractors who may need to 
enter controlled classified areas. 
Movement 
and Storage of 
Materials 
Store commonly used maintenance parts and tools within controlled classified environment to prevent contamination 
risks from frequently transferring these items from unclassified areas to classified areas 
Stage maintenance parts in a cleanroom covered cart or on shelves
Clean the cart, the shelves, and the parts, including the wheels, periodically 
Cover the parts during storage to help prevent accumulation of dust
Clean, dry, cap, and store all hoses appropriately 
Bring only the items needed into the controlled, classified environment and disinfect each item; large cases of 
maintenance equipment are difficult to disinfect properly
Protection of 
Environment and 
Equipment dur-
ing Maintenance
Cover all equipment with approved cleanroom materials during system invasion repair or any parts removal or repair
Clean-up and 
Return to 
Service
Clean up any spills immediately during maintenance using a cleanroom-appropriate cleaning agent and a qualified 
disinfectant 
Create procedures that ensure containment of maintenance activities and return to service; this program will likely 
include cleaning, disinfection, and EM before return to service that includes containment and return-to-service 
requirements commensurate with the risk. 
(Section 17.0—Appendix III, Case Study #4 presents an example program.) 
Select the chemical agents based on the surface and frequency on which they will be applied; for example, oxidizing sporicides 
lead to corrosion of certain metal surfaces and degradation of walls and floors if used frequently without any rinsing.
Perform a physical walk-through inspection of the area before releasing it after maintenance
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	 Maintenance activities are inherently risky events when nonroutine equipment and materials enter the clean areas, which can bring in 
contamination that overchallenges the normal control measures. Also, maintenance personnel may be inexperienced with cleanroom 
behavior and may be unaware of basic microbiology and how their work can interfere with contamination controls. (Section 17.0—
Appendix III presents example cases of contamination after maintenance events, “Clean-up and Return to Service” item #2.)
•	 Understanding the potential risks from maintenance activities is important in order to build standard procedures that address how to 
perform all maintenance activities in a way that reduces risk. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
50
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Table 15.0-6	
	
Movement and Gowning of Personnel
Path of 
Incoming and 
Exiting 
Personnel
Personnel air locks are separate from air locks for equipment and materials
Air locks provide a staging area to systematically replace outer garments and gloves
Unidirectional flow
Personnel are trained in effective aseptic practices for areas in which they work and instructed to understand the 
impact of personnel flow on bioburden introduction
Personnel 
Gowning
Use of multiple layers of gowning, where appropriate, to protect environmental or product quality in controlled or classified areas
Preventing the presence of personnel in the same area with different gowning requirements, such as material air locks
Qualification of gowning practices where required
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	 Understanding the movement of personnel entering and exiting the facility will help prevent introduction of bioburden or viruses in 
shared areas. 
•	 Understanding that humans are the most common source of contamination during aseptic processing and that gowning, unidirectional 
flows, air locks, and aseptic practices are effective barriers between controlled areas and parking lots, common spaces, rest rooms, and 
other sources of contaminants will raise awareness. 
•	 Use of air locks to replace gowns along the path to a clean room is an important terminating point for potentially contaminated garments and gloves.
Table 15.0-7	
	
Composition of DS and DP
Growth Source
Determine whether the composition of intermediates and buffers allow microbial growth or inhibit microbial growth, 
based on nutrient content, pH, water activity 
Understand that extended hold times create vulnerability to contamination if the composition allows growth 
Store material in an integral container to prevent contamination ingress
Downstream 
Processes 
Check downstream bioburden or endotoxin reduction steps after introduction of growth-enhancing materials
Bioburden 
Removal
Filtering solutions and intermediates
Removing bioburden from materials and buffers/media before adding to process stream via filtration, autoclaving, or 
other sterilization
Viral Removal or 
Inactivation
Low pH or detergent step, which inactivates enveloped viruses
Nanofiltration
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	
Understanding the points in the process that are vulnerable to microbial contamination allows for effective CCS to be built. The 
vulnerable points warrant strict control of the potential sources of microbial ingress (materials, equipment, environment, personnel), 
may warrant a bioburden removal, possibly viral removal, and in-process monitoring   
Table 15.0-8	
	
Cleaning and Sterilization Processes
Cleaning
Manual cleaning processes (such as washing) for equipment are difficult to qualify and ensure reproducibility
Sterilization
Facility design should consider features that prevent introduction of harmful contaminants into products at every stage of the 
sterilization process (e.g., one-way autoclaves, tunnels, storage of processed equipment in appropriate classification)
Understand requirements for equipment maintenance, calibration, validation, requalification.
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	
Correctly designed and validated cleaning (washing) and sterilization processes helps prevent contamination from equipment.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
51
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 15.0-9	
	
Environmental Monitoring (Viable and Total Particulate Monitoring)
What It Is
Provides immediate information on the status of an area from a particle perspective
Provides a snapshot of the bioburden profile of an area at a specific time
Provides an ongoing assessment of the routine flora in the manufacturing environment, if an appropriate identification 
program is followed
What It Is Not
Viable monitoring generally does not provide real-time results 
Particle monitoring is a discrete measurement does not provide a genus/species of microbes in the area
Zero CFU results are not a guarantee that no microorganisms are present in the environment since microorganisms are 
not distributed uniformly, and the detection is limited by sample size
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	
EM provides a snapshot of the state of control of the areas and materials sampled at a given time; it allows reaction to adverse trends 
and individual excursions, albeit as at a later point in time.
•	
Because microorganisms can be attached to particles suspended in air, it is beneficial to understand the relationship between 
airborne particulates and active air sampling for viable microorganisms in each manufacturing area. 
•	
Attention should also be paid to monitoring the recovery of microorganisms during production of low-bioburden products. 
•	
When an atypical organism is recovered, the potential risk of product impact should be assessed. 
Table 15.0-10	 Testing Controls or Alert Levels/ Action Limits
Setting Levels
Alert levels and action limits for impurities and contaminants serve to reinforce that purification steps are effective 
control measures in removing untoward substances at each step of the manufacturing process
Alert levels and action limits for EM allow signals to be monitored and appropriate corrective action to be taken
Trending
Process trending below the action level is a highly sensitive measure for the consistency and effectiveness of cleaning 
and disinfection practices
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	 Testing controls allow an understanding of the materials introduced and the environment in which the process is occurring.
•	 Timely trending provides valuable information for decisions on EM programs and contamination risks.
•	 Caveat: Laboratories should not be relied upon to detect contamination as a control of the process. Process and engineering controls 
should be put in place to control bioburden; laboratory testing only verifies the continued performance of those controls.
16.0 
Appendix 2: Examples for Assessing Impact of  
Microbial Excursions
Limiting the ingress and proliferation of microorganisms in the manufacturing process is the most 
effective approach to preventing microbial failures. This can be effectively achieved through a holistic 
CCS as described in this technical report. Detailed information and guidance on conducting micro-
bial deviation investigations can be found in PDA Technical Report No. 88: Microbial Data Deviation 
Investigations in the Pharmaceutical Industry.
For nonsterile process intermediates, where microbial control is important, the presence of bioburden 
above the established limits often requires a product quality impact assessment impact assessment. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
52
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
The assessment should be scientifically sound and consider the potential for microbial proliferation, 
potential microbial by-products, impact to the quality of the material at the affected process step(s), 
and the removal capability of the process to determine if the product is safe. Two detailed examples of 
this type of impact assessment are presented in this appendix.
A product quality impact assessment impact assessment is not appropriate for in-process steps that 
are expected to be free of bioburden, even where sterility testing is not performed, for example, in a 
cell-culture step.
Microbial by-products are produced during cellular metabolism and secreted extracellularly in the 
late exponential or post-exponential (stationary) phases in a cell-density-dependent manner. For ex-
ample, pathogenic strains of Staphylococcus aureus secrete exotoxins in the late exponential or stationary 
growth phases at a minimum concentration of 105–106 CFU/mL, and Bacillus cereus secretes exotoxins 
at a minimum concentration of 105 CFU/g. Supporting documents are presented in Section 16.2.
Assessing the process removal capability of potential by-products can be achieved by comparing the 
characteristics of microbial by-products against the downstream process-removal steps. This includes 
molecular size of by-products against size-exclusion steps, heat tolerance of by-products against pro-
cess-heating steps, and isoelectric point of by-products against validated-chromatography steps.
16.1	 Example 1: Microbial Impact Assessment 
This example presents a methodology for impact assessment of in-process action level bioburden events, 
described first in a workflow diagram (Figure 16.1-1), then using a detailed example (Table 16.1-1). 
Establishing the affected process steps is a key part of the assessment. Recommended actions to take are:
•	
Establish the boundary for impacted process steps using worst-case assumptions where informa-
tion is lacking.
•	
Include the process steps between the known ingress point and the next bioburden removal/
reduction step.
•	
If the ingress point is not clearly known, evaluate the process step(s) between the previous and 
next bioburden removal/reduction steps, OR between the previous sample point and next 
sample point that yields acceptable results.
Figure 16.1-1	 	
Microbial Impact Assessment Methodology
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
53
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
In this hypothetical example, action level Stenotrophomonas maltophilia was recovered from a chroma-
tography eluate at the end of a three-day hold step and directly before 0.2-µm filtration (Result: 120 
CFU/10mL, Action level >100 CFU/10mL).
The eluate had been 0.2-µm filtered into a stainless-steel hold-vessel, stored at 2–8 °C for three (3) days 
and then sampled for bioburden and endotoxin before being 0.2-µm filtered at the start of the next step.
The root cause was identified to be stagnant condensate in a stainless-steel filter-housing between 
the chromatography skid and the elute hold-vessel. Preventive actions were identified to replace the 
stainless-steel filter-housing with a single-use, gamma-irradiated filter cartridge. 
The quality impact assessment of the affected batch included three risk factors:
•	
Likelihood of Proliferation to Late Exponential Phase in the Process Stream: This is considered 
because microorganisms secrete by-products in a cell-density-dependent manner; the worst-case 
minimum density is 105 CFU/mL. Supporting documents are presented in 16.2.
Low likelihood: The eluate matrix and temperature prevented growth of S. maltophilia in the process stream 
(documented in Table 16.1-1). This is supported by the low-cell density seen in the bioburden result, which 
is four orders of magnitude below the minimum level associated with exotoxin secretion. Endotoxin levels 
were confirmed to be <0.05 EU/mL, confirming low-cell density of this endotoxin-producing microbe. 
•	
Microbial By-Product Potential: This is considered because microbial proliferation is a higher 
risk if the microorganism is capable of producing toxins or proteases.
Yes for by-product potential: S. maltophilia is capable of generating undesired by-products, such as 
endotoxins, exotoxins, and proteases, based on a search of the KEGG BRITE database (documented 
in Table 16.1-1).
•	
Severity Based on Downstream Process Removal Capability: The severity of impact is based on 
whether the subsequent process steps can reduce or eliminate the contaminating cells and poten-
tial by-products.
Low: The downstream process removes S. maltophilia microbial cells and there is direct evidence that 
potential microbial by-products are not affecting product quality (documented in Table 16.1-1).
In conclusion, this event was determined to be “acceptable” meaning it did not impact product quality or 
patient safety. The rationale is that the organism could not grow to late exponential phase in the process 
stream; therefore, it would not secrete negative by-products before the microbial cells were removed via 
filtration. The downstream bioburden results also demonstrated the removal of the microbial cells and 
absence of endotoxin, and an accelerated stability results demonstrated no damage from protease activity.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
54
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Table 16.1-1	
Microbial Impact Assessment Example 1
Vulnerability Scoring: Microorganism Characteristics 
Characteristics of Microorganism 
Microorganism Identified:
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia a
CFU per sample volume:
120 CFU/10 mL 
Estimated CFU/total working volume  
(50 L):
6.0 x 105 CFU/50 L
Common Source: 
☐ Human microbiota 
☐ Environmental, soil
☒ Water-borne microorganism
Gram stain:
☐ coccus Gram +  ☐ Mold
☐ coccus Gram –  ☐ Yeast
☐ rod Gram + 
  ☐ Other
☒ rod Gram –
Is the microorganism able to produce by-
products: endotoxin, exotoxin, mycotoxin, 
protease, or penicillin?
☒ Yes, list here: 
Endotoxin, Flagellar proteins, 
Exotoxins, Proteases a,b 
☐ No	
☐ Unknown
Spore-forming?
☐ Yes	 ☒ No
Cell size: 1.5 x 0.5 μm a Spore size: N/A
May pass 0.2-μm filter (cell or spore)? 
☐ Yes	 ☒ No	
☐ Unknown 
Vulnerability Scoring: Process Growth Potential
To determine the Likelihood of Proliferation, evaluate if the specific microorganism’s growth requirements are met by the process conditions, 
e.g., temperature, pH, time, antimicrobial properties. Production of extracellular microbial by-products is growth-phase dependent, occurring 
in late exponential or stationary phases. Scientific references should be included in the impact assessment files as appropriate to support the 
information entered below.
Parameter
Process Conditions*
Microorganism Growth 
Requirements
Late Exponential 
Growth Permitted? 
(Yes / No)
Previous Step(s) 
☒ N/A if steps are 
separated by bioburden 
removal operation
Step that Yielded 
Excursion:
Eluate end of hold
Temperature
N/A, 0.2-µm filtered 
directly before step 
that yielded excursion
2–8 °C
10°C to 40 °C,
35 °C (optimal) a
No
pH
N/A
Neutral
Neutral a
Yes
Duration of Potential Growth 
N/A
3 days
Doubling time**
30 min (optimal)
Yes
Microstatic/Microcidal 
Conditions? 
N/A
Yes, eluate solution is 
bacteriostatic c
N/A
No
Other Consideration
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Conclusion: Do the process conditions allow growth to late exponential phase?
Enter “No” here if an answer to any question above is “No” 
No
*	
For process conditions, consider the step where organism was found, including operations between the last bioburden removal step or specific 
ingress point, if known via investigation, and the next bioburden removal step.
**	 Doubling time may be a scientific estimate based on similar conditions or closely related organisms, or a worst-case estimate based on 
common microorganisms at ideal growth conditions (30 min). 
Citations for Vulnerability scoring section
a.	 Bergey’s Manual, Stenotrophomonas, 2015. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118960608.gbm01237
b.	 KEGG BRITE Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. https://www.genome.jp/brite/sml02042
c.	 Based on internal study (footnote to next page)
Vulnerability Scoring: Process Growth Potential
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
55
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Likelihood of Late Exponential Growth Score
☒ Low
By-product-generating growth of the microorganism(s) Not permitted by process conditions (a conclusion of “No” above) 
☐ High
By-product-generating growth of the microorganism(s) Is permitted by process conditions (a conclusion of “Yes” above)
Vulnerability Score
By-product Potential: Toxin Producer? Protease Producer? 
Penicillin Producer? 
No
Yes
Likelihood of Late Exponential Growth
Low
☐ V1
☒ V1
High
☐ V2
☐ V3
Severity Scoring of Downstream Removal Capability
Severity Score
☒ Low
Downstream process Will remove or kill the microorganism(s) and clear any possible by-products from the specific 
microorganism(s), OR
Downstream process May not remove or kill the microorganism(s) and/or clear possible by-products from the specific 
microorganism(s), but there is direct evidence that potential by-products are not affecting product quality, e.g., endotoxin 
results, accelerated stability results.
☐ High
Downstream process May not remove or kill the microorganism(s) and/or clear any possible by-products from the specific 
microorganism(s)
Document Rationale for Severity Score
Cell removal: S. maltophilia are removed by downstream 0.2-μm filtration, and downstream bioburden results demonstrate reduction to 0 CFU/10 mL 
By-product removal: Downstream purification steps may not remove all microbial by-products but there is direct evidence that potential by-
products are not affecting product quality. Endotoxin results demonstrate endotoxin was below the detectable level at the step being assessed.
Accelerated stability results demonstrated acceptable results, indicating there was no detectable damage from potential microbial protease activity.
Overall Score
Overall Risk Matrix
Severity Score
Likelihood of Proliferation Score
Low
High
V1
Acceptable
Acceptable with Action
V2
Acceptable
Unacceptable
V3
Acceptable
Unacceptable
Overall Risk Score
Impact(s)
Remediation Action
☒	Acceptable
•	 No patient impact
•	 No product quality impact
Action required to prevent recurrence unless justification 
approved by the Quality unit
☐	Acceptable with Action 
•	 No patient impact
•	 No product quality impact
Action required to prevent recurrence
☐	Unacceptable
•	 Potential impact on the patient 
•	 Unacceptable potential for impact on product quality
Action required to reject product lot and prevent recurrence 
Refer to Deviation for product disposition
16.2	 Microbial Impact Assessment Supporting Documents
Example 1 citations are embedded in the tables above. The following documents informed the creation 
of the tool methodology in Example 1 above.
Yarwood, J M, et al. Quorum Sensing in Staphylococcus aureus Biofilms. J Bacteriol 2004, 186 (6), 
(Table 16.1-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
56
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
1838-1850. doi:10.1128/jb.186.6.1838-1850.2004.
Miller, M B; Bassler, B L. Quorum Sensing in Bacteria. Annual Review of Microbiology 2001, 55 (1), 
165-199. doi:10.1146/annurev.micro.55.1.165>1. 
Janštová, Jr., B, et al. Staphylococcus aureus Growth and Enterotoxin Production in Different Types 
of Milk. Acta Univ Agric et Silvic Mendel Brun 2012, LX (5), 103–108. 
Agata N, et al. Production of Bacillus cereus Emetic Toxin (Cereulide) in Various Foods. Intl Journal 
of Food Microbiology 2002, 73 (1). doi:10.1016/S0168-1605(01)00692-4.
Pearson, F M., et al. Pyrogens: Endotoxin, LAL Testing and Depyrogenation. Mercel Deckker: New York, 1985. 
Raynaud, M; Alouf, J. Intracellular versus Extracellular Toxins. In Microbial Toxins, Volume I: Bacte-
rial Protein Toxins, Ajil, S J, et al., Eds. Academic Press: New York, 1970; pp 67- 117.
Alouf, J; Raynaud, M. Isolation and Purification of Bacterial Toxic Proteins. In Microbial Toxins, 
Volume I: Bacterial Protein Toxins, Ajl, S J, et al., Eds. Academic Press: New York, 1970; pp 119-82.
Evans, T M, et al. Rapid Determination of Bacteriological Water Quality by Using Limulus Lysate. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1978, Feb 35 (2), 376-82. doi: 10.1128/aem.35.2.376-382.1978. 
Malizio, C, et al. Purification of Clostridium botulinum Type A Neurotoxin. Methods Mol Biol 
2000, 145, 27-39. doi: 10.1385/1-59259-052-7:27.
Haggblom, M, et.al. Quantitative Analysis of Cereulide, the Emetic Toxin of Bacillus cereus, pro-
duced under Various Conditions. J Applied and Environmental Microbiology 2002, 68 (5), 2479-2483.
16.3	 Example 2: Microbial Impact Assessment 
Action level Sphingomonas paucimobilus was recovered from a UF/DF equipment-rinse sample directly 
before the UF/DF operation, which includes 0.2-µm filtration (Result: 20 CFU/100 mL, Process limit 
at this step is >10 CFU/100 mL).
The quality impact assessment of the affected batch included the Severity, Probability and Down-
stream Controls for three risk factors as outlined in Table 16.3-1: number of microorganisms, endo-
toxin potential, and other metabolites including exotoxins. 
The conclusion was that the overall risk is Low based on the rationales that the microorganisms were 
not expected to grow to a high number due to the short hold time, there are downstream purification 
steps, and the product showed acceptable results in all subsequent testing.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
57
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 16.3-1	
Microbial Impact Assessment Example 2
Event Conditions [italics are example text]
Microorganism Type (Genus, species): Sphingomonas paucimobilus
Amount Detected: 20 CFU/100 mL
Total number of microorganisms in batch:  
10 L/total batch x 200 CFU/L = 2x103 CFU/total batch
Process Step: UF/DF skid
Process Step Limit: 10 CFU/100 mL
Process Step Hold Time: < 24 hours
Hold Temperature: 2–8 °C
Material Matrix: 0.9% NaCl buffer
Attach Process Map, if appropriate, to indicate mitigation steps 
downstream
Microbial Hazards 
(examples)
Severity
Probability
Controls (Downstream Processing and 
Detection)
Risk  
(Severity × 
Probability × Controls)
Number of 
microorganisms
Medium
Low  
Hold time not conducive to 
growth of this organism
UF/DF process removes 
this size of organism, 
about 0.2 μm
Bioburden assays 
downstream are 
acceptable
Low
Endotoxin  
(if applicable)
Low
Low
Multiple purification 
steps downstream (e.g., 
TFF, column extraction) 
have removal capacity 
In-process 
endotoxin assays 
downstream are 
acceptable
Low
Other metabolites, as 
applicable (myco-
toxins, exotoxins, 
extracellular enzymes, 
e.g., proteases)
Low
Low
Levels and conditions 
(chemical treatment, low 
pH) do not result in produc-
tion of other metabolites 
[include references]
Final product 
protein patterns 
are typical, no 
changes
Low
17.0 
Appendix 3: Case Studies for Contamination Control
The following case studies provide real examples of contamination events that indicate weaknesses in 
contamination control strategies (CCS), particularly around maintenance controls, and the resulting 
root cause investigations (Cases 1–3). An example program to protect manufacturing processes during 
maintenance events, or “disruptions,” is also presented (Case 4).
17.1	 Case Study 1: Contamination Related to Equipment Maintenance
Reference: Case Studies of Microbial Contamination in Biologic Product Manufacturing by Kalavati Suvar-
na, PhD, Patricia Hughes, PhD, Richard L. Friedman; American Pharmaceutical Review, January 1, 2011
One case involved contamination of a fermenter used in the manufacture of a protein product secreted by 
a bacterial host. The contaminant was identified as Bacillus cereus (a Gram-positive spore-forming rod). A 
second case involved the contamination of a fermenter used in the manufacture of a recombinant protein 
by Paenibacillus curdlanolyticus (a Gram-variable spore-forming rod). A systematic approach was used 
during the investigations to identify the root cause of the contamination, which included several media 
simulations to aid in identifying the point of entry into the fermenter. In addition, the investigations 
involved the manufacture of engineering batches. After a lengthy investigation in both case studies, mul-
tiple potential root causes were identified, including problems with the sampling devices, addition valves, 
incorrectly fitted components, missing O-rings, incorrect installation and deformation of an air filter af-
ter sterilization, and/or inadequate slope of a condensate line. Immediate corrective actions included the 
replacement of valve diaphragms in fermenter addition ports, replacement of a membrane valve in the 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
58
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
sampling device, and replacement of O-rings on the measuring probes. Enhancements were also made to 
the sterilization processes of the fermenter and associated transfer lines. A preventive maintenance plan 
was developed for all fermenter valves. All valves were tagged using a detailed checklist to ensure correct 
installation. All SOPs were updated, and employees were trained on the revised versions. The investiga-
tions and corrective actions addressed all possible causes of contamination as an unequivocal root cause 
could not be assigned. In most cases, it is very difficult to identify a definitive assignable cause. Following 
a systematic approach to determine the root cause is highly recommended. Media simulations help in 
demonstrating that the sterility of the fermenter is not compromised. Recent microbial contamination 
events at several manufacturing facilities point to breaches in the sterile boundary caused by damaged 
vent filters, O-rings, diaphragms, and elastomers, and by improperly sloped condensate lines.
17.2	 Case Study 2: Contamination Related to Blow-Fill-Seal Equipment 
Design and Maintenance 
Reference: Commentary Aseptic Processing Contamination Case Studies and the Pharmaceutical Quality System by 
Richard L. Friedman; PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Vol. 59, No. 2, March–April 2005
Background: A firm experienced both sterility and media-fill failures. Stenotrophomonas maltophilia 
was identified as a sterility failure isolate. Media-fill isolates included Pseudomonas spp. and Acineto-
bacter spp. The prior sterility history of the blow-fill-seal (BFS) processing line was good. 
GMP Issues: Mold plates used to form the primary product container were chilled with cooling 
water. This demineralized potable water was held in a tank at a low temperature prior to use. When 
sampled, the cooling water yielded very high microbial counts. Leaks developed in the mold plates, al-
lowing contaminated water to infiltrate into the product, causing nonsterility. Based on this significant 
breach in equipment integrity, among the most relevant GMP deviations were the unsuitable process-
ing equipment and the lack of an adequate preventive maintenance program. 
Quality System Context: The facility and equipment system were the most deficient. The unsuitable 
equipment and inadequate preventive maintenance program were key factors in the product contamination. 
Outcome: Both the sterility failure and media-fill failure were attributed to contamination by cooling 
water. Pinhole leaks in the mold plates of the aseptic filling machine allowed cooling water to directly 
contaminate the product. The exact date the problem occurred was unknown, making the corrective 
and preventive action plan more difficult. Numerous lots were rejected. The firm concluded that fre-
quent visual inspections of BFS molds for leaks had not provided sufficient preventive maintenance, and 
it implemented corrective measures, including regular testing of molding equipment pressure integrity. 
17.3	 Case Study 3: Contamination Related to Facility Construction
Reference: Commentary Aseptic Processing Contamination Case Studies and the Pharmaceutical Quality System by 
Richard L. Friedman, PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Vol. 59, No. 2, March–April 2005
Background: A firm undertook major construction in a cleanroom next to the personnel gowning air 
lock. The construction occurred over a one-month period and coincided with continued drug product 
production. Following an initial media-fill failure, the firm’s investigation concluded that practices 
unrelated to the construction were the likely sources of the nonsterile units. The firm corrected the 
apparent root causes and then performed a repeat media fill. A second media-fill failure occurred. A 
second thorough investigation by the firm concluded that the contaminants in the media-fill vials had 
migrated from the area of the construction activity. Spore-forming bacteria (Bacillus sp.) were identi-
fied as isolates in both media fills. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
59
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
GMP Issues: The firm did not adequately assess the risk posed by construction activities. 
Quality System Context: The production system was most deficient in this case. With any change 
in normal, qualified conditions it is essential that it be carefully evaluated by production and quality 
management. The FDA has seen this scenario with surprising frequency: a firm performs construc-
tion in an area that is considerably removed from the aseptic processing room (in some cases, several 
rooms away) and presumes that the construction will not affect the sterility assurance of the product. 
Unfortunately, it is not uncommon for the contamination to ultimately migrate to the aseptic process-
ing room and into the product. Many sterility failures and media-fill failures have been attributed to 
contamination from nearby construction. For example, moving walls is a common culprit in the lib-
eration of spore-formers (most commonly fungi) into the cleanroom environment. These experiences 
should alert a firm to assess the potential impact of such deviations from normal conditions. Deviation 
and/or change control systems provide a formal mechanism for evaluating these issues. Written proce-
dures should address returning a facility to normal operating conditions when construction or other 
activities (e.g., maintenance) are considered to have a potentially adverse impact. In these cases, a firm 
should either elect not to manufacture product for a specific period or, where appropriate, implement 
special precautions and increase monitoring to detect any drift in environmental control. 
Outcome: Multiple lots were found to lack the assurance of sterility, and those already distributed 
were recalled. The firm temporarily suspended operations. The firm ultimately restored adequate con-
ditions and resumed aseptic processing following successful media fill-requalification.
17.4	 Case Study 4: Disruption Recovery Program 
Reference: The PDA TR-90 authoring team developed the following recovery program example based on 
their professional experiences.
Based on the CCS principle that impact to classified areas should be minimized whenever possible, 
every effort should be made to plan and schedule routine events such as preventive maintenance, 
calibration and validation activities, during shutdown periods or times when areas are not in use. The 
invasive disruption described below is considered an exception. 
Two levels of disruption are defined based on the severity of the event and their potential impact to 
the qualified state:
•	
Noninvasive disruption: An activity that does not breach the integrity of a controlled classi-
fied area or critical utilities systems and are performed when no activity is occurring in the room, 
for example, caulking repair, light-switch or outlet repair (no cutting), equipment calibration.
•	
Invasive Disruption: An activity that breaches the integrity of the controlled classified area or 
critical utilities systems and are performed when processing is occurring in the room, for example, 
opening an electrical panel in a classified area, welding or cutting pipes in critical utilities.
Disruption Recovery Plan: The following steps may be followed for the shutdown/startup process:
1.	 Develop a plan to contain the disruption and recover afterward through cleaning/disinfection 
and monitoring
2.	 Determine the environmental control measures for the equipment, facilities and personnel
3.	 Execute the activities in the plan
4.	 Confirm the completion of activities
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
60
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
5.	 Verify EM results to demonstrate the control and post-recovery environmental control measures 
(level of post-recovery measures should be commensurate with the risk; may be reduced for 
noninvasive disruptions) 
6.	 Resume manufacturing
Specific actions to be taken as part of the shutdown include:
•	
Create temporary barriers around the area (protect equipment and utilities and segregate the 
affected area)
•	
Determine which activities may continue, and which must be stopped
•	
Define a sequence of activities or steps to be conducted 
•	
Provide instructions for the alternative movement of materials, equipment, and people
•	
Train personnel involved in the shut-down activities how to prevent contamination 
Table 17.4-1 describes each level of disruption and offers examples. Specific actions to be taken as part 
of recovery activities are shown in the Table 17.4-2. The information in these tables is not all-inclusive 
but is provided as a guidance for consideration. 
Table 17.4-1	
Example of Categorization of Disruption 
Level
Description
1
Noninvasive Disruption
An activity that does not breach the integrity of a controlled classified area or critical utilities systems and is performed when 
no activity is occurring in the room/area. 
•	 Classified Areas, e.g., caulking repair, light switch or outlet repair (no cutting), spot painting (no sanding), calibration activities
•	 Critical Utilities, e.g., preventive maintenance, valve maintenance, calibration
2
Invasive Disruption
An activity that breaches the integrity of the controlled classified area or critical utilities systems and is performed when 
processing is occurring in the room/area.
Classified Areas, e.g., opening an electrical panel, equipment repair or maintenance, light bulb change, sprinkler cover replacement
Critical Utilities, e.g., cutting, welding, piping replacement, derouging, chemical cleaning
Table 17.4-2	
	
Example Recovery Plans
Level
Containment Recommendations 
Cleaning and Disinfection 
Recommendation
Monitoring Recommendation 
1
Over-gowning when exposing dirty 
surfaces – in addition to routine gowning, 
additional gloves, frock, booties may be 
applied during the work and removed 
directly after contact with dirty surfaces 
e.g., behind light switch or outlet
Daily cleaning / disinfection of the area 
and equipment 
Targeted cleaning / disinfection with 
sporicide if dirty surfaces (e.g., behind 
light switch or outlet) are exposed
Routine daily EM and critical utilities 
monitoring.
Particle counts may be sufficient to 
initiate activity in the area for minimally 
invasive work  
2
Over-gowning
Dust collection and temporary walls 
may be warranted depending on type 
of work
Construction clean-up (e.g., HEPA 
vacuum, dust horizontal surfaces) 
followed by cleaning and disinfection; 
should include sporicide per local 
procedure.
Specific EM program covering areas and 
locations that were impacted by the 
construction measures (both static and 
dynamic monitoring) for air and surfaces. 
Additional nonroutine samples should 
be considered. Air balancing/air change 
should be verified, as appropriate. 
3 (Utility) Isolate and limit access to the affected 
utility/portion of utility ports
Critical utilities should be sanitized to 
ensure system integrity.
Microbiological and chemical testing 
covering the impacted system
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
61
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
18.0 
Appendix 4: Illustration of CCS Variability based on Process
An effective CCS is tailored to the specific risks of a process, illustrated by the following three DS 
examples (Table 18.0-1). DS is used to illustrate this point because the processes vary widely across 
industry. This principle also applies to DP.
Table 18.0-1	
Illustration of CCS Tailored to Example Process
Process 1
Process 2
Process 3
Key Features
Open steps at start and end
Reusable equipment, complex 
piping
Synthetic product
Few open steps only at start
Single-use systems, manual connections 
via thermal welding & connectors
Biologic process, some animal-derived 
materials
No open steps
Single-use systems, pre-assembled 
kits – few manual connections
Biologic process, synthetic materials 
(other than host system)
Process 1
Process 2
Process 3
Key Features
–	 Risks for CCS
Controls to 
Enhance for CCS
Multiple open steps throughout
•	 Ingress from Environment & 
Personnel
•	 Stricter overall cleanroom 
classification 
•	 CCS Awareness Campaign & 
Coaching (alongside training)
Reusable equipment, complex 
piping
•	 Equipment maintenance issues
•	 Challenges to clean/sterilize
•	 Deadlegs/misalignments
•	 Conservative cleaning/ 
sanitization/ storage practices 
•	 Periodic equipment audits
Synthetic product
•	 Fouling during storage
•	 Temp, humidity control
•	 Cleanroom controls for material 
sampling
Few open steps, only at start
•	 Ingress from Environment & 
Personnel for open steps
•	 Stricter cleanroom classification for 
open steps
•	 CCS Awareness Campaign & 
Coaching (alongside training)
Single-use systems, manual 
connections via thermal welding 
& connectors
•	 Leaks, Personnel technique
•	 Vendor quality defects
•	 Targeted, hands-on training
•	 Inspection of consumables, on-site 
pre-use inflation of bags 
•	 Partner with vendors
Biologic process, some animal-
derived materials
•	 Adventitious agents, prions
•	 Expanded characterization
•	 Pre-use testing
•	 Treatment (e.g., gamma irradiation)
No open steps
•	 Risks from environment & 
personnel minimized
•	 Less strict cleanroom classification 
Single-use systems, pre-
assembled kits, few manual 
connections
•	 Vendor quality defects (e.g., 
possible leaks)
•	 Inspection of consumables, on-
site pre-use inflation of bags
•	 Partner with vendors
Biologic process, synthetic 
materials (other than host 
system)
•	 Adventitious agents, prions
•	 Expanded characterization
•	 Pre-use testing
•	 Treatment 
All CCS elements apply to each of the example processes, and the blue-highlighted elements in Figure 
18.0-1 warrant enhanced controls for risks that are specific to that process.
Process 1
Process 2
Process 3
Figure 18.0-1 Illustration of CCS Elements Highlighting those that Require Enhance Controls for Example Processes
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
62
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
19.0 
Appendix 5: Template Example for Contamination  
Control Strategy Document
Instructions for Template:
Text in gray is instructions for using this template. Delete from your final document. 
This short template is meant to serve as an example and should be tailored to the specific company’s 
processes and products. The template is designed to include brief example overviews with supporting 
references included, as applicable. Sections should be rearranged, omitted, or edited as required.
Tips for Contamination Control Strategy Document 
•	
Use factual, active voice. Describe the controls that do occur at the site, not what “shall” oc-
cur. State the rationale for these controls, especially when that rationale is critical to the overall 
strategy or not obvious/common. 
•	
Target 30-50 pages. Include visuals and avoid too many details. Instead, refer to other de-
tailed GMP documents (e.g., SOPs, Batch Records, site master file, reports, risk assessments). 
•	
Align the format to your company/site procedure requirements. 
•	
The Audience of the Contamination Control Strategy document is:
–	
Inspectors: This document will be given to inspectors to orient them to a site’s overall strat-
egy, procedures, and data related to contamination control.
–	
All GMP site employees: This document is a holistic overview to help readers understand 
the interconnectedness of all elements of the CCS and to ensure future changes do not 
adversely impact the state of contamination control.
•	
The Scope of your Contamination Control Strategy document: It may be facility-specific and/
or process-specific, depending on the organization. 
–	
The CCS should be prepared and owned by the responsible site for their portion of the sup-
ply chain. When multiple CCSs are needed to cover the full, end-to-end supply chain, they 
should reference one another.
–	
For multiproduct facilities, where the manufacturing processes are similar and the same 
CCS is employed (e.g., fill-finish operations), one strategy document may cover all process-
es/products at the site. 
–	
For multiproduct facilities, where manufacturing processes and/or associated CCSs vary 
widely (e.g., some drug substance sites, sites with liquid and solid products, nonsterile and 
sterile), separate strategy documents should be prepared for each product.
1.	 PURPOSE 
Step
Purpose
1.1
This document outlines a contamination control strategy to safeguard product quality from microbial, particulate, pyrogen/
endotoxin, and viral contamination. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
63
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
2.	 BACKGROUND 
Step
Background 
2.1
A Contamination Control Strategy (CCS) should be implemented across the facility in order to define all critical control points 
and assess the effectiveness of all the controls (design, procedural, technical and organizational) and monitoring measures 
employed to manage risks associated with contamination. The CCS should be actively updated and should drive continuous 
improvement of the manufacturing and control methods.
Contamination control and steps taken to minimize the risk of contamination from microbial and particulate sources are a series 
of successively linked events or measures. These are typically assessed, controlled and monitored individually but their collective 
effectiveness should be considered altogether. 
The development of the CCS requires thorough technical and process knowledge. Potential sources of contamination are 
attributable to microbial and cellular debris (e.g., pyrogens, endotoxins) as well as foreign particulate matter (e.g., glass and 
other visible and sub-visible particles). 
3.	 SCOPE 
Step
Scope 
3.1
This document describes, at a high level, the manufacturing process and associated contamination controls for  
<product/processes> at the <facility/area>. 
<Product> is a <type of product, e.g., chemically derived drug substance for an injectable drug product>. 
If this CCS is specific to one portion of the product, refer to CCS for the other portions of the supply chain if internal (or refer to QTA 
if externally sourced), for example: The API for <product name> is obtained from <external company, facility name>. This is 
governed by a formal Quality Agreement [Reference(s): [XXX]. Detailed guidance on contamination controls for the <API name> 
production processes is captured in a separate document owned by the <external company>.
3.2
The strategy is multifaceted and includes controls associated with the following:
Manufacturing process design, risk assessment, validation, monitoring
Facility design and environmental controls
Environmental monitoring
Equipment handling and cleaning controls
Equipment maintenance 
Utility design and controls
Alarm system
Personnel training and controls
Raw materials and components
Product containers and closures 
Vendor approval
Contamination and utility disruption response
Prevention: Quality systems and continuous improvement
Governance and oversight
4.	 RESPONSIBILITY
Step
Role
Responsibility
4.1
Quality 
Ensure this policy remains current
4.2
Site Employees involved in GMP activities
Ensure adherence to the principles and policies outlined in 
this document
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
64
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
5.	 CONTAMINTION CONTROL STRATEGY ELEMENTS: Sections may be rearranged as 
deemed appropriate by the site. Add other important site-specific controls where appropriate.
Step
Contamination Control Elements
All elements of the CCS are summarized or referenced in the following sections to illustrate how these individual controls work together to 
effect holistic control.
5.1
Manufacturing Process Design, Risk Assessment, Validation, and Monitoring (TR90 Sections 7.0, 8.0, and 9.0)
In this section, include a short description of the process. Add a process map that identifies important process contamination 
controls including antimicrobial agents, impurity removal steps, process hold times, and microbiological/particulate testing points. 
Add overview of how process design controls the potential for microbial ingress, survival and growth/proliferation, microbial removal 
steps, aseptic process simulation (APS), and risk assessments and validations related to these process contamination controls. 
Add rationale for process testing scheme and limits for microbial (bio and endotoxin), viral, and particulates. 
5.2
Facilities Design and Environmental Controls (TR90 Section 5.0)
Refer to current version of GMP drawings of facility maps with area classification outlined. 
Add overview of facility layout showing area classifications, areas of segregation, direction of flows (e.g., upstream, 
downstream, warehouse, raw material sampling). Include overview of areas of enhanced biosafety levels.
Add overview for major environmental controls: design, temperature and humidity, air pressure cascade, cleaning and 
disinfection, access control and facility flows, and pest control.
Add overview of barrier technologies, if applicable (e.g., isolators, RABS). 
NOTE: Environmental monitoring is in Section 5.3.
5.3
Environmental Monitoring (TR90 Section 7.0)
Add overview of environmental monitoring, limits, and status of environmental qualification and periodicity of requalification. 
5.4
Equipment Handling, Cleaning, and Sanitization/Sterilization (TR90 Section 9.2)
Add overview of reusable manufacturing equipment controls: segregation of clean/dirty (and live/non-live, toxic/detoxified, 
where applicable); cleaning and sanitization/sterilization methods, including water quality; clean equipment storage; column/
skid and UF/DF handling; and associated validation and risk assessment related to contamination control. 
NOTE: Equipment maintenance is in Section 9.5.
5.5
Equipment Maintenance (TR90 Section 9.5)
Add overview of equipment maintenance program, including how PM schedules are established and how maintenance events 
are contained to limit contamination to the process. 
5.6
Utilities Design and Controls (TR90 Section 5.4)
Add overview of controls of GMP utility systems (utilities that are used as raw material or have direct contact with product or 
product-contact surfaces), sanitary design, usage, sanitization, and monitoring, including sampling strategy, trending system, 
and potential for biofilm formation. Specifically, include cooling systems if placed in filling room.
5.6.1
Air Handling Units/HVAC (TR90 Section 5.4.2)
5.6.2
Water(s) (TR90 Section 5.4.1)
5.6.3
Clean Steam, if applicable (TR90 Section 5.4.1)
5.6.4
Compressed Air Gas (TR90 Section 5.4.3)
5.6.5
Other Gases (e.g., nitrogen) or Vacuum, if applicable (TR90 Section 5.4.3)
5.6.6
Other GMP Utilities (e.g., cooling system), if applicable (TR90 Section 5.4.2)
5.7
Alarm System (TR90 Section 9.1)
Add overview of facility and equipment alarm system and controls, limit strategy, and how excursions are handled. 
5.8
Personnel Training and Controls (TR90 Section 8.0)
Add overview of personnel health/hygiene/gowning requirements and associated training/certification, aseptic gowning and 
training, job training; highlight contamination control awareness campaign. Include how visitors are handled.
Include personnel training for visual inspection for particulates, if applicable. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
65
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Step
Contamination Control Elements
5.9
Raw Materials and Components (TR90 Section 6.0)
Add overview of raw material and components controls, including single-use systems (SUS), e.g., selection and qualification, 
categorization by criticality, establishing test plans and specification, receipt testing and inspection before use for consumables, 
and special provisions for endotoxin and/or particulate levels, if applicable. 
Include what types of raw materials undergo microbiological testing and what components and SUS systems undergo in-house 
preparation (e.g., depyrogenation/sterilization). 
Explain how data and complaints are trended and evaluated.
5.10
Containers and Closures (TR90 Section 10.0)
Add overview of containers and closures, selection, receipt testing, in-house controls (cleaning/depyrogenation/sterilization), 
and validation and control of container closure integrity. Include containers used for shipment and storage of large-volume 
solutions and final-product containers.
5.11
Vendor Approval (TR90 Section 11.6)
Add overview of vendor or subcontractor approval for raw material and consumables, depyrogenation/sterilization of components 
and SUS systems, or other outsourced services related to contamination control (e.g., cleaning and sterilization services).
5.12
Contamination and Utility Disruption Response (TR90 Section 7.2)
Add overview of contamination response (microbial, particulate, and viral, if applicable) and how to contain utility interruption 
events (e.g., maintenance shutdowns, invasive maintenance events, power outages).
5.13
Prevention: Quality Systems and Continuous Improvement (TR90 Section 11.0)
Add overview of quality systems related to contamination control (e.g., deviation investigation, trending, CAPA, change control, 
quality risk management). Describe how these quality systems are employed to strive for continuous improvement of the 
contamination control program.
5.14
Quality Controls (TR90 Section 11.7)
Add overview or reference on lab training, OOS program, APS, and specific testing aspects as appropriate.
5.15
Governance and Effectiveness Review (TR90 Section 12.0)
Add overview of how performance of contamination controls is monitored by governing body(s), and how the quality systems support 
the oversight and governance and the established escalation scheme (e.g., site quality management review).
6.	 GLOSSARY
Step
Definitions
6.1
<Add relevant site definitions in this document.>
7.	 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS 
Document Number
Title
Add relevant site SOPs, site validations, studies, risk assessments, and others mentioned in this document
8.	 REVISION HISTORY
Revision Number
Date Effective
Summary of Changes
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
