14
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
pend on strong communication between end users and suppliers. Identifying and qualifying alternative 
suppliers may help control costs, inventory, and time needed to plan and implement changes.
3.5.9.6	Technical Diligence
Technical diligence is the process by which the SUS end user obtains a thorough understanding of the 
SUS product, the supplier, and the compatibility of the SUS with the end user’s processes and facility. 
These principles are based on established recommendations and procedures for critical raw materials.
3.6	 Implementation Summary
Efforts required for implementation of a single-use process solution often differ from what is required for 
a reusable system. Thus, the critical path for the fastest implementation of a process solution might also 
differ. SUSs may allow for concurrent qualification and validation whereas MUSs require a more sequen-
tial approach. Successful implementation of an SUS hinges on a thorough comparative analysis.
Furthermore, the workflow performed in the implementation stages should be supported by best 
practices in process validation and verification, risk management, and stakeholder management.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
15
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.0	 Single-Use Technologies and System Integration
4.1	 Introduction
This section describes strategies for comparing single-use and traditional fixed multiple-use manufac-
turing methods with particular emphasis on the differences between SUS and the equivalent MUS. It 
also provides a framework for assessing the technical feasibility and risks associated with implement-
ing an SUS. A description of the most common technical attributes of SUSs is also provided. Although 
SU manufacturing is undergoing rapid technological changes that may affect the specific factors used 
to compare and contrast SU with MU technologies, the fundamental principles used to assess the 
feasibility or development of risk assessment is expected to remain unchanged. The methodology and 
key points presented in this section will continue to be relevant as SUS suppliers continue to innovate.
4.2	 Comparison of MUS and SUS 
Most stainless steel systems are available in an SU format. Since SU suppliers use less costly polymeric 
materials, they have developed physical and mechanical operations to produce the functional equiva-
lent unit operation in a format that is designed for an SU. A comparative description of the features of 
SU and MU technologies is presented in Table 4.2-1.
Table 4.2-1	 Comparison of MU and SU Systems
Functional Requirement
MUS
SUS
Connections to sterile 
envelope
Stainless steel (SS), steam-
in-place (SIP) valve arrays
Aseptic connectors, SIP connectors, and tubing weld-
ers. Alpha/beta ports
Disconnections from 
sterile envelope
SS SIP valve arrays
Aseptic disconnects, SIP connectors, and tubing seal-
ers. Alpha/beta ports
Containment, storage, 
and transportation
SS tanks, fixed or portable
Polymeric film sealed to form 2D or 3D bags, unsupported, 
or as an insert to an external rigid support container (e.g., 
large bags, tank liners, and centrifuge liners)
Fluid transfer
SS piping, transfer panels
Tubing (flexible and rigid, polymeric)
Pumping
Multiple, fluid contact
Primarily peristaltic, nonfluid contact
Mixing (mass transfer)
SS impeller
Nonfluid contact (e.g., agitation and pumping) or SU 
impeller-based technology
Freezing
SS tanks or as integrated 
freeze-thaw systems
2D bags with or without shells, or as integrated SU 
freeze-thaw systems
Filtration
SS filter housings with 
filter elements (e.g., car-
tridges and plate/frame)
Capsule filters, hollow fiber cartridges, SU cassette 
technology
Chromatography
Multiple columns packed 
on-site with media (resin)
Prepacked columns and membrane adsorbers
Isolators
SS transfer canisters with 
docking port
2D bags with docking port and with or without tubing 
sets
Sampling 
SS SIP sample valves
Sample bag or manifolds with or without SU sample 
valves. Aseptic connectors or tubing welders can be used 
to attach additional sample bags or manifolds if needed
Measurements
In situ reusable probe; can 
recalibrate during a process 
In situ sensor may include a reusable probe or a single-use 
recalibrated sensor that cannot be adjusted or recalibrated 
during a process. Calibration is set during manufacturing 
and may be influenced by storage of the SUS
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
16
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
4.3	 SU Components and Assembly
The primary components for the assembly of an SUS include fittings, tubing, filters, connectors, bags 
(film), porting (bags), impellers, spargers, valves, sensors, filling needles, pump heads, docking port 
containers, and outer pouches (dust covers). The individual components do not require environmen-
tally controlled storage rooms; they are stored in sealed bags and must be handled with gloves once 
opened to avoid contamination during assembly of the SUS. Several of the components can be as-
sembled into a system and supplied presterilized, commonly via gamma irradiation. This is especially 
convenient for a completed fluid contact pathway of tubing preattached to a bag with all the tubing 
legs either heat-sealed or terminated with aseptic connectors. These systems are called bag assem-
blies, and they have tubing sets or tubing manifolds attached to them.
As shown in Figure 4.3-1, fully functional assemblies are often created by connecting components to 
a set of subassemblies, which in turn forms a functional SUS assembly that is capable of performing 
specific unit operations.
Figure 4.3-1	 Anatomy of an SUS
MUSs are assembled in classified and environmentally monitored facilities, and the equipment interior 
is cleaned by a clean-in-place (CIP) technique. An SUS must be manufactured and assembled in a clean 
environment because there is no practical method to clean an SU assembly. Some tubing can be purged 
with ultrapure air or nitrogen for particle removal during fabrication; however, this is not practical for 
the assembled SUS. The area where the SUS will be assembled must be prepared in advance using stan-
dard clean-room practices. The outside of each component package must be wiped with alcohol before 
transport into the assembly area. Assembly rooms are typically ISO 7 or 8 (Grade B/C or Grade C/D, 
respectively), and it is normal to conduct a combination of nonviable particle and microbial sampling of 
the assembly room (9). The design of the room is similar to that of pharmaceutical manufacturing suites 
(i.e., HEPA-filtered air, low returns, smooth surfaces, and airlocks for entry and exit). Staff gowning 
must be appropriate for an ISO 7 or ISO 8 environment. Regular, consistent, and high-quality cleaning of 
the assembly room is required to maintain area classification and provide a consistent environment for 
manufacturing SU solutions. SUS components are manufactured and assembled in controlled environ-
ments in order to meet acceptable standards for particle, bioburden, and endotoxin levels. Since there 
are no established testing standards for an SUS, the end user must rely on the supplier’s specifications 
Fittings
Tubing
Filters
Connectors
Film
Ports
Impellers
Spargers
Valves
Sensors
Filling needles
Outer Bag
Tube sets
Manifolds
Bags
Sensor assemblies
Filter assemblies
Full-capacity unit 
operations
Quality 
attributes
Multiple supplier facility 
control for components
Supplier control for 
subassembly
End user for final 
functional assembly
Connections 
Sterilization
Fitness for use 
Sterilization 
Deployment
COMPONENTS
SUBASSEMBLIES
ASSEMBLIES
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
17
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
and control strategies for particles, endotoxins, and bioburden. Suppliers should have quality systems in 
place to ensure their facilities and procedures meet end-user requirements. It is also critical that quality 
agreements are established between end users and suppliers to ensure that the suppliers’ facilities are 
adequate to deliver an SUS that meets end-user requirements.
4.4	 Technical Feasibility and Risk Assessment Framework
A technical feasibility assessment is needed to show that a proposed SUS can meet the functional and 
regulatory requirements expected for a particular application. This assessment is performed after the 
generation of user requirements (UR), which outline the particular technical requirements for an SUS 
application. The design of the SUS must be evaluated for each SUS application, taking into consid-
eration process compatibility, facility fit, and the effect of SUS design on critical process parameters 
(CPPs) and critical quality attributes (CQAs). Figure 4.4-1 delineates potential process and product 
risk factors and provides a framework for conducting a technical feasibility assessment. In using this 
figure, one should be aware that process risk may lead to product risk.
Figure 4.4-1	 Implementation of an SUS and the Assessment of Drug Process and Product Risk
Potential Loss of System Integrity
• Deployment of SUS and operator training
• Physical strength of SUS
• Failure modes and recovery
• Failure rate of SUS vs MUS
• Impact on operator Safety
• Preventive maintenance
Potential Process Alteration
• Size limitations of SUS vs MUS
• Facility capactiy/productivity of SUS vs MUS
• Extent of process adjustments required for optimal 
use of SUS vs MUS
• Changes in SUS barrier due to surroundings
• Changes in time/duration of process
Are CPPs still being met?
Process Requirements 
& Parameters
SUS Technical Feasibility
• Liquid constituents
• Volume
• Temperature
• Pressure
• Flow rate
• Time
• pH
• Oxygen sensitivity
• Light sensitivity
• Sterility requirements
• Sampling requirements
• Solid additions
• Mixing requirements
• Cell viability
• and growth rate requirements
• Monitoring requirements
• Mass transfer
• Heat transfer
Product Requirements 
& Attributes
Process Risk 
Considerations
Product Risk 
Considerations
Potential for Added Contaminants
• Leachables/extractables of SUS vs MUS
• Contamination due to manufacturing of SUS
• Microbial contamination due to SUS
• Chemical contamination due to SUS
• Cross contamination from other products
Potential Process Alteration
• Adsorption product or functional component
• Ability of SUS to catalyze a reaction
• Suboptimal processing due to technical limitations 
of SUS
• Change in SUS barrier due to surroundings
Are CQAs still being met?
Considerations
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
18
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
4.5	 Factors Affecting SUS Design
A technical feasibility study includes a thorough review of the design of a particular SUS in order to 
prevent mistakes stemming from component selection and system configuration. The scope of this 
design review will depend on both the functional objective and complexity of the SUS application 
in question. An inherent outcome of a technical feasibility study is the potential for identifying that 
a supplier’s off-the-shelf SUS configuration is suitably designed with prequalified components (e.g., 
as proposed by a supplier). In some cases a customized, user-specified component or system will be 
identified during a technical feasibility study. Custom SUS configurations with specified components 
require additional efforts from an end user during a technical feasibility study if the supplier is not 
experienced with the user-specified components.
4.5.1	 Process Compatibility
Another factor to consider during the technical feasibility study of an SUS is process compatibility. 
This involves an assessment of how each of the components of the SUS, plus the SUS as a complete 
integrated unit, may impact the process outcome. A description of a process compatibility assessment 
is provided in Table 4.5.1-1.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
19
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.5.1-1	Assessment of Process Compatibility 
Factor
Design Considerations
Construction 
materials
Chemical compatibility with the product and process fluids (liquid and solid), cleaning and 
sanitizing agents; biocompatibility; animal-derived components; extractable and leachable 
profiles; and nonspecific adsorption. Note that films may be permeable to some chemical 
agents (e.g., those used for wipe-down), which could have an impact on the process or 
product.
Physical properties
Attributes such as film or tube thickness, durometer, brittleness, surface smoothness, 
elongation, modulus, and impact and tear resistance will contribute to the ruggedness of 
the system and its resistance to breach of system integrity.
Microbial control 
methods
Ability to withstand gamma irradiation and/or other means of sanitization or sterilization
Time
Contact time (e.g., short passage in fluid conduit versus storage over an extended period 
of time), processing time (e.g., mixing time)
Volume
Size and scale of operation, holdup or residual volume (relative to drainage), dead volume
Temperature
Ability to withstand variations in temperature. Freezing applications require specialized 
systems to retain system integrity. The requirement for controlled addition of heat (e.g., to 
facilitate the flow of highly viscous fluids), and time for adjustment of temperature
Gas barrier
The loss of water vapor and moisture; oxygen, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen ingress and 
egress. (Barrier properties are temperature and relative humidity dependent.)
pH 
Limitations in high or low pH; fixed versus variable pH over time or imposed profiles
Pressure
Limitations in absolute or differential pressure of the system and individual components 
(e.g., bags, which do not carry an absolute pressure rating; tubing burst pressure; and 
vacuum resistance ratings). Applications allowing for pressurized filling and draining of 
bags in enclosed rigid outer containers are possible following Good Engineering Practices)
Optical
Limitations in the visual process-monitoring capability (e.g., polymeric materials are often 
classified as transparent, translucent, or opaque)
Light
Sensitivity to light (including exposure time). The transparency of cell culture bags to light 
may or may not be a desirable feature.
Flow rate
Tubing ID, bag porting size, gravity drain versus pump capability 
Particulates
Limitations due to normal particulate content or shedding as a result of abrasion and spall-
ation
Mixing
Viscosity, inadequate mixing, and the generation of particles in cases where there is no ter-
minal filtration. The ability to keep a solution homogeneous in applications involving suspen-
sions. Make sure the design of the container allows for low-volume dispensing and mixing.
Sterilizing filtration
Location of the filter to ensure optimum product drainage; filtration inside sterile core or out-
side; venting or draining of filters during operation; pre-use flushing and integrity testing and 
post-use integrity testing; redundant sterilizing filters or need for prefiltration, filter sizing
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
20
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
4.6	 Facility Impact for SUS Setup and Deployment
Although SUSs can be set up and deployed in existing manufacturing facilities, a new or renovated fa-
cility may be more effective if a high level of SUS integration is required. To manage the risk of dam-
age to the SUS, assessment of facility design and layout should include SUS material management, 
storage, and handling during operational setup. Including a defined setup and deployment stage, with 
standardized activities for each part, is a recognized success factor for SUS implementation and should 
be a routine part of the workflow and planning for each SUS application.
Setup includes those activities required to deliver the SUS to the point of use. Deployment involves 
the hands-on steps required to successfully assemble and ready the system for use in a specific SUS 
application. Examples of the facility setup and deployment assessments are described in Table 4.6-1.
Table 4.6-1	 Assessment of SUS Facility Setup and Deployment
Factor
Design Considerations
Facility
Room classifications and the level of SUS integration between SUS and MUS and intra-
facility transport of materials to progressively more stringent clean-room classification. 
Large SUS units may require hoisting or other mechanized deployment and transport. 
SUS implementation can increase demand on support areas (such as warehouses) and 
at use storage.
Staging, storage, and 
SUS deployment
SUS storage and space for staging SUS materials prior to operations; operator handling 
training; standardization of SUS deployment activities. Storage space for SUS is affected 
by run frequency and supplier lead times.
Floor space
Factors such as the lack of available space, plus the size and geometry of components 
(e.g., storage containers), may be the source of some obstacles to an SUS setup. Con-
sider factors such as floor space and the geometry of the container when configuring an 
SUS, and optimize the use of stackable or collapsible reusable storage containers.
Changeover time
Product and campaign changeover time and individual unit processing setup times; se-
quence, bottlenecks, and process streamlining; and materials management. SUS can 
reduce facility changeover time, but SUS availability must be closely managed or the 
potential time savings will be lost. 
Cleaning
Consider the effect of reusable storage containers, cleaning, and changeover time. Con-
struction materials and surface finish of reusable storage containers (e.g., tolerance to-
ward chemical cleaning agents, hygienic design and drainability).
Complexity 
Ease of the SUS setup and deployment due to system complexity, ergonomic design, 
and error proofing should be assessed.
Labor
SUS and MUS may have differing labor demands, and how labor is impacted should be 
analyzed in detail.
4.6.1	 Operational Requirements
SUS processes have inherently more manual connection and operational steps than MUS processes, 
which are often highly automated. Although the initial system design of an SUS generates an initial 
method of operation, it may be necessary to optimize the process operation for an end user’s individ-
ual process requirements and facility. Examples of operational requirement assessments are reviewed 
in Table 4.6.1-1.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
21
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.6.1-1	Assessment of Operational Requirements 
Design Factor
Design Considerations
Campaigning
One use versus multiple fluid passages through an SUS
Deployment
Ability of bag and containment system to accommodate bag deployment during an SUS operation
Fluid integrity
Limitations in material strength, puncture resistance, and component and system integrity 
during normal operation
Process 
connectivity
Ability to make aseptic and sterile connections to SUS and MUS during the course of the 
process using aseptic connectors, including SIP connectors, and tube welders
Process 
disconnectivity
Ability to disconnect from the process stream aseptically, including SIP connectors (e.g., self-
closing connectors, crimping tools, tube sealers)
Sampling
Ability to take representative and sterile samples from the process stream with consider-
ations for point-of-use, volume, and frequency
Calibration
Practical considerations for the calibration of SU sensors
Space
Floor space for removing SUS after manufacturing
4.7	 Applications and Technology
This section discusses several applications that are common in biopharmaceutical manufacturing, 
along with their cognate SU technologies. The structure to discussing these applications and tech-
nologies is as follows:
1.	 A description of the objective of the application
2.	 A description of current SU technologies available to meet the application needs
3.	 Specific considerations of the technology that one may use as part of a technical feasibility study
4.7.1	 Process Connections
Connectors and tube welders are used primarily to connect:
• Components within an SU subassembly
• Multiple subassemblies to create a complete operational assembly
• An assembly to a neighboring unit operation
In addition, connectors are used with tube sealers or disconnectors to disconnect:
• Components (e.g., bags) within an SU subassembly
• A subassembly from a complete operational assembly
4.7.1.1	Technological Examples
A wide variety of connectors are commercially available for various user requirements. In general, two-
piece connectors consist of two units with mating ends that may be joined to form a connection. Identical 
mating parts are denoted as “genderless,” and nonidentical mating parts are usually denoted as “male” 
or “female.” Although connectors are usually used to create a connection between parts, they may be 
installed internally within a pipe in order, for example, to open a flow path of a steaming process.
Single-piece insert connectors commonly are variants of standard straight, Y, or T configurations and 
employ hose barbs that can be inserted into tubing and secured with cable ties or clamps. A variant of 
a single-piece connector can be made by a specialized overmolding procedure that creates a connec-
tion with a uniformly smooth inner bore.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
22
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Connectors with integrated valves and resterilizable SIP connectors have the additional functionality 
of enabling aseptic disconnections and reconnection.
As shown in Table 4.7.1.1-1, connectors may be grouped into three functional categories.
Table 4.7.1.1-1	
Functional Categories of Connectors
Connector Category
Description
Adapter type
Hose barb and tri-clamp are the most common insert connection adapters. Hose barbs 
are for making tubing-to-tubing or tubing-to-device connections.
Tri-clamp adapters are for making direct connections to stainless or filter with tri-clamp 
fittings. Overmolded connections can be converted into T, Y, 4-way, or tri-clamp con-
figurations without insert connectors. Several connectors for aseptic requirements are 
commercially available.
Diameter of the flow 
path
Although there is a wide selection of commercially available connectors for tubing with 
standard diameters, in certain cases, it may be difficult to find an appropriate diameter 
of the flow path.
Aseptic connection or 
disconnection
Nonaseptic connectors are used in cases in which the connector is integrated into an 
SU assembly prior to sterilization via irradiation, whereas aseptic connectors are used to 
join two tubes that are part of a gamma-irradiated SU subassembly. Luer-lock connectors 
are examples of nonaseptic connectors that are used for small-bore (i.e., quarter inch or 
smaller) tubing connections during sampling applications. Steamable connectors are used 
to make aseptic connections between SU assemblies and traditional SIP stainless steel 
equipment; in this case, a resterilizable design system allows for aseptic disconnection. 
An aseptic connector with a built-in valve allows for aseptic disconnection from a process 
stream. A crimp-and-cut disconnector can also be used to achieve aseptic disconnection 
of an assembly. This is attained by installing a tightly fitting metal sleeve over the tubing. 
The sleeve is then crimped and cut with a specific tool.
A manifold can be constructed with pieces of tubing connected together with hose barb connectors 
and secured with cable ties, clamps, or other components so as to prevent leakage or bursting of the 
connection. Although organizations tend to adopt a particular type and style of connection technol-
ogy to simplify logistics, it is important to complete a technology assessment for each new project to 
confirm that factors such as the specific connector technology, materials of construction, and connec-
tor size support end-user design requirements. Table 4.7.1.1-2 contains specific considerations that 
apply to connector technology.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
23
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.7.1.1-2	
Specific Considerations for Connectors
Factor
Consideration
Ease of use
Determine the relative ease of use of the various connectors to ensure minimal operator 
error. 
Technology
Evaluate the relative merits and feasibility of using tube-welding technology and asep-
tic connectors in a given application (such as tubing ID, space constraints, location of 
the needed weld, electricity/utilities requirements, and process requirements such as 
operating pressure). Examine risk factors of using tubing sets made with inserted hose 
barbs and overmolded connections with regard to the potential for leaks and fluid patch 
constrictions, which can affect flow rates and turbulence.
Sizing
Evaluate the effect of connector diameter on the flow rate requirement; ensure use of 
an appropriately sized connector. 
Fitness for use
Check supplier qualification data for connector/disconnector, tube welding, and seal-
ing technology to ensure the technology is suitable for the application. Make sure that 
connectors are qualified for use at pressures required in process. Consider how many 
connections are required for a particular application and location in the process design. 
Connector and tubing 
materials
Evaluate the effect of materials on extractables and leachables and their potential im-
pact on process and product.
The type of connection technology to be used should be considered when planning an SUS:
• Tube welder: A tube welder is an alternative type of connection technology that is designed to 
make a connection by cutting the two pieces of appropriate thermoplastic tubing to be connected 
and rapidly heating, aligning, and joining the two ends to form an aseptic, integral weld upon 
cooling. There is no need for a specific connector in the thermoplastic tubing, as the welded 
thermoplastic forms the seal between the two lines connected. Silicone tubing is not a suitable 
material for tube welding, as it is not a thermoplastic.
• Tube sealer: A tube sealer is a type of disconnection technology designed to seal a single 
thermoplastic tube using heat or energy to fuse together the lumen of one tubing end, segment, 
or fluid path. The sealed area is then separated from the rest of the tube by cutting it away. 
Silicone tubing is not appropriate for tube sealing, as it is not a thermoplastic.
4.8	 Materials of Construction
Factors concerning the materials used for constructing the SUS may include inherent safety, traceabil-
ity, physical properties, and compatibility with other components or product and process materials. 
The components used for the construction of SUSs are primarily comprised of plastic materials that 
may vary according to polymer class, molecular weight, and additives. This variability confers a wide 
range of performance characteristics on the plastic materials. Table 4.8-1 contains a list of plastics 
commonly used for the production of SU components, along with their trade names, chemical ab-
breviations, properties, and applications. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
24
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Table 4.8-1	 Plastics Commonly Used in SUS
Family
Chemical 
Abbreviation
Chemical Name
Brand Name*
Applications
Reasons to Use
Comments
Fluoropolymers
PTFE
Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
Teflon®
Fluon®
Filters, tubing
Biologically inert
Chemically resistant
Extreme cold or hot temperature re-
sistance
Low extractables and leachables
Cannot be sterilized using gamma ir-
radiation
Limited mechanical properties 
PVDF
Poly(vinylidenefluoride)
Poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-
hexafluoropropylene)
Kynar®
Kynar Flex®
Filters, fittings, 
tubing, bags
Biologically inert
Greater strength and wear resistance 
than PTFE
Broad temperature and chemical com-
patibility
Low extractables and leachables
Easily worked, molded, and sealed
Sterilizable by irradiation, steam, or 
chemical
Some strong solvents can solubilize 
the material
Polycarbonate
PC
Polycarbonate
Lexan®
Makrolon®
Fittings
Easily worked, molded, and thermo-
formed
Excellent durability
Temperature and impact resistant
Autoclavable
Clear, lightweight
Limited chemical compatibility range
Some grades may leach bisphenol A 
(BPA), which has been implicated in 
a variety of adverse effects in some 
studies
Polyester
PET, PETE
PBT
Poly(ethylene terephthalate)
Poly(butylene terephthalate)
Rynite®
Crastin®
Bottles,
filter capsules
Semirigid to rigid
Very lightweight
Good gas barrier
Naturally colorless with high transpar-
ency
High strength 
Excellent stain resistance
Good wear resistance
Excellent dimensional stability 
Radiation sterilizable
Fair moisture barrier
Naturally hygroscopic—must be dried 
before heat molding
Copolymer variations include PETG 
(cyclohexane dimethanol co-polymer)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
25
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Family
Chemical 
Abbreviation
Chemical Name
Brand Name*
Applications
Reasons to Use
Comments
Polyolefin
(polyalkene)
PP
Polypropylene
Moplen®
Pro-fax®
Filters, 
hous-
ings, piping, fit-
tings
Good chemical resistance
Tough, impact resistant
Good processing properties
Higher temperature or chemical resis-
tance over PE
Rigidity, hardness
Autoclavable
Irradiatable (stabilized formulations only)
Nonstabilized formulations cannot be 
sterilized by gamma irradiation (re-
duces shelf life, elevates extractables)
High thermal expansion
Poor impact strength at low 
temperature 
PE
Polyethylene
Dowlex®
Engage®
Bags, fittings
Good processing properties
Impact resistant
Good toughness
High stress cracking resistance
Lower extractables than EVA
Cold temperature performance
Properties vary by density (high, low, 
ultralow, linear low)
High thermal expansion
Cannot be autoclaved
Copolymers
EVOH
Ethylene vinyl alcohols
Eval®
Soranol®
Barrier layer in 
films
Superior gas barrier properties
Good chemical resistance
Very good clarity
Can be coextruded with many different 
polymers
Hygroscopic, gas barrier properties 
diminished with moisture
Moisture barrier properties lower than 
other polymers
EVA
Ethylene vinyl acetate 
Evatane® 
Elvax®
Bags, tubing
Soft and flexible
Good clarity and gloss
Good barrier properties
Little or no odor
Excellent cold temperature properties
Better tear resistance than LDPE
Excellent resistance to environmental 
stress cracking
Gamma-irradiated EVA can lower pH 
of contents
Extractables may be undesirable
Poor heat resistance
Reduced barrier properties compared 
to LDPE
Attacked by polar solvents, hydrocar-
bons, oxidants, and strong acids
Reduced creep resistance compared 
to LDPE
Table 4.8-1 (Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
26
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Family
Chemical 
Abbreviation
Chemical Name
Brand Name*
Applications
Reasons to Use
Comments
Polyamides 
(nylons)
PA6,6
Polyamide 6,6 or
nylon 6,6
Zytel®
Ultramid®6,6
Films, filters
High melt point (autoclavable)
Lower extractables than PA6
Moldable and extrudeable
Good mechanical properties and wear 
resistance
Susceptible to degradation by strong 
acids, bases, and oxidizing agents
PA6
Polyamide 6 or nylon 6 
Zytel®
Films, tubes
Tough, higher impact resistance
High-temperature resistant
Easier to process
Lower mold shrinkage
Good fatigue resistance
Greater elasticity and elastic recovery 
Higher extractables
Susceptible to degradation by strong 
acids, bases, and oxidizing agents
Highest rate of water absorption and 
equilibrium water content
PA11
Polyamide 11 or
nylon 11
Rilsan® 11
Alamid® 11
Zytel®
Films, tubes
Improved chemical resistance versus 
other polyamides
Some are bio-based
Low water adsorption
More expensive than other PA
Lower impact strength
Minimal heat resistance (not auto-
clavable)
PVC
Polyvinyl 
chloride 
Poly(chloroethanediyl)
Pipes, 
films, 
tubes
Tough, strong
Inexpensive raw material and low pro-
cessing temperature
Good combination of stiffness and 
impact strength (rigid formulation), 
toughness, extensibility
High ratio of strength to weight (flex-
ible formulations)
Not autoclavable
High levels of extractants
Must be free of DEHP for fluid contact 
applications
Low cost 
Disposal issues (generates dioxin on 
incineration)
Vinyl
CPVC
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride
 
Pipes
Good resistance to acids and bases 
Inexpensive
Improved chemical resistance over 
PVC
More flexible than PVC
Not autoclavable
Disposal issues (generates dioxin on 
incineration)
Table 4.8-1 (Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
