50
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
cost and time required for their assessment (40). It is important for the model solvent to be representative of 
the contact solutions in the end user’s process or formulation. Common model solvents include:
• WFI aqueous extraction (neutral pH) 
• Aqueous extraction (pH <2)
• Aqueous extraction (pH >9)
• Solvent extraction—ethanol/water mixtures 
• Phosphate-buffered saline 
• Surfactant systems—anion (neutral pH)
The key aspect of the model solvent selection is to closely replicate the contact solution and minimize 
interference with qualified analytical methods for detecting the extractable or leachable.
Tables 5.6.1-2 through 5.6.1-4 show examples of testing methods for extractables from filters and 
containers from different suppliers (40). The amounts detected would depend on the methods used 
and materials tested.
Table 5.6.1-2	
Example—Quantitation of Extractables from SU Components after 50 kGy Irradiation
Test 
Compounds Identified 
Concentration
FTIR spectroscopy 
on ethanol-extracted 
nonvolatile residue (NVR)
Acrylates (derived from membrane surface modification)
NVR <0.5 mg (ppm)
GC-MS on ethanol 
extract
2-ethylhexanoic acid
1,3-di-tert-butyl-benzene
2,4-di-tert-butyl-phenol
Lauryl acetate
Lauryl acrylate
0.56
0.52
0.12
0.13
0.64
GC-MS on derivatized 
ethanol extract 
Ethanedioic acid, dibutyl ester (oxalic)
Propanedioic acid, dibutyl ester (malonic)
Dodecanoic acid, butyl ester (lauric)
Butanedioic acid, butyl ester (succinic) 
Tetradecanoic acid, butyl ester (myristic)
Hexadecanoic acid, butyl ester (palmitic)
Octadecanoic acid, butyl ester (stearic)
1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid, bis(2-methylpropyl) ester 
0.16
0.10
0.23
0.17
0.09
0.61
1.23
2.24
LC-MS on ethanol 
extract
2-ethylhexanoic acid
Lauric acid
Myristic acid
Palmitic acid
Stearic acid
144.21
200.32
228.37
256.42
284.48
Note: Identity and quantities of compounds derived via ethanol extracts from a polypropylene filter capsule 
with modified polyvinylide fluoride membrane.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
51
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.6.1-3	
Identified Extractables from Membrane Filter Cartridges from Several Manufacturers
Water Extract
Ethanol Extract
Volatiles
2-methoxy-2-propanol
2,3,4-trimethylpentane
Semivolatiles
No peaks
Low MW aliphatic hydrocarbons
1,3-ditertbutylbenzene (1,3-DTBB)
2,4-ditertbutylphenol (2,4-DTBP)
1-tridecanol
Lauryl acrylate
Nonvolatiles and heat-sen-
sitive compounds
No peaks
Irgafos®* antioxidant and its degradants
Organic acids
Oxalic acid
Myristic, palmitic, and stearic acid
Inorganic elements
Na, Fe, Zn, and K <10 ppb; 
Ca 53 ppb
Na, Al, K, and Ca no higher than for the negative 
control
* Irgafos is a proprietary stabilizer and trademark of Ciba Holding AG in Basel, Switzerland.
Table 5.6.1-4	
Identification of Extractables from Polyethylene Biocontainers with Ethyl Vinyl Alcohol Interlayer
Water Extract
Ethanol Extract
Volatiles
2-methyl-2-propanol 
Butanal 
Hexanal 2-octanone
2-methylpentane
Hexane
Trimethylpentane
3-methylheptane
1-octene; octane
Semivolatiles
No peaks
Low MW oligomers of polyethylene;
1,3-DTBB
2,4-DTBP
2-octanone 1-heptadecanol
1-octadecanol
Organic fatty acids
Oxalic acid 0.07 ppm
Succinic, palmitic, and stearic acid all below 0.06 
ppm
Inorganic elements
Na, B, Mg, K, Ca, and Ba all 
at ppb levels
B 8.3 ppb
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
52
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
5.6.2	 Toxicity of E&L
The toxicity of leachables must be evaluated with regards to the effect on the patient or process. 
Containers and storage bags are a potential source of leachables that may have adverse effects on the 
patient. Although some chemicals may be considered unacceptable at almost any concentration in 
pharmaceutical products (e.g., ICH Q3C class 1 solvents), determination of the toxicity of extract-
ables or leachables must be viewed in the broader context of the following criteria (37):
• Actual concentration of leachables in the final 
drug product
• Dose size and regimen
• Mode of delivery
• Patient population
• Risk-benefit assessment
Therefore, toxicity cannot be derived from extractable identification and concentration alone, or from 
the amount of leachables in process fluids or drug product intermediates.
The data for the identification and quantitation of extractables is used to determine the concentra-
tion of potential leachables in the final drug product after considering further processing—includ-
ing downstream purification, diafiltration, dilution, and formulation. If an identified leachable in the 
final drug product is not covered by existing guidelines and there is limited or no toxicity data, the 
threshold of toxicological concern (TTC) may be applied (41). The purpose of the TTC is to define 
a common acceptable exposure level for unstudied chemicals. Therefore, it is applicable to the risk 
assessment of leachables derived from SUSs. The concept of TTC may also be applied to extractables 
that may be potential leachables in the final drug product.
Leachables may affect the function of various components of the SUS. For instance, it has been re-
ported that residual silicone from silicone tubing significantly suppressed the post-use bubble points 
of sterilizing-grade filters, resulting in false integrity test failures (42). Therefore, it is important to 
make sure that SUS test samples removed for sampling do not contain leachables that may interfere 
with test measurements or present unknown peaks in routine assays.
Leachables may have an adverse effect on the viability of cell cultures without posing a risk to the 
patient. Recent presentations from different users have reported that certain cell lines may be more 
sensitive to some materials (39,43-46).
In one case, cell growth media that was warmed overnight in disposable containers produced lower 
than expected growth in glass bioreactors. In another case, the effect of prefilters on growth perfor-
mance was studied, and it was noted that extensive flushing was required for optimal performance. 
Differences were observed in the surfaces and texture of films, and certain cell lines showed different 
sensitivities to different films (39).
5.6.3	 Using Supplier Documentation for Extractables
The end user may rely on extractables data from the supplier as a starting point for general informa-
tion on E&L components. This kind of data is typically generated using model extraction solvents 
under exaggerated conditions. Given the specificity of each product and diversity of extractables and 
leachables, as well as production and final use conditions, it would be prudent for the end user to 
perform an independent assessment to ascertain that the data are representative of the actual SUS 
process. Supplier documentation may be sufficient for certain low-risk applications (e.g., short-term 
exposure, no contact with the product, or position in the process stream); but more detailed studies 
may be required for high-risk applications (e.g., where long-term contact and extreme conditions ex-
ist). This is critical for qualifying alternative sources of materials.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
53
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The end user must review the underlying methods in order to conduct an effective comparison of 
supplier extractables data for components constructed of like materials. In addition, it is critical for 
the end user to use the same components and processes for an extractables study as that used in the 
original supplier’s manufacturing process. If the potential for adverse results is high (e.g., a high se-
verity score in a risk assessment), data from extended storage of product and a leachables study may 
need to be generated and supported by actual functional testing to ensure that there would be no 
adverse effect on either the product or the process (e.g., stability test of the final product container, 
cell growth, and the effect of the bioreactor bag on cell viability).
5.6.4	 Extractable Testing Standardization
To assist in defining common extractable study requirements for biopharma drug substance requirements, 
including test conditions, analytical techniques, and format of the results provided to users, some level of 
standardization is needed in the industry. Such standardization would facilitate SUS implementation (36).
5.7	 Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE)/Transmissible 
Spongiform Encephalopathy (TSE) Concerns
SUSs have low-risk BSE/TSE concerns and they do not contain high-risk animal-derived components. 
Certain mold release and slip agents and plastics resins (e.g., polypropylene or polycarbonate) may 
contain trace levels of additives (e.g., calcium stearate), which are manufactured from bovine tallow 
and have low BSE/TSE risk. Tallow is a lubricant sometimes used in pelletizing operations for bulk 
resin or as a mold release agent for the manufacture of SU components. Tallow is produced by treat-
ing beef fat with steam to create a mixture of fats. The fat (e.g., glyceryl tristearate) is then boiled in a 
sodium hydroxide solution, resulting in a mixture of sodium stearate and glycerin.
Tallow-derived additives are not considered as specified BSE risk materials according to the current 
revision of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21 Part 189.5 (47). Furthermore, the CPMP’s 
“Note for Minimizing the Risk of Transmitting Animal Spongiform Encephalopathies via Human 
and Veterinary Medicinal Products” (EMA 410/01 rev 3 ), gives specific consideration to tallow de-
rivatives (48). It states that they are unlikely to be infectious due to the rigorous processing steps (e.g., 
transesterification, or hydrolysis, at not less than 200°C under pressure for not less than twenty min-
utes) used during their manufacture. A BSE/TSE risk assessment should be completed and periodi-
cally updated to reflect whether an SUS supplier is using components in the fluid pathway that were 
fabricated from plastic resins containing bovine-derived additives at trace levels.
5.8	 The Quality Systems of the End User and Supplier
It is important for the end user to have instituted a robust quality system to receive materials, quaran-
tine unreleased and rejected materials, inspect those materials, and release them to production. Since 
the testing and release of an SUS can vary widely from end user to end user, a complete and careful 
documentation in the form of a purchase specification and inspection plan should accompany any 
off-the-shelf or customized SUS requisition. A supplier quality agreement is another useful way to 
manage the requirements and expectations of both supplier and end user.
5.9	 Quality Management for Single-Use System Implementation
5.9.1	 Determination of Expiration Date and Shelf Life
The SUS supplier is expected to provide estimates for expiration dates and the shelf life of the SUS 
according to validation of maintenance of sterility tests and key functional properties. The expiration 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
54
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
date is normally set post-sterilization. Any extension of the shelf life of the SUS must be supported 
by pertinent data. Real-time aging studies provide the best data to ensure that both the materials and 
the functional integrity of a sterile barrier system do not degrade with time. Accelerated studies may 
be a suitable substitute if real-time aging studies cannot be performed. The ASTM F1980–07(2007) 
Standard Guide for Accelerated Aging of Sterile Barrier Systems for Medical Devices is a widely used 
test for accelerated aging of the plastic components of SUSs (49).
The term Ready-To-Use is a marketing term often used to describe the benefits of single-use technol-
ogy or SUS. This designation has no regulatory or scientific basis supporting suitability for use, and 
end users are responsible for evaluating and determining whether appropriate quality requirements 
have been met for their application.
5.9.2	 Dealing with Particulates
The level of particulates found in the SUS depends on the application (fluid path contents) of the 
system. Particles embedded in the bulk plastic as well as the presence of loose particles or fibers in an 
SUS are undesirable and their limits should be clearly specified in purchase agreements. If the pres-
ence of particulates in the fluid path would not have adverse effects on the product or process, then 
components used upstream of final filters may not require stipulated particulate levels. However, SUS 
components employed downstream of final filters or without particulate filtration may require strin-
gent limits for particulates to ensure that the final product meets pharmacopeia standards. An accept-
able solution is to qualify fluid path rinse volumes to meet USP <788> and USP <790> or equivalent 
pharmacopeia standards for large-volume injectables (10,50). In addition, the frequency of sampling 
and analysis may be extended from lot samples to periodic audits of model SUSs—this would be akin 
to the bioburden audits that are conducted for the validation of sterilization by irradiation. Applicable 
SUS model system design and particulate audit practices should be established between the supplier 
and the end user.
5.9.3	 Sanitation and Sterilization
The use of an SUS in biopharmaceutical manufacturing can vary so widely that in one instance there 
may be no need for a specific bioburden control (e.g., as in the mixing of nonsterile buffer formula-
tions or other raw materials) whereas in another, stringent restrictions on the incidence of a biobur-
den are called for (e.g., validated sterility for final formulation and filling of sterile drug product). It 
is critical for the end user to review processes, fluids, contact, and storage conditions for microbial 
quality to determine the appropriate measures to be taken.
5.9.4	 Bioburden Control
The molding and extrusion of SUS components at high temperatures plus their assembly into a func-
tional SUS in a clean and controlled environment confers advantages such as intrinsically low inci-
dence of bioburden on the fluid paths of the SUS. Although this inherently low degree of bioburden 
may be adequate for nonsterile processes, many SU components or systems may be autoclaved or 
subjected to gamma irradiation for additional control of bioburden. Doses of irradiation as low as 
8 to 10 kGy are enough to reduce intrinsic bioburden to zero; however, in practice, doses >25 kGy 
are used to achieve a sterility assurance level (SAL) of 10-6. The increased irradiation dosage has the 
advantage of attaining a bioburden level comparable to that of validated sterility without conducting 
the necessary validation protocols or periodic sterilization audits that would otherwise be required 
for a statistical claim of sterility of 10-6 (51). This may be suitable for bacterial fermentation applica-
tions and aseptic processes such as the preparation and storage of downstream chromatography and 
ultrafiltration buffers and intermediates.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
55
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.10	 Sterilization
5.10.1	Irradiation Sterilization
SUSs are especially suitable to sterilization by irradiation because of the relative transparency of plas-
tics to ionizing radiation, which allows complex systems to be sterilized without the risk of spreading 
the sterilizing agent throughout the fluid path. Irradiation may be used to sterilize plastics or SUS 
assemblies that may be unsuitable for steam sterilization. The practice of sterilizing via irradiation is 
well established in the medical device industry with transferable standards that can be applied to SU 
process equipment (51). Although no specific industry standard has been developed for the steriliza-
tion of SUSs, the industry and regulatory communities have adopted the ANSI/AAMI/ISO 11137 
standard, Sterilization of  Health Care Products—Radiation, and the closely related AAMI Technical In-
formation Report TIR 33:2005, Substantiation of  a Selected Sterilization Dose—Method VD max (51,52). 
Adaptation and implementation of these standards to the implementation of SUS have been dis-
cussed in the literature (53). The most common alternative methods mentioned in the standards are 
the dose substantiation methods (i.e., the verification dose max, or “VD max,” methods).
In practice, a typical audit involves the selection of a single-use product (SUP) as representative of the 
SUS. A supplier quality audit must consider how the product family and the representative product design 
were derived. In cases where testing the representative product would be impractical (e.g., due to size and 
complexity), a portion of the sample item may be used with mathematical scaling between the actual 
product and the sample item. A supplier quality audit must include an understanding of the mathematical 
scaling technique. Since the standards require that a supplier must perform quarterly dose audits for each 
product family, the end-user quality audit of the SU supplier must ascertain that there is a procedure in 
place for the supplier to conduct quarterly dose auditing. Validation normally involves the determination 
of an average bioburden level in a representative master system, assessment of radiation resistance by 
sterility testing of the fluid path of the master system after a low “verification” dose (about 8 to 10 kGy), 
and calculation of a suitable dose to provide a sterility assurance level or a probability of nonsterility of 
10-6 for the model product and its variants. The supplier and the end user should review the applicability 
of validation via master system sterilization to the end user’s SUS configuration.
5.10.2	Sterilization with Moist Heat
Several methods of sterilization are acceptable for use with SUS. Each is appropriate for different ap-
plications and should be evaluated for suitability.
• Autoclaving — This technique is often used to sterilize an SUS or SU components assembled by 
end users (54). After that, most end users may find it more convenient to source preassembled SUSs 
that are sterilized by gamma irradiation.
• Sterilize-in-place (SIP) — Steam-to-connector configuration is one example of SIP. The physical 
limitations of plastics limit the ability of an SUS to be sterilized by steam pressure in situ. Some 
SU connectors are designed to be physically attached to a stainless multiple-use port so that the 
tank connection can be sterilized with steam. Steam-to or steam-through connectors tend to be 
preconnected to tubing with an SUS at one end and are presterilized by autoclaving or irradiation. 
A valve or barrier mechanism is used to isolate the sterile system. The steam-to or steam-through 
connector is then connected to a tank, and the interface is sterilized with steam (55).
• Gas sterilization — Although it is not a common practice, an SUS may be sterilized using a gas 
such as ethylene oxide. Gas sterilization is not as popular as other methods of sterilization for two 
reasons: 1) ethylene chlorohydrin and ethylene glycol reaction by-products can form; and 2) some 
ethylene oxide may be retained in the filter matrix, when a filter is present. Some of the factors that 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
56
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
affect the use of gas sterilization are preconditioning, concentration, relative humidity, temperature, 
and time. The monitoring and validation of gas sterilization is conducted by destroying a suitable 
biological indicator such as the spores of Bacillus subtilis. To achieve successful sterilization using 
ethylene oxide, the SUS should be dry and wrapped in a way that allows for the influx of water 
vapor and gas into the fluid path. The appropriate concentration of gas and other parameters 
must be established during development and validation processes. It is important to rid the SUS of 
residual gas and other undesirable by-products after gas sterilization.
• Resterilization — SU components are not amenable to multiple autoclave cycles. Gamma 
irradiation is a cumulative process and most SU components cannot be re-irradiated without 
causing significant degradation of physical integrity, creation of extractables, and reduction of shelf 
life. In addition, irradiation may reduce the resistance of the SUS to subsequent steam exposure, 
which may increase the formation of extractables and leachables. In general, an SUS is not designed 
to be resterilized.
5.10.3  Sensor Technology
The pace of technological evolution of SU sensors is so rapid that the end user may decide to use 
several strategies at the same time. The end user may:
• Choose a novel method
• Adapt an existing technology for SU
• Apply traditional multiple-use sensors in an SUS
The end user must evaluate the technology for suitability according to the accuracy, repeatability, 
range, and calibration requirements. Other questions to consider are:
• How compatible is the SU sensor with the sterilization technique?
• What is the shelf life of the sensor?
• What is the in-service life of the sensor?
• How appropriate is the sensor for the SUS in question?
Early examples of SU sensors for pH and dissolved oxygen in an SU bioreactor (SUB) were based on 
optical differences observed on a chemical patch immersed in the process fluid. Optical sensors are 
calibrated with a batch-specific calibration standard instead of a zero-and-span calibration technique. 
The end user must be aware that optical sensors may be sensitive to photo bleaching and drift. In 
general, steam sterilization cycles may be more damaging to a reusable sensor than a single gamma 
sterilization cycle. Some SU sensors may be calibrated using a traditional two-point calibration tech-
nique prior to use without any adverse effects on sterility. Thus, SU sensors may be inherently more 
reliable than reusable sensors. The end user must pay attention to the advantages and limitations of a 
chosen SU sensor, including the specific requirements and circumstances of application.
5.10.4	Qualification and Validation
The end user is responsible for process validation, and the method for validating an SUS must be 
determined using a risk-based approach, which considers the effective integration of the SUS design 
into the end user’s quality systems (8). Although purchasing a preassembled, sterilized SUS allows the 
end user to take advantage of the qualification data generated by the SUS supplier, it is incumbent on 
the end user to understand the supplier’s qualification approach and how it applies to the end user’s 
specific application. The scope of process validation at the manufacturing site must encompass the 
materials for construction, relevant testing procedures (e.g., for heavy metals, particulates, pyrogenic-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
57
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
ity, cytotoxicity, leachables, and extractables), and information on any sterilization method used. Any 
deficiencies discovered during the validation process may be mitigated by applying additional targeted 
checks or other controls. Additional information may include pressure limitations, correct procedures 
for using aseptic connectors and tubing fusers, and how many times pump tubing can be reused. The 
validation study should ensure and document process-specific fitness for use of the SUS.
Pertinent validation concerns for an SUS include the following:
• SU products, and qualified alternative designs, used in bulk drug substance and sterile filling should 
be incorporated into the media fill program.
• SU filtration systems may need to be designed with alternative receiving containers to accommodate 
pre-use wetting and integrity testing.
• Since it may not be feasible to test the SUS for leaks, the manufacturing, shipping, handling, and 
operation procedures should be assessed for their assurance of avoiding issues (punctures, tears, 
stresses) that may lead to leaks.
• While extractables data may be suitable for predicting worst-case in-process leachables, actual 
testing of leachables may be necessary for final drug formulation in bulk storage containers.
• When proprietary sterile connections are incorporated into the SUS, the end user must review supplier 
validation data to determine whether any additional process-specific validation may be required.
• Proper handling and manipulation of the SUS by trained operators should be qualified.
5.11	 Integrity
5.11.1  Testing an SUS for Leaks
The requirements for testing an SUS will depend on its intended use. The retention of structural in-
tegrity (i.e., containers do not leak) is the main concern and is a key concern in process-contact appli-
cations. For low-risk applications (e.g., sample and buffer bags), an understanding of supplier testing, 
performance, and training in appropriate handling procedures may be sufficient.
SUSs are increasingly used for the production of vaccines, and the egress of a live virus could have 
serious consequences;, therefore, specific testing of individual systems is recommended.
When an SUS is used for holding media, the potential for microbial ingress that may compromise ste-
rility becomes a significant concern. Attempts have been made to assess the maximum size of a defect 
that will compromise the effectiveness of a flexible bag (56). This is a complex undertaking because 
it depends on factors such as the surface tension of the liquid in the bag, time, temperature, and the 
method of measurement. In addition, the permeability of individual components (e.g., tubing and 
films) may differ according to the test agent (e.g., gas or dye) used.
The structural integrity of the SUS should be carefully evaluated in a collaborative manner by the end 
user and the supplier. Post-shipment/transport testing to evaluate the method of packaging the SUS 
will need to be incorporated. To test for the integrity of the fluid path during qualification—includ-
ing tubing manifolds and connectors—a suggested method is to internally pressurize tubing with air 
and hold it under water. Provided that testing will not compromise the sterility or cleanliness of the 
equipment, manifolds can be inspected by manipulation to check for air bubbles at both tubing con-
nector engagements and along the entire length of tubing. For upstream applications, the user should 
confirm the supplier’s claims during verification and accept materials based on their documentation 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
58
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
thereafter. A special case may need to be made for customized SUS. Demands are generally stricter 
for product containers; therefore, end users may wish to ask the suppliers what testing is feasible for 
larger containers at their sites versus the end user’s site (after installation).
To test a bag container or a SUS for leakage, a suggested method (depending on the size of the SUS) 
is to fill the plastic bag or SUS with water inside the bin, drum, or tank and check for leaks at maxi-
mum volume. If the location of the leak is not apparent, fill the plastic container with water outside 
of the bin, drum, or tank on a flat, absorbent surface such as cardboard or paper. Locate the leak by 
identifying wet spots on the absorbent surface corresponding to a position on the container. Using 
the mapped location of the leak on the bag, examine the bin, drum, or tank for sharp points that may 
have caused the leak. Examine the leak under magnification to determine whether the leakage was 
caused by puncture, tear, creasing, pinhole, or another means. Track leak locations to help with root 
cause analysis of failure modes (e.g. handling, structural/design considerations, and material failure).
If the end user determines that a leak was caused by a manufacturing defect, the failed sample should 
be returned to the supplier for quality investigation and corrective action. The returned sample should 
include full information regarding the conditions of use and location of the leak. Suppliers should 
maintain records of system failures and their root causes for further analysis.
5.11.2  Leak Prevention in an SUS
Leaks in fluid management systems can lead to contamination, personnel safety risk, and product 
loss. A thorough investigation must be conducted to determine the cause, identify the source of the 
leak, and monitor corrective and preventive actions. The investigation strategy should include a leak-
investigation procedure for generating standard reports. Such a report must include the location of 
the leak on the assembly, the surrounding temperature conditions, composition of the fluids, any 
adverse mechanical events, and an analysis of the failure mode. This information is particularly useful 
for trend analysis. Consider the example depicted in Figure 5.11.2-1 in which a bioprocess container 
(BC) was investigated for leaks. Individual reports for each leak were analyzed and the location of 
each leak was mapped and identified according to type and cause (57).
Figure 5.11.2-1	 Investigation of a Bioprocess Container for Leaks
The leaks were mapped onto a deconstructed view of the BC (Figure 5.11.2-2). The map indicated 
the leaks were more likely to occur at the bottom and top of the bag (i.e., where the BC was handled 
by operators). Subsequently, the operators were trained to avoid damage due to mishandling, and this 
led to a significant decline in leak rates (57).
Distribution of Bioprocess Container Leak Locations
n Bag Chamber
n Tubing
n Connector
n Sampling Manifold
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
59
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Figure 5.11.2-2	 Identifying the Location of Leaks on a Bioprocessing Container
This, in turn, led to the following recommendations.
For end users
• Train operators to be aware of the root causes of leaks.
• Remove sharp objects from the vicinity of a BC.
• Improve lifting equipment for handling the BC.
• Make sure that the BC fits properly into the container in order to minimize handling.
Partnering with suppliers
• Share leak investigation reports when returning defective products.
• Use supplier-developed methods to improve reliability.
• Identify and implement a more robust BC.
The summation of activities involving the hands-on steps required to successfully assemble and make 
a system ready for use for a specific SUS application is called deployment. This includes a defined 
setup and deployment stage, with standardized activities for each part, and is a recognized success 
factor for SUS implementation. Deployment should be a routine part of the workflow and planning 
for each SUS application.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
