60
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
5.12	 Campaigning
Although they are disposable systems designed to be used once and discarded, there are a few excep-
tional circumstances in which an SUS may be reused. Examples would be the use of a container as a 
mixing vessel or reservoir for buffer concentrates, in which there are no broken connections and the 
contents of the container are replenished. Extending the period of time or number of cycles an SUS 
is operating in a closed process without breaking the sterile barrier processes is called campaigning. 
The end user is responsible for evaluating and determining whether appropriate quality requirements 
are met for their application.
The end user must also consider whether the reuse of an SUS would compromise the definition of 
a batch. Conversely, strict adherence to single usage of a prepacked, presanitized chromatography 
column may be prohibitively expensive; therefore, it would be economical for the end user to run 
the column for multiple cycles (e.g., for preparing clinical material). The column may then be held 
in storage conditions and tested before being reused. The effectiveness of the storage conditions and 
tests should be verified as for a brand-new column.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
61
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.0	
Business Drivers for the Adoption 
of Single-Use Systems
This section provides a detailed description of the key business drivers that inform the evaluation and 
implementation of single-use versus traditional MUSs. The business drivers for the introduction of an 
SUS are many, varied, and unique to each company’s individual situation and business model. Several 
factors must be considered for a successful analysis. These factors include:
• Supplier-demonstrated technical and quality capabilities
• Product sustainability
• Guarantee of business continuity
• The business model of the company considering an SUS
• Process design
• The product and its potential market volume
• Available facilities
• Anticipated location
Each company will approach SUS implementation with a different set of objectives developed from 
business drivers that are unique to a specific business model.
SUS implementation confers advantages such as reduced capital investment, flexible operation, faster 
changeover, and the application of lean manufacturing principles. Since a company’s individual situa-
tion and business model will affect the role of pertinent business drivers, it is critical to start the evalu-
ation with an understanding of the business in question. For example, the main concern of a contract 
manufacturing company (CMO) may be the elimination of cross-contamination in a multiple-client, 
multiple-product facility. A stand-alone manufacturer with a facility dedicated to the production of a 
single product may consider a hybrid approach of an SUS and MUS to reduce SU variable costs yet al-
low for the expansion of production capacity at peak periods. An effective implementation of an SUS 
would help the company to meet important business goals in addition to cost savings.
6.1	 Evaluation of Business Drivers
The decision to implement an SUS tends to be driven by economic incentives such as 1) potential elimina-
tion of cleaning and sterilization processes; 2) reduction of dedicated equipment or changeover time; and 
3) increased flexibility and capacity of the manufacturing facility. The end user must consider both tan-
gible cost savings and less quantitative benefits such as low risks of cross contamination. A cost-of-goods-
manufactured (COGM) analysis can be used to support claims of economic savings. Other tools, such as 
risk assessment, value-stream mapping, CO2 footprint, green manufacturing, and value-added analysis, can 
provide invaluable data to inform a business decision on whether to implement SUS or not.
6.2	 Lifecycle Approach
The importance of specific business drivers will depend on the needs of each individual company. 
The scope of the project may be as narrow as using an SUS to boost the capacity of a single process 
step or to eliminate cleaning steps. Such a tactical comparison depends on technological, process 
compatibility, and economic factors. Conversely, the project scope could be a corporate-wide initia-
tive to evaluate the feasibility of SUS implementation for an entire production process or part of an 
overall lifecycle evaluation for a product or facility. A lifecycle approach involves an evaluation of the 
costs incurred throughout the lifetime of the project in order to provide a complete economic basis 
for making decisions. Costs for evaluation may include the initial capital investments, production and 
quality overheads, and decommissioning. The lifecycle approach incorporates time and risk factors as 
relevant strategies are applied, and this leads to a more comprehensive economic evaluation.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
62
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
For instance, the forecast for a new product may include an initial launch phase with a relatively uncer-
tain production demand followed by a full-scale production phase with options for capacity expansion 
or additional products. In such a situation, operational flexibility becomes important to the business 
case because of the uncertainty in product demand. Such flexibility comes with an increase in capital 
investment for traditional MUSs, whereas the implementation of an SUS tends to reduce the cost of 
operational flexibility because it is less reliant on investment for utilities and equipment installation. 
An SUS is less costly to modify or expand to a new facility when a change in product lifecycle occurs.
6.3	 Opportunity Cost
Opportunity cost is defined as the value of the next-best choice available when choosing between 
several mutually exclusive options. These costs are often excluded from estimates of fixed opera-
tion costs because they can be difficult for comparative analyses in the overall decision process. For 
example, deciding to expand a facility may result in forgoing the opportunity to invest in other proj-
ects, contract batch production at a CMO, or maintain cash reserves. Opportunities can be difficult 
to compare; hence, opportunity cost calculations between competing projects may help identify the 
best path forward.
6.4	 Cost of Quality
The cost of quality can be defined as any cost that would not have been expended if quality were 
perfect. The inherent advantages of an SUS may lead to reductions in the cost of quality for the end 
user. In order for an SUS to be used in a manufacturing process, the end user must be able to demon-
strate that it is fit for purpose and meets applicable quality and regulatory requirements. SUS suppliers 
may take advantage of automation, economies of scale, and lean manufacturing to improve consis-
tency and reduce the cost of manufacturing. This arrangement makes the end user dependent on the 
supplier’s quality system. Therefore, it is critical for the quality system of the supplier to be robust 
enough to manage subsuppliers (e.g., resin and component suppliers). In addition, the quality system 
of the supplier must be able to monitor and detect the unique failure modes associated with SUS (e.g., 
bag breakage, variations in the profile of extractables and leachables, and effects on cell growth). It is 
the responsibility of the end user to ensure that the SUS meets applicable quality standards. Any tests 
conducted by the end user to ascertain process compatibility due to changes made by the supplier 
may be included in cost-of-quality estimates.
6.5	 Quantitative Evaluation of Business Drivers
A quantitative evaluation of business drivers for an SUS project may be based on determining the 
average cost of a batch in order to examine the feasibility of the SUS project. An overall economic 
model for a given project may be obtained by combining parameters from a series of submodels. A 
list of submodels and their interactions for setting up the overall economic model is shown in Figure 
6.5-1. The actual split between submodels and the amount of modeling work necessary depends on 
the project scope and level of accuracy necessary for the study. A more comprehensive comparative 
study may include all submodels, but in some cases, depending on the level of accuracy needed, an 
approach including only the Process, Capital Cost, and Variable Cost models may be sufficient for 
giving an estimate of the feasibility of the project.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
63
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Figure 6.5-1	 Cost Comparison Studies Reference Model
As shown in Figure 6.5-1, a process model is created first, followed by the generation of submodels 
according to the project scope. The resulting submodels for facility, investment, variable, and fixed 
costs may then be combined to form the total cost model. The factors to consider for the process 
model are summarized in Table 6.5-1.
Table 6.5-1	 Factors That Affect the Process Model
Process Model Factors
Considerations for SUS Implementation
Unit operation
Processes involving large volumes may be done with only one reusable vessel, 
whereas several vessels may be required for an SUS. The effect on the function, 
layout, and classification of the facility should be taken into account.
Storage of solution
The storage and distribution of solutions may be performed with mobile tanks or 
bags or in fixed installations. The concentrations of the solutions may be at use 
concentration or highly concentrated for subsequent dilution prior to use.
Support system 
requirements
This includes utility demand, washing and sterilization requirements, and the need 
for water and steam.
Batch duration and 
frequency
The time required for performing the process steps in question needs to be deter-
mined.
6.5.1	 Process Assessment
The process model is an assessment of the process with respect to an SUS. The process model forms 
the basis for any cost comparison exercise by defining process setup and deployment for either an SUS 
or an MUS. Data from the process model feeds into the facility, capital cost, and variable cost model 
to provide the basis for the fixed-cost model.
6.5.2	 Batch Frequency
With a higher batch frequency, variable costs arising from using more consumables over time may 
become prohibitive for an SUS design. If the batch frequency is low, varies, or becomes difficult to pre-
dict, then an SUS may improve the business case by keeping fixed costs low. For batch sizes exceeding 
feasible SUS volumes, there may be adverse economic effects from frequent use of the SUS.
Process model
Fixed cost model
Total cost model
Variable cost model
Section 6.3.1
Facility model
Section 6.8.4
Section 6.10
Section 6.7
Section 6.3
Operational model
Section 6.6
Business model
Capital cost model
Section 6.10.1
Cost of capital
Equipment
Consumables Materials, Utilities
Batch frequency Downtime
Floor space 
Classifications Operators
Labor Wages 
Maintenance
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
64
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
6.6	 Operational Model
Operational data about the facility is captured by the operation model and then added to the data from 
the process model in order to estimate utilization and batch output from the facility. When this informa-
tion is combined with other cost models, the average batch cost for the various scenarios can then be 
calculated. The main factors that affect the selection of operation model are summarized in Table 6.6-1.
Table 6.6-1	 Factors That Affect the Operational Model
Operational Model Factors
Considerations
Production (weeks/year)
The number of weeks scheduled for production minus holidays and scheduled 
maintenance.
Downtime duration
The time required for cleaning, dismantling, sterilizing, calibrating, testing, set-
ting up, and deploying the next batch to be processed.
Changeover duration
The time required for switching between campaigns or products. This may in-
clude the dismantling and cleaning of the production train (e.g., reusable stor-
age containers, equipment, or instrumentation screens), and clearance of items 
used in the last batch of production.
Batches per year
An SUS may produce more batches per year compared to an MUS because of 
the reduction in changeover time. The average cost of a batch does not include 
variable costs only, but it is influenced by fixed costs and the number of batches 
processed per year.
Scrap ratio
This refers to the number of batches lost to contamination, loss of integrity, and 
other problems. It also refers to the cost of materials and labor stemming from 
the loss of sterility or the integrity of the system.
6.6.1	 Single- or Multiple-Product Facility
The business case may be improved with an SUS because it may reduce downtime and changeover 
time. In a single-product facility, capacity may be increased via a reduction in the time required for 
equipment cleaning. In a multiple-product facility, improved capacity may be achieved through a 
decrease in both changeover and equipment-cleaning time. It is important to factor in differences in 
facility throughput when technologies are compared.
6.7	 Total Cost Model
A project may involve either the construction of a new facility or the retrofitting of an existing one. 
The main points of consideration for both cases are summarized in Table 6.7-1 (58).
Table 6.7-1	 Comparative Evaluation of a New Versus Retrofitted Facility During SUS Implementation
New Facility
Retrofitting of an Existing Facility
Emphasis on facility model for capital cost estimate
Ability to limit facility model by constraints already given
Ability to eliminate or reduce functions or utilities by using 
SUS
Possibility to overcome capacity limitations by using an 
SUS
Design for SUS technology
Interfacing and connecting SUS technology to existing 
areas and systems
Reduction in total project time as a result of SUS, time 
to market 
Possible reduction of interruptions in productivity
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
65
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.7.1	 Shortcut Cost Model Based on Cost of Goods
 In a preliminary evaluation in which the speed of comparison is more important than accuracy, a yes-
or-no type of feasibility study incorporating a minimum of factors would be sufficient. This approach 
may not be rigorous enough for a final binding decision where funds would be committed. In such a 
case, elements of the more comprehensive approach must be applied.
The minimum factors to consider in the shortcut model are:
• Process equipment
• Utility equipment
• SU consumables
• Cost of capital assumptions
6.7.2	 Example of a Shortcut Cost Model
Use the following lists and the preceding paragraphs to estimate the following for each scenario:
Process and Operational Basis
• Process equipment involved
• Number of batches produced annually
Investment Costs
• Equipment costs
• Area needed
• Area costs
• Total investment costs
Cost of Capital
• Annual depreciation on investment
• Annual interest rate paid on capital investment
• Total cost of capital
Operating Costs
• Consumables costs
• Materials costs
• Labor costs 
Evaluate the Following According to the Business Model:
• Investment costs
• Operating costs
• Number of batches produced
• COGM = (total operating costs + total cost of capital)/number of batches produced
• Payback time = difference in investment cost/difference in COGM
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
6.7.3	 Comprehensive Cost-of-Goods Model
A more comprehensive cost model may include factors selected from the preceding sections (Tables 
6.5-1, 6.6-1, 6.7-1 and Section 6.7.2-1). The structure of the model must be flexible enough so that it 
can be improved for accuracy with additional data. A sensitivity analysis is the most effective way to 
use an economic model because it incorporates a range of input factors for arriving at a good under-
standing of the potential risks involved.
6.8	 Investment Costs
6.8.1	 Process Equipment
The first step in evaluating an SU project is normally an equipment-to-equipment comparison of SUS 
versus MUS direct investment cost. Reduced demand for cleaning and sterilization allow for simpli-
fications in piping and instrumentation, which leads to a reduction in the investment cost for SUSs. 
While this will give an estimate of whether the technology is economically feasible for the project, 
Table 6.8.1-1 shows additional factors for evaluating investment costs that should be considered for 
an SUS project (59).
Table 6.8.1-1	Contributory Factors to Investment Costs
Investment Costs
Considerations
Process equipment
This refers to the process equipment (e.g., bioreactors, centrifuges, tanks, filters, col-
umns) and support equipment (e.g., welders, sealers, process controller, pumps, and bag 
supports for SUS) required to run the process.
Utility equipment
This refers to the secondary equipment or systems (e.g., clean steam, CIP, and COP) 
required to run the process.
Installation
Installations for CIP/SIP and traditional process tanks should be considered.
Engineering design
A SUS may either be customized or purchased with the off-the-shelf configuration.
Commissioning
Implementation of an SUS may eliminate I/O points associated with CIP and SIP.
Validation
quality shop floor 
A SUS may require investigations into potential leachables and other studies, and reus-
able equipment would require CIP and SIP validation. Consider the cost of doing facility 
acceptance test (FAT) and site acceptance test (SAT) as well as verification activities.
Facility floor space
This refers to the effect on both footprint and cleanliness classification for operation and 
SUS storage.
Operators
The number of operators affects training considerations as well as the number of work-
stations and lockers required.
6.8.2	 Utility Equipment
The effect of utility systems on the investment costs should be explored because it may be possible 
to remove entire system groups from the scope (e.g., clean steam, CIP stations) or achieve enough 
reduction in capacity to obtain cost reductions (WFI for rinsing, kill systems). The need to inactivate 
solid waste may increase the investment costs of an SUS, while the absence of a CIP in an SUS design 
may lead to a reduction in the generation of wastewater.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
67
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.8.3	 Indirect Equipment Costs
The estimates for engineering and installation costs (e.g., design, commissioning, and qualification 
and validation) are normally calculated as a percentage of the equipment costs. One of the advan-
tages of an SUS is that reductions in piping and instrumentation may decrease the number of both 
installed hardware and communication I/O points in the automation system. However, an SUS may 
incur a higher engineering percentage cost compared to similar MUS designs because of lower initial 
investment costs and the cost of validating leachables and extractables for the SUS. The installation 
percentage is lower for an SUS than an MUS. A similar approach can be used to determine the per-
centage costs for construction and project management (60).
6.8.4	 Facility
An SUS uses stackable rectangular containers, which results in a smaller footprint compared to MUS. 
The absence of a CIP and washing/sterilization function further reduces the space requirements of 
SUS. However, inefficient movement of containers, installation, and dismantling of bags can easily 
waste the space saved by an SUS. In addition, proper storage and handling of an SUS is very impor-
tant, since any damage might result in a lost batch or contamination. The transport route of an SUS 
may increase compared to that of a hard-piped system, and an SUS requires space to store process 
waste prior to final disposal. Storage space for SUS is typically greater than that for traditional MUS 
because of the need to manage SUS inventory and associated reusable storage containers. The main 
contributions to variable operating costs are summarized in Table 6.8.4-1 (61).
Table 6.8.4-1	
Main Variable Operating Costs
Variable Costs
Description
Raw materials
Input materials such as media, buffer, and various process aids like antifoam and 
chromatography gels
Consumables
Items such as storage bags, tubing, filters, and diaphragms that form or are a part of 
process equipment and are used on a per batch basis
Utilities
Steam, water, power, cooling, and chemical consumption for CIP/SIP
Waste
Energy consumption for inactivation systems and costs for disposing of solid waste
QC/QA and cost of quality Analytical, documentation, batch documentation, release activities, investigations, 
supplier audits
6.8.5	 Materials
Often, input materials (e.g., SUS materials prefilled with hydrated or powdered media and buffer com-
ponents and chromatography gels) may be independent of SUS or MUS technology (62).
6.8.6	 Consumables
The best way to determine the component cost of consumables is from the specific SUS process 
design under consideration because there can be a significant discrepancy between the costs of a sup-
plier’s standard configuration and that of the specific assembly required for a particular process step. 
Whenever possible, using the supplier’s standard configurations would be the most cost-effective way 
to determine the cost of consumables. Designing the SUS with backup systems such as redundant 
tubing, filters, and connectors will increase the costs per batch of that SUS. However, if these backup 
systems are necessary, they must be reflected in the final cost analysis of the project. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
68
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
It is possible to minimize SUS overdesign via a thorough understanding of the real risks determined 
in a process risk assessment such as a failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) (7). It is also important 
to get a feel for the actual cost of the SUS once specific connectors, filters, and tubing sets are added 
to the design. Since it may be possible to obtain discounts with large-volume orders from prospective 
suppliers, it is necessary to understand SUS configurations and how they can be customized to meet 
individual SUS process requirements. It would be advisable to incorporate a sensitivity analysis for the 
purchase cost of an SUS because final configurations and prices can be difficult to predict. In general, 
the sensitivity analysis should be extended to any variable with uncertain cost estimates (63).
6.8.7	 Utilities
The reductions in cleaning and sterilization associated with an SUS leads to a decrease in the cost of 
utilities, especially for clean water generation, CIP, and SIP systems. It is important to use carefully 
verified cost data since large volumes may be involved in these processes. The cost of water for injec-
tion is significantly lower for large on-site systems than for commercially supplied WFI. It may be 
calculated from system depreciation, labor, and energy costs.
6.8.8	 Waste
The cost of inactivating solid waste can be significant depending on the degree of containment re-
quired. The solid waste may be 1) inactivated on-site, which will lead to increased load on kill auto-
claves; or 2) transported off-site for incineration or disposal at a landfill. Both approaches would incur 
transport and disposal fees. A third approach involves chemical inactivation. The disposal strategy for 
each SUS must comply with the laws and requirements of the municipal authority in charge (64–66).
6.9	 QC/QA and Cost of Quality
Since some variable costs (e.g., analyses, preparing batch documentation, and batch release) are rarely 
affected by SUS implementation, the baseline costs of MU and SU systems tend to be similar. Batch 
review and investigation efforts may decrease and result in additional savings because SUS implemen-
tation results in reduced cleaning, SIP, and changeover activities. However, certain quality oversight 
activities (e.g., quality agreement, supplier audits, SUS documentation review, subsupplier audits, and 
QC-receiving inspection) may increase with an SUS implementation. The operation of several qual-
ity activities within the supplier’s quality system rather than that of the end user may make process 
investigations more complex, and this additional effort should be taken into account.
6.10	 Fixed Operating Costs
Fixed operating costs represent the expenditure on the facility regardless of the state of production. 
The main factors involved in evaluating fixed operating costs are summarized in Table 6.10-1.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
