100
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
• A technical diligence and quality audit process should be implemented. By now, the supplier and SUS 
should have been evaluated by a site visit. Any design changes should be assessed for their compliance, the 
supplier’s ability to adhere to the modifications, and the end user’s process compatibility (Section 7.7.1).
• The delivery and installation process should be agreed to with the supplier. Please note that not all 
suppliers include these facilities in their basic offers; hence, they can take time to define properly 
and add significant costs to the total investment (Sections 7.6.1 and 7.6.2).
• It may be appropriate at this stage to initiate quality and supply agreements for routine SUS 
procurement (Section 7.7).
• Business contingency planning and crisis management should be reviewed for potential problems 
or the need to make necessary changes to project planning, construction, and delivery or receiving 
because these can have profound impact on the end user’s startup and C&Q processes.
7.6	 Implementation S6: Testing and Validation
During this stage, methods and documentation must be developed for equipment SOPs, mainte-
nance, qualification and process validation, HSE processes, and personnel training. Some documents 
(e.g., the validation master plan) may require updates at this stage to maintain compliance.
7.6.1	 Delivery
The PEP must cover the delivery process, including responsibilities of the supplier and the end user. 
Transport logistics are sometimes complex, and the procedure by which the equipment will be safely 
shipped (transported) and unloaded from its delivery vehicle must be considered. Some suppliers do 
not take unloading into account, and the end user may need to take particular precautions here or 
ensure that the supplier contractually takes responsibility. There may be specific non-GxP issues to 
resolve such as documentation (delivery notes), inspection for inventory or damage, and insurance or 
the removal and appropriate disposal of crates and other packaging materials (103).
7.6.2	 Installation
The PEP will also cover all aspects of the startup process, including post-delivery storage, handling 
prior to installation unpacking, and the responsibilities of the supplier and the end user in a more 
general manner. Transferring the equipment to its place of use can be problematic if equipment di-
mensions or facility access has not been reviewed in advance. Preparing the area, particularly in cases 
where the SUS equipment will be used in manufacturing operations, may require specific training. 
The overall strategy and approach will depend on the nature of the SUS and the level of risk associ-
ated with this process (Section 7.4.1). In some cases, non-GxP documentation may be generated or 
supplied and work permits (e.g., fire safety) secured during the installation processes (e.g., removals).
7.6.3	 Qualification
Qualification of an SUS should include lifecycle testing that reproduces the most impactful steps of 
the system’s lifecycle (e.g., sterilization, transport, freezing/thawing) followed by a verification of the 
key functionalities and performance attributes (e.g., integrity testing). The lifecycle testing must be 
designed to cover the intended working space. Please refer to Sections 5 and 7.7 for a discussion of 
the SUS qualification process and supplier qualification, respectively.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
101
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7.6.4	 Training
Training is a GMP requirement and an integral part of SUS technical implementation. The goal of 
any training program should be to provide specific knowledge and understanding that will support 
successful operations. Although, the specific training needs are normally described in the user re-
quirements, other training requirements (e.g., for project management and risk assessment) may be 
critical for the successful implementation of the project. Training programs for SUS should include 
concepts and principles of operation that might be unique to SUS and unfamiliar to MUS operators.
7.6.5	 Training Workflow
Guidelines for a training workflow are as follows:
• Examine each part of the entire SUS PEP individually and identify the functional areas concerned.
• Identify the training needs in each functional area and assign stakeholders.
• Assemble training requirements in a training matrix (example in Section 10, Appendix 3).
• Determine the scope of each training module. Some subjects may require more than one level of 
presentation and may require periodic retraining.
• Make sure that a trainee assessment or evaluation process is included at the end of the training 
module; this is a GMP requirement.
• Take the resources as well as the subject and complexity of the training requirement into account 
when planning training procedures.
• Some training modules may be delivered by competent team members or operators who are 
familiar with SUS implementation. Other training modules may be delivered by suppliers.
• Add completed training modules to the individual training records of each stakeholder.
7.6.6	 An Example of SUS Training
Factors that may contribute to the leakage of bags are:
• Poor handling during deployment
• Mechanical stress on films or welds
• Accidental puncture or stressing of the SUS during handling and setup
Incidences of bag leakage may be reduced through the following interventions (104,105):
• Changing storage bin and bag design, if appropriate
• Optimizing the method of deployment (i.e., installation)
• Providing operational training
• Providing bag-handling awareness training
• Implementing a control strategy (e.g., remedial procedures by the supplier)
• Monitoring location and type of bag damage for trending
The in-house training program should be based on operational parameters and operator feedback. 
Operators should be educated and engaged about:
• Working areas and surfaces
• Bag installation and filling
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
102
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
• Prior root causes for failure
• Leakage history and trends
• Root-cause analyses
Additional details on training are provided in Section 6.
7.6.7	 Safety
Health and safety issues involving the control of both recognized and unidentified hazards in order to 
achieve an acceptable level of risk in the workplace are the responsibility of all stakeholders. Ensur-
ing safety in the workplace as required by local laws can be best addressed by preparing an HSE plan.
7.6.8	 Preparation of a Health, Safety, and Environment Plan
The HSE plan addresses health, safety, and environmental concerns throughout the SUS project. It 
should be prepared at an early stage and incorporated into the user requirements. Published examples 
of an HSE plan (although not related to SU technology) can be found in the literature (106,107). The 
HSE plan lists stakeholders and those responsible for performing specific HSE activities. These ac-
tivities may range from mapping and analyzing the impact of HSE to developing and implementing 
process improvements. A workflow for developing an HSE plan may consist of the following steps:
• Screen — Quick clarification of any HSE aspects related to the project
• Define — Overall evaluation of significant HSE concerns during the project lifecycle
• Plan — Final HSE plan with stakeholders, activities, responsibilities, and deadlines
The screening and defining activities involve the complete evaluation of the project from an HSE 
point of view in order to determine HSE concerns that require immediate action. Some of the HSE 
concerns for a typical SUS project are presented here.
Health
• Ergonomics
• Manual operations
Safety
• Flammables
• Equipment malfunction
• Improper operation of equipment
Environment
• Emissions
• Waste
• Energy
• Water
• Chemicals
• Fossil fuels and raw materials
• Consumption of raw materials
• Wrappings and other 
support materials
• Transport
7.6.9 Health and Safety Issues Related to SUS
SUSs often consist of plastic components that have low resistance to physical stress, pressure, and 
temperature extremes. A typical setup includes a range of support equipment (e.g., pumps, agitators, 
scales) that requires manual transportation, installation, and dismantling. This generates a unique set 
of HSE concerns, as presented in the following lists.
Safety
• Tubing ruptures at eye level
• Bag ruptures at eye level
• Spills and slippage
• Emergency stops for moving parts
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
103
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
• Automatic restarts after power cuts
• Tubing on floor that may result in tripping
• Loose parts (e.g., media containers, peristaltic 
pumps) that can fall
• Mobile containers over feet or hands, mobile 
containers squeezed in doorways
• Mobile containers’ finish, corners, and handles
• Connections failing for compressed air and 
other gases (e.g., CO2 and nitrogen)
• Retention of infectious material
• Failure in connecting to CIP/SIP equipment
• Position of emergency stop during filling 
operations may be out of sight from 
dispensing vessel
Health
• Ergonomics for installation and removal of SUS components (e.g., installing bags, filters)
• Ergonomics for handling bags that contain liquid
• Stress of communicating during filling operations that may be out of sight from dispensing vessel
• Lifting heavy or cumbersome objects
• Insufficient work space and surfaces
7.7	 Implementation S7: Launch
The PEP leads to an initial procurement of equipment for the SUS project in addition to setting out 
a secure supply chain for continuous operation of the SUS. Initial supplier evaluations are part of the 
PEP preparation in S4 (Section 7.4.10). In the following paragraphs, these first steps are consolidated 
with a detailed evaluation of the appropriate tools for the routine management of suppliers.
7.7.1	 Management of Materials
Since continuous sourcing of supplies is critical to keeping the SUS in a productive state, it is impor-
tant to maintain an efficient routine supplier management (e.g., technical diligence, quality audits, 
quality and supply agreements, and purchasing, logistical, and waste-handling strategies) to create a 
robust support for SUS manufacturing operations.
7.7.2	 Routine or Operational Procurement
Routine procurement for SUS (e.g., single-use bioreactors or chromatography systems) requires a sup-
plier qualification program for each of the SUS suppliers included in the PEP. Whenever the risk and 
complexity of the component in question is considered significant, the qualification program should 
be implemented using a risk-management approach. Some of the factors to consider are as follows:
• The end user may have to adopt a different approach to the procurement of integrated SUS 
equipment versus routine SUS components (Sections 5.2, 5.4, 5.5, 6.12.1, 6.14, 7.5.7, and 7.6.2).
• A backup policy of sourcing the same component from at least two different vendors should be 
adopted, and the suitability for the backup to be interchangeable with the original must be defined.
• The end user must evaluate and audit the supplier’s manufacturing capabilities and supply chain to 
determine the supplier’s ability to increase output on demand.
• The relationship between the end user and the supplier should be as transparent as possible in order 
to enhance the unimpeded operation of the SUS.
• The quality systems of the supplier should be examined as part of a quality audit process, and 
quality and supply agreements should be implemented (Section 7.7.4).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
104
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
• The supplier should be provided with a detailed description of the manufacturing process of the 
SUS, film quality, biocompatibility, and testing (e.g., bioburden monitoring of the SUS), particulates, 
extractables and leachables, and testing of leakages (108).
• A contract (supply or manufacturing agreement) describing the commercial conditions that relate 
to the supply chain, guarantee of delivery, and transport quality should be implemented (109).
• Both the supplier and the end user must institute robust change-control processes in order to 
prevent ad hoc modifications to the SUS.
• Time lines from the design to arrival of both MUS and SUS parts should be monitored.
• Evaluation models (preferably at the end user’s site) that use mock-ups of preliminary SUS designs 
(available for training and simulations) should be tested. Testing is an important risk-mitigating 
procedure. This process may have been started as part of the SUS strategy (Section 7.2.3).
• The end user should adhere to green and sustainable manufacturing policies throughout the entire 
supply chain and evaluate waste disposal for carbon footprint reduction.
7.7.3	 Technical Diligence
A QbD approach is the best way to qualify suppliers for SUSs. It is based on ICH principles (ICH 
Q8) and it embraces the complementary concepts of quality-risk management and pharmaceutical 
quality-system management (as detailed in ICH Q9 and Q10), process validation and verification, and 
stakeholder management (Sections 7.2.1, 7.2.2 and 7.2.3). These approaches lay the foundation for 
quality-driven processes built on a science- and risk-based approach and understanding. This is the 
case not just for the process for which the SUS will be used but also for the SU technology that will be 
deployed, thus supporting patient safety and product availability (3–5,18,77,106,110-114). The QbD 
approach allows for the identification and management of critical sources of variability in which con-
trol strategies can be used to maintain a state of control and facilitate the application of continuous 
improvement throughout the SUS product lifecycle (114).
Technical diligence can be started at S4 (Section 7.4). Based on established principles, it involves a care-
fully documented visit to the supplier’s site (18,92–94). The outcome should be an appropriate and mea-
sured understanding of all the technical issues pertaining to the SUS manufacturing process, readiness 
for installation, and operation at the end user’s facility. Technical diligence should be considered an im-
portant step in the supplier qualification process and a complement to the quality audit process. The 
principal differences between technical diligence and a quality audit are summarized in Table 7.7.3-1.
Table 7.7.3-1		
Principle Differences Between a Quality Audit and a Technical Diligence Assessment
Description
Quality Audit
Technical Diligence
Purpose
Compliance,
quality systems
Extensive technical understanding of design, manufac-
ture, fitness for purpose, and control strategy
Personnel involved
Quality team(s) 
Scientists, engineers, SMEs, and the supplier’s techni-
cal and manufacturing staff
Scope
Focused,
supplier’s quality systems
Open-ended scope will vary depending on project, sup-
ply-chain transparency, subsuppliers back to source
Some of the important factors to consider when performing technical diligence are reviewed in Table 
7.7.3-2.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
105
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 7.7.3-2		
Some Pertinent Factors for a Technical Diligence Assessment Checklist
Supplier Information
Supplier Technical Capability
End-User Product Suitability and 
Compatibility
CDA implemented
Design: engineering drawings and 
specifications
Fit with the end user’s process
Company and stakeholders
Risk to the end user
Fit with the end user’s facility and 
warehousing
Level of supplier integration
Resins, films, and other components
Prototype testing procedure
Sourcing and supply chain
Manufacturing process overview
Qualification
Contingency planning
Irradiation or other form of sterilization
Deployment method
Plant tour
SUS shelf life
Training and HSE
Determine the supplier’s degree of integration:
• Vertical: The supplier manufactures practically everything on-site, from the film to the finished 
and packaged SUS
• Horizontal: These activities are spread over more than one site
• Mixed model: A combination of vertical and horizontal integration
The mixed model has become increasingly common. Resin is nearly always sourced as a bulk from larger 
industrial companies, and the SUS supplier company may be specialized in the production of SUS for phar-
maceutical operations and have facilities on more than one continent. In some cases, it may require more 
than one technical diligence visit to the supplier’s sites to address all the relevant technical concerns (e.g., the 
film’s blow-extrusion may be performed at a different site than that used for SUS assembly and testing). The 
end user should pay careful attention to supply chain issues in this context. Depending on sourcing from an-
other continent or from multiple continents could easily be disrupted by many factors beyond the end user’s 
control and should be assessed from a risk-based approach. A quality audit may be executed either following 
or in parallel with the technical diligence process (e.g., an audit questionnaire can be part of the technical 
diligence process for phase I IMPs). A practical example of the technical diligence process can be found in 
Brown’s presentation on Implementation and Technical Diligence (115). Table 7.7.3-3 shows an interpretation 
of the SUS implementation process for a drug substance using a lifecycle approach.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
106
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Table 7.7.3-3		
An Interpretation of the SUS Implementation Process
Clinical Status 
of Product 
Manufactured
SUS Implementation 
Stage According to TR 
Section 7.1, Figure 7.1-1
FDA Process 
Validation 
Guide Stage
Supplier 
Qualification 
Activity
Presence 
of a Quality 
Agreement
Risk and 
Complexity
Preclinical 
material
Technical assessment (1), 
detailed investigation (2), 
and scoping (3)
PV S1
Collect 
supplier and 
SUS product 
information
Optional
High
IMPs for 
toxicology and 
phase I 
Business case (4), devel-
opment (5), and testing 
and validation (6)
PV S1–2
Perform 
technical 
diligence
Yes
High
IMPs for phases 
II and III
PPQ 
conformance 
batches
Launch (7)
PV S2
Perform 
technical 
diligence and 
an audit
Yes
Moderate
Licensed 
product
SUS exploitation stage
PV S3
Continue 
supplier 
verification
Yes
Low
7.7.4	 Quality and Technical Agreements
Quality and technical agreements clarify the functional aspects of a business relationship by delineat-
ing the responsibilities of quality, regulatory, and production personnel within each company in order 
to enhance communication and prevent ambiguity as referred to in Section 6 (109,110–114). A quality 
agreement should not be confused with a business, supply, or manufacturing agreement. Several tem-
plates for APIs are available for chemical and biological products, and the end user may adapt them to 
an SUS from the Bulk Pharmaceuticals Task Force (Society of Chemical Manufacturers and Affiliates 
or SOCMA) or the International Pharmaceutical Excipients Council (IPEC) (116,117).
7.7.5	 Logistics and Storage
The storage and warehouse facilities required for the efficient operation of the SUS should be defined in 
the PEP. In general, the amount of pallet space required may be calculated as a function of consumption 
and the dimensions of the shipping container. A risk-based approach may be used to allocate storage 
space for critical consumables with limited or no alternative suppliers, while standard consumables can 
be sourced as and when they are needed. Value-stream mapping (a lean manufacturing technique used 
to analyze the flow of materials and information required to bring a product or service to the user) can 
be used to identify improvements in lead time or to identify inefficient operations. For example, a value-
stream map can show where excess materials are accumulating. Some of the factors to consider are:
• High-risk consumables
• Standard consumables
• Storage policy
• Pallet space
• Frequency of delivery to consumers
• Environmental storage conditions 
monitoring and control (a GMP requirement)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
