3
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Single-Use System (SUS)	
An engineered process equipment solution, 
most commonly assembled from components 
made using polymeric materials, which together 
create a system or unit operation designed for 
one time or campaign use. 
SUS Interchangeability	
Functionally equivalent substitution of an alter-
native SUS, for an existing SUS design providing a 
contingency or process improvement with equiv-
alent process performance and product quality. 
The end user is responsible to evaluate and de-
termine if appropriate quality requirements are 
met for their application. 
Technical Diligence	
The means by which the technical capabilities 
of the SUS, its supplier and its fit with the end 
user are verified. It is complimentary to a quality 
audit program and becomes a recurring theme 
over the implementation process and subse-
quent routine procurement.
Value-added Activities	
Includes the management of materials, opera-
tions, qualification, verification, vender audits, 
materials testing, and shop-floor oversight that 
allows an SUS to be used in operations.
2.1	 Acronyms
CIP	
Clean-in-Place
CMO	
Contract Manufacturing Organization
COGM	 Cost-Of-Goods-Manufactured
CPP 	
Critical process parameters 
CQA	
Critical Quality Attributes
E&L	
Extractables and Leachables
FMEA	 Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
HACCP	 Hazard Analysis and Critical Control 
Points
MU	
Multiple-use
MUS	
Multiple-use System
PEP	
Project Execution Plan
QRM	
Quality Risk Management
RAT	
Regulatory Assessment Table
SIP	
Sterilize-in-Place
SU	
Single-Use
SUS	
Single-Use System
UR	
User Requirements
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
3.0	 Points to Consider for Single-Use 
System Manufacturing Strategy
This section provides an introduction to and overview of the most important points to consider and 
the necessary steps the end user must accomplish in order to implement a successful single-use (SU) 
strategy, while a more detailed description of these points and a structured implementation strategy 
can be found in the subsequent sections of this document. Additionally, this section offers a guideline 
for a structured approach for an initial feasibility evaluation of a single-use system (SUS) manufactur-
ing strategy.
The key to successful SU technology implementation is the development of an effective manufac-
turing strategy for the molecule or formulation to be produced. Many factors must be considered 
when an organization is making strategic decisions, and implementation of SU technology is no dif-
ferent. In this report we suggest developing a high-level manufacturing strategy after a science- and 
risk-based approach with consideration given to four main areas that influence the success of SUS 
implementation:
• Technologies and system integration 
• Qualification of assembled products 
• Business drivers
• Implementation
The resulting manufacturing strategy will then outline the questions for consideration needed for 
successful implementation of an SUS. This technical report has a dedicated section for each of these 
areas of consideration. An overview of each will be presented in this section.
As depicted in Figure 3.0-1, each area plays a crucial role in establishing successful use of SUSs. Ques-
tions within these areas of focus must be considered and balanced against an organization’s needs and 
competencies when developing a manufacturing strategy (detailed in Section 7.1). Only a compre-
hensive approach ensures that the primary customer-based goals of patient safety, product availability, 
product understanding, and process understanding are met when implementing new technology.
Figure 3.0-1	 Key Decision Areas for an SUS Manufacturing Strategy
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Each area has a situation-dependent role in the decision process and may be weighed differently ac-
cording to the circumstances of the end user. For example, a contract manufacturer may value the 
ability to shorten changeover time between different products, whereas a large pharmaceutical com-
pany may weigh the risk of adopting new technology against utilization of existing capabilities. A 
small organization may not have the resources (manpower or capital) to invest in a fixed multiple-use 
system (MUS). Other important factors to consider are:
• The current stage of drug development
• The scale of post-launch manufacturing
• The likelihood of the facility being used to produce other products in the future
• The risk associated with depending on a sole SUS supplier
A detailed implementation process for SUS is described in Section 7, and this includes details of the 
workflow for the implementation process, starting with the preparation of the manufacturing strat-
egy reviewed in this section.
A gated approach is used to facilitate the preparation of the manufacturing strategy and decision process. 
A “gate,” as it is used here, is a decision point where the pros and cons of the strategy are addressed using 
a science- and risk-based approach. A proposal for the effective evaluation of important factors within the 
gated approach is described in Figure 3.0-2. Each stage is crucial to the successful implementation of a 
new technology. Negative results at any stage may halt the implementation of the SUS. An example of 
such a negative decision will be a case in which there will be an adverse effect on patient safety or where 
there is no feasible solution to a technical problem. The aim of the gated approach is to fail the process 
quickly when a major problem cannot be solved. The decision pathway is not necessarily linear—the end 
user may decide to enter the pathway at any given point. However, each stage must be addressed to have 
a balanced decision process prior to the implementation of an SUS.
A detailed implementation process for SUSs is described in Section 7, and the implementation work-
flow is developed based on the decisions made in the manufacturing strategy reviewed in this section. 
An overview of the different implementation stages is described in Figure 7.0-1 and Table 7.0-1. Key 
documentary outputs for the whole implementation process are listed in Section 8, Appendix I: SUS 
Facility Overall User Requirement Specification.
The following sections provide an overview of a proposed decision-making process for implementing 
an SUS strategy.
Figure 3.0-3 offers an overview of how the sections in this document are related and support the 
structured approach for implementation of SUS.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Figure 3.0-2	Proposed SUS Decision Pathway
Figure 3.0-3	Technical Report Structure Overview
Initial Feasibility Study for the Manufacturing Strategy: Section 3
SUS Technical Assessment 
and Feasibility: Section 3.1
Business Case: Section 3.2
Product and Process Risks: 
Section 3.3
Process Control Strategy: 
Section 3.4
Implementation Strategy: 
Section 3.5
Logistics Strategy: 
Section 3.5.8
Key Drivers
Technology: Section 4
Qualification: Section 5
Business: Section 6
Implementation: Section 7
Detailed Implementation Workflow: Section 7
Scoping: Section 7.3
Business Case:  
Section 7.4
Development: Section 7.5
Testing and Validating: 
Section 7.6
Launch: Section 7.7
Deployment & 
Exploitation:  
Section 7.7.1–7.7.6
Post.Launch Verification: 
Section 7.7.7
SUS may not be applicable
No
SUS is 
feasible
Yes
and
Is SUS 
Technically 
Feasible?
• Size, pressure, 
temperature limitations
• Complexity of the 
system
• Compatibility
• Flexibility
• Facility utilization
• Balance of capital 
and operating costs
Business Case 
Acceptable?
and
Product Risk 
Acceptable?
• Cross contamination
• Adsorption
• Extractables/
Leachables
and
and
Process Risk 
Acceptable?
• System integrity loss
• Process adjustments
• Operator safety
• Process validation
• Measurement 
quality
• Process interation
Process Control 
Strategy 
Acceptable?
and
Implementation 
Strategy 
Acceptable?
• Regulatory 
acceptance
• System reliability
• Internal change 
acceptance
and
Logistic Control 
Strategy 
Acceptable?
• Supply
• Qualification
• Transportation
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
7
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.1	 Single-Use Technologies
SUSs differ in many ways from conventional MUSs. When examining whether a technically feasible 
single-use solution exists, the end user should evaluate process operating parameters and require-
ments in relation to traditional systems:
• Process and product are compatible with materials of construction
• Process volume, temperature, pH, pressure, and flow rate are within specifications
• Oxygen, moisture, or light barrier properties of the system are adequate for the process
• Specific process components can be sterilized
• Process monitoring and sampling strategy exists for the critical operating parameters
• Access ports and connection technology are available to perform the operation
• Mixing technology meets the uniformity needs of the process
• Weight, size, and physical strength of SUS meet the needs of the process and facility
After an organization determines that a technical solution exists for a single-use solution, other con-
siderations to be included in the final decision to implement an SUS are as follows:
• Does the implementation of SUS impact existing process equipment that will need modification to 
optimize use of an SUS?
• What is the impact on cost and material management of customization, given that custom manu-
facturing of small quantities is less effective for suppliers?Although there are advantages to using 
a supplier’s standard configurations, in some cases the SUS itself may require customization to ac-
commodate an individual organization’s needs. 
• What is the potential impact on facility design and utility requirements?
The end user’s approach to the determination of technical feasibility should be recorded in a risk-
analysis document that is consistent with the methods outlined in ICH Q9, and it should include 
process-specific considerations such as (4):
• The stage of the SUS application
• Process performance or capability
• Process scale
• Product quality attributes
• Batch production rates
• Factors affecting system design (e.g., process compatibility, component reliability, facility design, 
storage and materials handling, and/or transportation)
3.2	 Business Drivers for the Adoption of Single-Use Systems
The decision between a single-use and a multiple-use process solution is often heavily influenced by a desire 
to reduce costs, increase the flexibility of a facility, and accelerate the drug development process. To that end, 
a structural comparative model that analyzes the cost of production, capital, quality, and process develop-
ment, combined with the time constraints of the project, can be developed. The model’s level of accuracy 
and detail should be suitable for the decision under consideration and should incorporate company-specific 
information wherever possible. A holistic model takes into account many factors that are useful for deciding 
if a greenfield facility is needed as opposed to a retrofit of existing applications. Often, a simplified model 
may be sufficient for an initial decision of whether SUS should be considered. The important point to consid-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
8
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
er is that an economic analysis needs to be done to support any important decision, and this is best done right 
from the start as part of developing a high-level manufacturing strategy. The following lists include examples 
of elements that may be considered when evaluating the business rationale for implementation of an SUS.
Capital Design
• Capital investment
• Equipment costs
• Utilities costs
• Facility floor space (cleanroom versus lower 
classification, production area versus warehouse)
• Validation—costs of validation clean-in-place 
and steam-in-place systems, facility environment
• Cost of retrofitting the facility for a new 
product or purpose
• Commissioning—costs associated with 
start-up and validation, testing, and 
documentation
• Cost of capital—borrowing costs
Operating Costs: Day-to-Day Variable Costs
• Labor
• Utilities and energy
• Waste management (solid and liquid, disposal 
versus recycling)
• Sterilization
• Cleaning
• Setup and changeover time and labor
• Amount lost to sterility failure or integrity losses
• Operation model make or buy SUS
• SUS run costs
• Inventory
• Media and buffer 
• Preventive maintenance 
• Value-added activities, quality audits of 
suppliers
• Multiple-product (MP) or single-product (SP) 
facility, changeover, testing, and regulatory 
submissions
Drug Development and Process Assessment
• Time-to-market and constraints
• Number of batches per year
• Number of products per year
• Product lifecycle—estimates of product 
demand over time
• Increased manufacturing time (may not fit 
existing manufacturing and quality processes)
• Process complexity
• Proximity to final drug presentation or 
container closures
• Workforce skill level
• Cost of active ingredients and intermediates
• Health, safety, and the environment (HSE) 
(e.g., biosafety, toxicity, occupational health, 
and industrial hygiene)
• Multiple-product or single-product facility
Time
• Process uptime
• Construction time
• Time constraints
• Regulatory milestones
• Expected market competition milestones
• Expected product launch date
• Product demand growth rate
• Inventory build time line
• Equipment and component assembly
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
9
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Green Manufacturing
• Environmental concerns for manufacturing process
• SUS waste generation
• Resources for waste management
• Design for sustainability
Value-Added Activities
• Cost of quality and cost of failure
• Quality, compliance, validation, calibration, operations
• Outsourced activities, make versus buy SUS
• Expedited transfer of manufacturing site to new location, reducing the time required to accommo-
date demand for additional product 
Modeling will be highly dependent on specific circumstances and may result in different outcomes, 
dependent on model design, scale, timing, facility fit, product demand, and process frequency. For 
these reasons, it is not possible to make specific model design recommendations in this report. Every 
organization handles economic and process modeling differently. The concepts are presented in this 
report so the reader is aware that modeling plays an important role in supporting the decision process. 
Readers should reach out to others in their organization to decide how to best develop models for 
their organization. The following tools and resources may be useful to aid the decision process:
• ICH Q9 Risk Assessment Tools, FMEA, fishbone, fault tree, HACCP (4)
• Comparative matrix
• Internal cost databases
• Cost-of-goods modeling
• Comprehensive cost models
3.3	 Qualification and Verification of Suppliers, Materials, 
Components, and Completed Assemblies
Any adverse effect on product quality and, hence, patient safety must be the main concern when 
the end user performs a risk assessment of an SUS. An assessment of critical operational parameters 
must be performed in order to determine the potential impact of an SUS on product quality. In this 
exercise, the end user must take into account the potential for interaction between process fluid and 
the materials of construction of the process equipment.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
10
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
3.3.1	 Product Risk
The potential impact of the SUS on the product quality is a key area to be assessed through a risk-
based approach considering its proximity to the final product, the processing stage, and product re-
quirements. The following are examples of specific considerations for potential interactions between 
SUS and product fluids:
• An SUS is a defined system, which may minimize the risk of both microbial and chemical contamination.
• SUSs are susceptible to generation of particulates during the fabrication and operation of the system.
• SUS minimizes risk of cross-contamination when they are used once or in campaign manufacturing 
of a single drug substance.
• An SUS will contribute to the leachables present in a process. An assessment of impact can be made 
by 1) Identifying potential leachables through an extractables study and 2) Conducting further studies 
should an extractables study identify materials of concern.
Product impact considerations typically include:
• Sterility
• Degradation, or binding to the product molecule
• Adsorption of the product molecule or product pool
• Adsorption of the functional component of the media or buffer
• Interactions between leachables or their breakdown products with the product molecule or 
formulation or the process materials of construction
• Technical limitations of the SUS, which could lead to suboptimal processing, poor cell growth, low 
yields, or impact to product-critical quality attribute (e.g., limitation of temperature control may impact 
MAB glycan profile)
• Changes in the light, gas, moisture, or other barrier to the surroundings, which could cause oxidation 
or chemical reaction of the product molecule, product pool, or media components
In addition to product quality considerations, incorporating an SUS may affect key operating param-
eters at different process steps and potentially the control strategy for the entire process. An assess-
ment for each process step, as well as the entire process, should include the following considerations:
• Impact on system integrity (may be positive or negative)
• Estimation of risk of equipment or system failure for both SUS and MUS, including downtime for 
correcting potential failures and backup equipment required (e.g., maintaining an ISO 5/Grade A-B 
area for connections if an SU connector fails or designing the connection for backup sterile tube 
welding if a connector fails)
• Size limitations of an SUS as compared to an MUS
• Productivity impacts when using SUS as compared to an MUS approach
• Verification activities, such as system integrity or leaks, compared to an MUS approach
• Supplier and vendor supply-chain transparency, change control, communication, product quality, 
and supply security
• Proximity of the SUS to the final drug product
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
11
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.4	 Process Control Strategy Considerations
The monitoring capability of single-use and multiple-use systems may differ. Some points to keep in 
mind include the following:
• When deciding between reusable and single-use probes, balance the cost per batch to generate the 
desired data, control of sensor calibration, cleaning validation requirements, and probe accuracy 
and reliability.
• Consider and assess impact from potential differences in automation level; SUSs typically include 
more manual controls dependent on operator training and execution. Some SUSs may incorporate 
proprietary support framework and control systems at comparable costs to traditional process skids; 
however, this significantly limits SUS interchangeability. To avoid this problem, the end user may 
wish to adopt cross-platform supervisory control and data application (SCADA) systems, which 
provide greater flexibility and portability.
• Consider that an SUS may affect how adjustments to the process are made (e.g., adjusting pH, 
adding solids, foam control); in some cases these adjustments may not be possible with SUS.
• Note that qualifying and calibrating probes and the measurement system before use may be 
more complicated or not possible if a single-use probe is built into a presterilized system. Batch 
documentation practices for recording sensor calibration may be different for SUS.
• Evaluate dependency on the supplier’s and vendor’s quality system and qualification activities.
• Account for the possibility of smaller batch sizes with increased frequency or sub-batch or batch 
pooling due to smaller container volumes.
3.5	 Implementation of a Single-Use System
Implementation includes all of the activities required for the realization of the end user’s manufactur-
ing strategy. Since the manufacturing strategy is an assessment of feasibility informed by evaluation 
of the considerations from the sections on technology, business drivers, qualification, and implemen-
tation in this report, it provides a framework for implementation of the specific situation evaluated. 
However, each evaluation performed will be unique.
Furthermore, since time-to-clinic and time-to-market are becoming increasingly important factors 
for making implementation decisions, a comparative implementation assessment has become a cru-
cial requirement. A well-thought-out and thorough implementation plan is important for successful 
implementation of an SUS. The implementation process is organized as a road map with a series of 
gateways between stages. The workflow should be organized around the following themes.
3.5.1	 Stakeholder Management
Successful implementation of an SUS may require an active analysis of the effects of the implemen-
tation on the organization and stakeholder management. Broad implementation of SUS across an 
organization can impose certain organizational strains and stresses and problems may arise which 
have to be considered and dealt with.
3.5.2	 Risk Management
The use of formal risk-assessment methods during SUS implementation provides a means for quan-
titative comparisons of risk related to MUS versus SUS to assist in decision making and stakeholder 
management (7).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
12
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
3.5.3	 Process Validation and Verification (PVV)
The PVV strategy for an SUS differs from that of an MUS. Therefore, the end user must be aware 
that traditional qualification activities may have limited value for an SUS implementation without the 
confidence that the supplier’s production processes are of a high enough caliber and the end user’s 
process is sufficiently robust to tolerate any variations of the SUS by the supplier (8).
3.5.4	 Scoping
This segment of the implementation plan contains a detailed description of the technical scope of the 
SUS project; it complements the manufacturing strategy by providing global guidance and policies to 
be applied for SU applications across the project.
3.5.5	 Project Execution Plan (PEP)
A PEP provides a detailed description of the project, the execution strategy, management, and com-
pliance in order to attain project goals in terms of budget, time, and quality. This includes a policy for 
the identification and selection of suppliers, which will encourage the creation of a transparent rela-
tionship and help prevent the selection of equipment and suppliers from becoming an ad hoc process. 
An example PEP is shown in Section 9, Appendix II: SUS Facility Project Execution Plan Example.
3.5.6	 End-User Requirements
This section of the plan provides a description of the end user’s requirements for the SUS, including 
E&L and standardization in preparation for the equipment procurement process.
3.5.7	 Testing and Documentation
Following delivery and installation, the user will develop methods and documentation for equipment 
SOPs; maintenance; qualification and process validation; the HSE plan; and personnel training.
3.5.8	 Supplier Management
The effective management of SUS suppliers must include periodic review meetings involving the 
analysis of the supplier’s performance during the previous period for quality and punctuality. Business 
review meetings should also include collaborative planning and effective forecasting of future de-
mands in order to take effective advantage of the supplier’s resources, lower the costs of maintaining 
capacity, and eliminate spikes in demand that may affect lead times. Appropriate supply and quality 
agreements must be in place to clearly communicate expectations to critical suppliers.
Drug master files provided by either the polymer compound or film supplier can be referred to, how-
ever, they may not exist for all applications and the level of detailed of the information may vary by 
submission. The polymer compound formulations (type and levels of additives), for example, may 
only list the highest amount of the additives that can be included in the polymer rather than specify-
ing the actual specification range of additives. In any case the information is not available to the end 
user so it is preferable to receive the information in the form of a regulatory support file.
3.5.9	 Logistics Control Requirements
A logistics control strategy is a critical part of the implementation of an SUS because the end user 
relies on the supplier’s production and quality systems to a higher degree than for the implementation 
of an MUS. The following factors are important for an effective logistics control strategy.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
13
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.5.9.1	Inventory and Supply Chain Management
A thorough analysis of the entire supply chain is necessary in order to safeguard the supply of important 
materials for undisrupted SUS production. Such an analysis must encompass the supply and inventory 
strategy of the vendors who supply components and materials to SUS manufacturers in addition to the 
supply and inventory strategies of the SUS suppliers themselves. SUS suppliers have a responsibility to 
protect the security and supply of their finished goods by appropriate risk analyses and risk-mitigation 
strategies for the materials and components they purchase. It is incumbent on the end user to confirm 
that these strategies are adequate to maintain the continuity of supply. If the supplier’s control strategies 
fall short of expectations, the end user may mitigate the risk of supply interruption by qualifying second-
ary sources or putting specific inventory management and supply agreements in place. 
3.5.9.2	Waste
Operation of an SUS leads to an increased amount of solid waste compared to an MUS. An SUS 
waste-management strategy must include:
• Collecting, storing, and inactivating waste in the facility
• Avoiding cross-contamination
• Monitoring the waste-management activities of subcontractors
3.5.9.3	Transportation
All aspects of transportation and holding must be understood for their role in maintaining integrity 
of the material throughout the supply chain. SU Technology requires additional care be taken dur-
ing the entire supply chain; transportation, receiving, storage and delivery to the point of use. Some 
considerations are:
• Maintain integrity of material throughout the supply chain.
• An SUS must have a control strategy (such as supplier qualification, ID tests, or statistical analysis) 
of any product contacting materials to assure performance of critical components. Note that 
testing incoming components will in many cases be impractical beyond confirming the package 
and label, since SUS are typically not fully unpacked until the point of use.
• Ensure proper warehousing and inventory management.
• SU processes place additional demands on a warehouse. Consider shelf space and support 
functions for a warehouse and ways of improving delivery time, maintaining integrity, and 
documenting chain of custody from the vendor
3.5.9.4	Single Suppliers
In cases where an SUS component, film, or integrated assembly may be unique and proprietary, mak-
ing it difficult to find and qualify a second supplier, the risk (including mitigation efforts and additional 
equipment needed to ensure uninterrupted supply) must be recorded in a risk-assessment document.
In some cases, sole source situations may exist with intellectual property (IP) protections, which need 
to be addressed with special contractual provisions in the event that the supplier is no longer able to 
provide the SUS in the future.
3.5.9.5	Change notifications
The end user must make sure that a change notification agreement is in place with suppliers (includ-
ing third-party suppliers) and that such an agreement provides enough time to assess the effects of any 
changes on SUS functionally. Predictable, controlled transitions and ongoing operations of an SUS de-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
