85
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7.3	 Implementation S3: Scoping
The project scoping process provides a source of information that is complementary to that obtained from a 
definition of the manufacturing strategy (Section 3). Scoping identifies pertinent information that may affect 
conception (e.g., potential materials, science, and facility operational requirements) and establishes the prin-
ciples for conceiving, selecting, and operating the SUS. Once the basic strategy is defined, this information is 
applied in S4 to define process and facility requirements (Section 7.4.2). Technical guides that may assist the 
SUS scoping process are available from the website of Bioprocess Systems Alliance (BPSA) (79).
7.3.1	 SUS Strategy
The output of the scoping process is the SUS strategy document. This is a primary reference document that 
provides overall guidance and policies for SU applications across the entire project. It may be combined with 
outputs from S1 and S2 if more elaborate evaluations were performed during those stages. However, if the 
organization of the road map is changed, care should be exercised that the implementation process does not 
lose structure and that the comprehensive treatment of all of the elements necessary remains in place. The 
SUS strategy is normally a short and concise document with a global technical vision outlining how SUS 
control strategies would integrate with quality systems and international GMPs.
The strategy also highlights key topics and clarifies their roles within the SUS. This is important be-
cause propitious decisions made at the beginning of the implementation process can save consider-
able time, effort, and money in later stages. For instance, it is critical that the selection of SUS equip-
ment and suppliers is not allowed to become an ad hoc process. This issue can be problematic for 
large companies as well as small to medium enterprises. Lack of control over this decision at an early 
stage can lead to equipment redundancies and using more suppliers than necessary. Depending on the 
circumstances, this can be considered to be a form of technology overdosing (i.e., too many suppliers 
or no coordination across company functional areas). Although having a straightforward relationship 
with suppliers is essential, dealing with too many suppliers can significantly increase the resources and 
supplier qualification effort required at later implementation stages.
Equally important, consider the case in which an SUS is supplied as part of a raw material in a ready-
to-use format (e.g., a ready-made culture media in which the media container is an SUS). Regardless 
of whether this was an occasional order or made via a supply agreement, the end user would need 
to make sure that the supplied components adhere to the same quality standards as all the other SUS 
components. Such a scenario may represent an SUS-inherited implementation because the end user 
acquires the product but does not necessarily have a choice about the technology source.
The following paragraphs describe key subjects that should be addressed in the SUS strategy document.
7.3.2	 Business Drivers
It is important to review the business drivers for SUS implementation. Sometimes, an SUS may be 
used for predevelopment prior to a requirement for GMP (e.g., in a small-scale and disposable multi-
reactor robotic screening system). Much larger SUSs can be deployed when process development 
or manufacturing services are required during advanced stages of the product lifecycle. Economic 
considerations (i.e., the desire to reduce costs) tend to become the most critical business drivers for 
selecting either an MUS or an SUS. Other factors are quality-improvement drivers such as contain-
ment or the need to avoid cross contamination. End users may need to adapt the policies described in 
this report to their specific situation and review them regularly. This is because it may be necessary to 
determine how the quality system, GMP, and PVV fit into the overall process.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
86
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
7.3.3	 Operating Scenarios and Standardization
Developing operating scenarios and standardization offers end users the opportunity to define specific rules, 
policies, or principles for key issues relevant to the implementation process, for example, the type of multi-
purpose operations in use or the selection of production by campaign. More examples are described later 
in this section. An example of the practical application of standardization can be found in the literature (80).
7.3.4	 Process Validation Stage
It is important to define the SUS project within the process validation lifecycle because it affects the 
subsequent approach to PVV. Predevelopment systems (prior to PVV S1) would not necessarily be 
subject to the same quality requirements as that for later-stage processes involving GMP. Conversely, 
the starting materials for some medicinal products, such as those for cell therapy, could be isolated at 
a very early stage in the product development lifecycle, and their exploitation may require extensive 
PVV and careful handling to ensure process compatibility and regulatory compliance.
7.3.5	 Operating Volumes and Storage Requirements
The end user should define operating and storage volumes for static and mobile requirements. A 
maximum mobile volume (i.e., the maximum allowable volume for manual transportation within the 
plant) above 500 L may be difficult to transport and may significantly affect the floor space required in 
the facility. In addition, such large equipment may be subject to HSE regulations.
7.3.6	 Hybrid Systems
The end user should evaluate the requirements for connections that combine SU and MU systems 
(e.g., CIP or SIP). The principles that ensure operator safety and product integrity must be defined. 
Any MUS parts that require manual cleaning and autoclaving must be defined and specified.
7.3.7	 Connection Principles
The end user should define the requirements and principles of operation that apply to the various 
connection applications. These principles should include the types of connections allowed or em-
ployed, according to process circumstances and regulatory requirements.
7.3.8	 Campaigning
Although there are specific situations where an SUS container might be refilled and used in a single 
campaign (e.g., where a large buffer tank is used to refill a single SUS storage vessel without breaking 
the sterile barrier), reusing SUS is not recommended. It is preferable to define a position from a risk-
based perspective against reusing SU components. Multiple caustic cycles over an SU column may be 
used to process several pools from a batch or series of harvests, but SU tubing circuits in processing 
skids may not be able to withstand repeated caustic cycles. Therefore, while the SU columns may be 
campaigned, the SU tubing circuits may need to be replaced for each cycle.
7.3.9	 Future Deployment
Significant productivity gains can be achieved by deploying and exploiting SUS over MUS. For ex-
ample, there can be significant differences in maintenance costs, batch-to-batch turnaround, and staff-
ing requirements (81). Standard principles must be reviewed and identified for activities involving the 
hands-on steps required to successfully assemble and make a system ready for use for a specific SUS 
application. Including a defined setup and deployment stage, with standardized activities for each 
part, is a recognized success factor for SUS implementation, and this should be a routine part of the 
workflow and planning for each SUS application.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
87
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7.3.10	 Sourcing
The end user should determine whether the SUS would be sourced from exterior suppliers or ven-
dors (i.e., designed, constructed, and delivered) or self-made (i.e., designed, prepared, and operated 
on-site). Some applications and business drivers may implicitly require a clear policy, so a risk-based 
approach should always be used. A self-made SUS would have to meet the following requirements:
• Has specifications
• Has batch process records
• Meets qualification criteria including sterility
• Has a change-control process in place
• Passes stability studies if necessary
It is essential to verify that both internally and externally sourced SUSs meet the same quality standards.
7.3.11	 Testing Strategy
An SUS strategy should define the principles and aims of any in-house testing program that would be 
proposed as part of the implementation process. This may include the collection of supplier testing 
data and controls. Testing strategies should be discussed in detail with the supplier, and quality agree-
ments should allow for the exchange of test data between a supplier and the end user.
7.3.12	 Materials
The strategy should define a position on single- or multiple-film usage. Reducing the number of ma-
terial specifications reduces confusion and errors. For example, using the same product-contact film 
may simplify the subsequent evaluation of extractables and leachables. However, it may also limit 
the range of available technical solutions. Although desirable, standardization within a single-film 
strategy may not be possible where multiple SUSs from different suppliers are used in an integrated 
process. Finally, the materials should be biocompatible and the end user should be aware of supplier 
testing procedures. Harmonizing the various testing methods that suppliers use could make it easier 
for end users to make comparisons between suppliers (see Table 5.5.2-1).
7.3.13 Shelf-Life Policy
The expiration and shelf-life policy needs to be defined. This is particularly important if the end user 
has a large number of different SUSs (from multiple suppliers or self-made assemblies). Note that 
some SUS suppliers may have their own definition of shelf life, and the end user should address and 
resolve these issues during policy definition.
7.3.14	 Procurement
The procurement process should be standardized. If the project deals with several suppliers, it may be 
necessary to make this a uniform process. The end user may need different strategies for purchasing 
occasional versus routine SUS equipment and components (Sections 7.4.10, 7.5.3, 7.7.1, and 7.7.2).
7.3.15	 Storage
The strategy document should define how SUS warehousing and logistical operations would be orga-
nized. A dedicated clean and controlled storage area is recommended.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
88
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
7.3.16	 Waste Treatment
The policy for waste treatment (i.e., how SUS solid waste would be handled and inactivated) should 
be defined, and the potential impact of carbon taxes must be taken into account. In addition, the end 
user must explore the feasibility of recycling some of the waste from SUSs.
7.3.17	 Non-GxP Issues
The end user should define any non-GxP issues that must be considered as part of the SUS implemen-
tation project. These issues are often quite diverse and can be local or country-specific (e.g., permits, 
tax credits, grants or subsidies, imposed supplier preferences, or safety-related concerns).
7.3.18 Sustainability
A key point is that in general, SUSs are more sustainable and have less adverse environmental effects 
than traditional MUSs. The SUS strategy should define a policy that includes these principles. Some 
examples would be fossil fuel depletion and energy use, urban land occupation, pollution, green-
house gas emissions and ozone depletion, water depletion, and so on (82).
7.4	 Implementation S4: Business Case
This stage of implementation concerns the different business and technical scenarios that can influ-
ence user requirements and the implementation process. Examples of key business drivers include:
• Whether the project concerns drug substance or drug product
• Whether the project concerns the manufacture of preclinical material, investigational medicinal 
products (IMPs), or licensed product
• Whether the product is a biological or chemical entity
• Containment requirements
The main documentary output from S4 is the project execution plan (PEP). Important parameters for 
preparing the PEP (such as facility and process integration, technological survey, supplier selection, 
and supply chain) are discussed in the paragraphs that follow. Further details on the evaluation of 
business drivers can be found in Section 5.
7.4.1	 Project Execution Plan
The purpose of the PEP is to ensure that the goals of the project (i.e., budget, time, and quality) are 
met. It defines and describes:
• The project parameters
• Execution strategy
• Management
• Compliance
A detailed and structured PEP is critical to a well-organized implementation project. Other project 
documents such as a validation master plan (VMP) and user requirements may be used in PEP prepa-
ration or execution. Typically, the PEP would address the headings shown in Table 7.4.1-1. Materials 
management (Section 7.7.1) contains some additional points that may need to be addressed in the 
PEP. An example of a PEP for an SUS facility can be found in Section 9, Appendix 2. Additional 
examples of checklists, implementation experiences, and points to consider can be found in the lit-
erature (83–89).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
89
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 7.4.1-1	Typical Contents of the SUS Project Execution Plan
SUS Project Execution Plan
1. Introduction
Purpose
Context
Document history
Languages
Document templates
5. Project Execution Approach
Overview
Design
Contractors and subcontractors
Commissioning and qualification
9. Health, Safety, and Environment
Context
Specific issues
HSE plan
HSE stakeholders
Safety committees
2. Project Overview
Introduction
Client/user overview
History and scope
Objectives and drivers
Steering committee
6. Organization
Strategic partnerships
Organization and governance
Roles and responsibilities
Stakeholders
Conflict resolution
10. Implementation
Procurement
Delivery
Installation
Commissioning and qualification
Training
3. Contract Documents
Deliverables
Policies and strategies
Impact assessments
Technical plans
7. Quality
Quality strategy
Supplier qualifications
Quality activities plan
Document control
11.	Handover and Operational 
Support
Phases
Planning
Materials management
Debriefing
4. Scope
Engineering scope
Equipment and systems
Change management
8. Risk Management:
Approach
Risk mitigation strategies
Risk mitigation plan
12. Annex
Abbreviations
References
Complementary documents
The PEP, sometimes called a project implementation plan (PIP), provides a thorough and detailed 
description of the project. It complements other project documents such as the VMP, user require-
ments, and other non-GxP documentation, including environmental safety, waste-handling require-
ments, and inspections and building permits. Since not all projects involve the same level of complex-
ity, the PEP may need to be modified accordingly. Therefore, this table is for illustrative purposes. 
The final content of the PEP will depend on the approach to the project, risk-management level, and 
business drivers such as the nature of the product, lifecycle requirements, engineering policies, and 
project scale.
7.4.2	 Process and Facility Requirements: Basis of Approach
Process and facility requirements are key business drivers, and their consideration forms an impor-
tant part of the PEP preparation. SUSs can be integrated and deployed within existing processes and 
manufacturing facilities. However, when a high level of SUS integration is necessary, new facilities 
may be required because of the radical structural differences between SU and MU systems. For PEP 
preparation, SUS integration must be considered from the point of view of the engineering service, 
suppliers, and the end user. The outputs are three relatively simple documents which outline the 
implementation strategy: facility-, implementation-, and operational-level plans.
7.4.3	 Facility-Level Plan
This plan shows how the SUS fits into the facility design space together with other process equipment, 
and it summarizes different functional situations.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
90
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
7.4.4	 Implementation-Level Plan
This contains the parameters that affect the supplier during the production, marketing, and supply 
of SUS for off-the-shelf or customized systems. In addition, it describes the parameters that influence 
the end user during the creation of self-made or in-house SUSs.
7.4.5	 Operational-Level Plan
This describes the parameters for SUS integration (i.e., assembly, connection, and deployment) in 
readiness for manufacturing. It is essential to review each of these factors thoroughly because they 
provide the necessary content to complete the PEP and subsequent documents. The operational-level 
plan contains elements from manufacturing and SUS strategies. The input and output documents for 
SUS integration are illustrated in Figure 7.4.5-1.
Figure 7.4.5-1	
SUS Process and Facility Integration
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
91
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7.4.6	 Facility-Level Integration Plan
This is normally a concise document that describes the integration of the SUS into the facility design 
space (87). Robust process knowledge is a prerequisite for defining the various operational situations 
of the facility. It is critical to adopt a holistic approach because several factors (e.g., compliance, en-
vironment, operational requirements, and the compatibility of processes and equipment) may affect 
the successful operation of the SUS. These factors depend on the nature and properties of the prod-
uct (e.g., biological or chemical entity) and the requirements for containment. Figure 7.4.6-1 provides 
a conceptual representation of how the successive steps in facility-level integration may be achieved. 
Some of the most relevant parameters to consider include:
• Product type
• Sterile or nonsterile processing
• Product volume
• Lifecycle
• Available surface footprint
• Dependence on utilities
• Flexibility of facility design 
• Avoiding cross-contamination
• Level of segregation and dedication
• Environment (e.g., room air grade, 
containment)
• Personnel interactions
• Process validation (may be necessary when 
the equipment used in scale-up changes in 
terms of volume, aspect ratio, or between 
MUS and SUS)
Figure 7.4.6-1	
Process and Facility Considerations for SUS Implementation
The chart on the left side of the figure depicts a holistic vision of a facility from the top-level processes 
that created it (outside rings) to the process design space (inside ring). The key points to address dur-
ing implementation are illustrated as a stakeholder pathway. The triangle and the down-facing arrow 
on the right show how the risk from biological or chemical potency may affect the amount of dedica-
tion/segregation and containment necessary at all levels within the manufacturing site.
A structured risk-based approach should be used to prepare the facility plan, starting with the manu-
facturing strategy prepared in S1 and S2, and the SUS implementation strategy prepared in S3.
Process mapping and regulatory assessment tables (RATs) are additional tools for defining facility re-
quirements. Process mapping identifies operating scenarios and potential CQAs, while a RAT enables 
cross-referencing to key GMP factors and other regulatory requirements where it is appropriate for 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
92
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
the user to document their policy regarding those regulations (i.e., how they intend to practically ad-
dress those requirements) (87). The use of good engineering practice (GEP) also complements this 
strategy by providing a framework for the application of key concepts (e.g., project engineering, com-
mon practices, and operations and maintenance) (90). Examples include non-GxP compliance, design 
reviews, change management, equipment maintenance, and lifecycle management. Table 7.4.6-1 
shows an example of a RAT.
Table 7.4.6-1	
Example of a Regulatory Assessment Table
ICH Q7A - Basic Requirements for Active Substances Used as Starting Materials:
Specific Guidance for APIs Manufactured by Cell Culture/Fermentation
Section
Excerpt from ICH Q7A
User Policy for Meeting Each Requirement
18.30
“Where aseptic addition of cell substrates, me-
dia, buffers, and gases is needed; closed or con-
tained systems should be used where possible. If 
the inoculation of the initial vessel or subsequent 
transfers or additions (media, buffers) are per-
formed in open vessels, there should be controls 
and procedures in place to minimize the risk of 
contamination.”
All aseptic additions will be performed as closed 
processes within closed systems. SUS must 
be presterilized; MUS must have received a SIP 
treatment. 
18.31
“Where the quality of the API [active pharma-
ceutical ingredient] can be affected by microbial 
contamination, manipulations using open vessels 
should be performed in a bio-safety cabinet or 
similarly controlled environment.”
A risk-based approach will be used to determine 
whether a particular manipulation might be 
affected by microbial contamination. If a 
process step is considered to be at particular 
risk, for example, where an open connection 
should be made, these open steps will always 
take place in a microbiological safety cabinet 
under EU-GMP Grade A with background Grade 
B conditions.
18.34
“Cell culture equipment should be cleaned and ster-
ilized after use. As appropriate, fermentation equip-
ment should be cleaned and sanitized or sterilized.”
Process equipment used for upstream production 
runs will be sourced as an SUS and, as such, will 
be used only once.
18.38
“Shared (multiproduct) equipment may warrant 
additional testing after cleaning between product 
campaigns, as appropriate, to minimize the risk of 
cross-contamination.”
Some equipment used in the production process 
may be an SUS-MUS hybrid. The CIP procedures 
for the MUS components (e.g., steel sampling 
valves) will consist of a decontamination step by 
SIP or autoclaving followed by a defined and con-
trolled cleaning procedure. These processes will 
be validated. 
This table is an example based on Chapter 18 of ICH Q7A (EU-GMP Part II) (2). Other regulatory 
texts can also be exploited in this manner. A RAT is used to cull the sections of a regulatory text that 
are most applicable to the project and to document the company’s position with regard to each cho-
sen paragraph. This helps to identify the key strategies or policies that may be required. A RAT can 
be a useful supplement as part of a risk-management-based approach to developing situations for 
facility-operating scenarios.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
93
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7.4.7	 Equipment-Level Integration Plan
This brief document describes factors influencing the supplier or end user during the construction, 
marketing, and supply of the SUS as an off-the-shelf, customized, or self-made system. Some of the 
parameters for verification are:
• Position in the product lifecycle and making 
sure that it is compatible with future GMP 
and quality systems 
• Working volumes
• Transport conditions
• Handling or moving the system, and 
protecting it during this process
• Physical support (e.g., whether the system can 
support itself or requires a supporting structure)
• Physical parameters
• Flow rates for gases and liquids
• Temperature range (e.g., cold storage to 
process conditions)
• Heating and cooling requirements
• Agitation and mixing
• Pressure
• Sterilization or chemical sanitation cycles
• Chemical compatibilities (e.g., organic 
solvents, gas permeability)
• Direct-impact phenomena (e.g., cellular 
growth kinetics)
• Biocontainment capabilities
• Standardization
• Control systems and their validation
• Autonomy [i.e., does the system require a 
uninterrupted power supply (UPS) in case of 
power failure?]
At S4, it is generally assumed that 1) sufficient process knowledge exists to enable a coherent review 
of the design factors that must be built into the SU, and 2) this would be performed from a risk-based 
perspective. Some of the most relevant design factors are:
• Construction materials
• Physical properties
• Microbial control methods
• Size and volume
• Physical parameters
• Direct-impact phenomena (e.g., contact time, 
E&L, biocompatibility)
For many end users, establishing a close partnership with major SUS suppliers allows them to lever-
age their extensive experience in the process field. Adopting customized SUS or using inexperienced 
suppliers would increase risk, although this may be mitigated by on-site SUS testing. The onus is on 
the end user to ascertain the compatibility of process, equipment, and facility design space from a 
risk-based perspective (Sections 7.4.10 and 7.7).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
94
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
7.4.8	 Operational-Level Integration Plan
This describes the parameters for SUS integration (i.e., assembly, connection, and deployment) in read-
iness for manufacturing. A risk-based approach should be used because of the structural and functional 
diversity of SUSs (91). Some of the important parameters to consider during deployment include:
• Packaging and container integrity — It must be determined whether preuse leak testing of SUS 
is feasible. Manufacturing, shipping, handling, and operational procedures should be qualified to 
maintain SUS integrity. This can be achieved by implementing control strategies within the end 
user’s organization and between supplier and end user.
• SUS testing and release — Testing and release vary with use. The same off-the-shelf system 
may have different test and release criteria depending on process-, product-, regulatory-, and user-
imposed requirements.
• Reuse of components — In general, reuse of SUSs is not recommended. The policy for 
this should have been established in the SUS strategy (Section 7.2.1.7). However, there are 
circumstances in which the reuse of SUS may be acceptable (e.g., use of a container as a mixing 
vessel or reservoir for buffer concentrates in which there are no broken connections). A risk 
analysis should be performed to determine if the risks are acceptable.
• Training — Appropriate personnel training is essential because the collapse of a bag may lead 
to stress cracks that could result in a loss of structural and functional integrity. Training topics 
might include the use of different sterile connection and disconnection devices or techniques for 
avoiding bag creases or holes during deployment. 
• Shelf life — A coherent expiration and shelf-life policy should be implemented, especially in 
situations in which the end user has a large number of different SUSs from multiple suppliers or 
local, self-made assemblies.
• Quality assurance — Ensuring quality during deployment should be addressed at an early stage 
of implementation. Technical diligence may enhance this goal (Section 7.4.10 and 7.7.3).
7.4.9	 Technological Survey
The aim of this document is to complement the information gathered as part of the manufacturing 
strategy (Sections 3.0, 7.0, and 7.1). Depending on when the manufacturing strategy is written, an 
update to the document may be necessary. However, if a greater level of information is obtained in S1 
and entry into the full implementation process takes place at G4, then this survey can be omitted. Ad-
aptations of the implementation road map are addressed in Section 7.1. However, if the organization 
of the road map is changed, care should be exercised that the implementation process does not lose 
structure and that the comprehensive treatment of all of the elements necessary remains in place.
The components for SUS implementation often come from a range of suppliers, and a SWOT-type assess-
ment (i.e., strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) may be used to evaluate and compare solutions. 
The aim is to make sure that the best available technology is selected while also obtaining pertinent informa-
tion for including any further requirements in the specification process. Sources of information may include:
• Suppliers
• In-house know-how
• Industry networks and 
associations
• Journals
• Conferences
• Industry guidelines
Suppliers may be considered as stakeholders.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
95
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7.4.10	 Supplier Selection and Supply-Chain Review
The aim of this review is to determine a policy for the identification and selection of suppliers in order 
to complete the PEP and project planning.
The selection of appropriate SUS suppliers can often be an arduous task that can be made less cum-
bersome with a risk-management approach. For a successful SUS implementation, it is essential to 
have a detailed and transparent relationship between suppliers, vendors, and the end user. This re-
quires good communication and understanding of stakeholder management in order to garner the 
expectations of both the suppliers and the end users. Being able to share pertinent information with 
suppliers at the early stages of the project may speed up the design process. Note that in order to 
obtain full benefits from this approach, the exchange of uni- or bilateral confidential disclosure agree-
ments (CDA) may be required. The implementation and management of an end user–supplier rela-
tionship via technical diligence is described in Section 7.7.3. Suppliers provide material data, advice 
on applying typical designs, and the following documents:
• Process flow diagrams (PFDs)
• Piping and Instrumentation Diagrams 
(P&IDs)
• Component lists
• Physical layout proposals
• Operation manuals
• Pricing
• Qualification packages, including guidelines 
on E&L, for example
For both large companies and SMEs, it is critical to prevent the selection of equipment and suppliers 
from becoming an ad hoc process because that can lead to unnecessary and costly redundancies. In ad-
dition, working with too many suppliers may divert limited resources that could otherwise be gainfully 
employed in other parts of the SUS implementation process. Since the degree of business integration of 
a particular SUS supplier may depend on the size, location, and SUS assembly concerned, it is important 
to adopt a risk-mitigation approach to SUS supplier qualification and validation (Section 7.7.3).
Starting materials such as resins and films should be treated as critical raw materials as part of the 
verification process due to the complexity of SUS implementation (18). It is important to begin the 
supplier technical diligence (i.e., obtaining a thorough understanding of the SUS product, supplier, 
and compatibility of the SUS with the end user’s process and facility) at this stage. These principles 
are based on established procedures for critical raw materials as recommended by the Association 
for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology (APIC) due diligence process, ASTM E2500-
07 vendor technical capability as part of the PVV process (Figure 7.2.7.1-1), and quality by design 
(QbD)-inspired raw materials qualification processes (18,92–94). Full details on how to implement the 
technical diligence process are described in Section 7.7.3. Note that this task may require the exchange 
of uni- or bilateral CDAs or nondisclosure agreements (NDA).
The quality of the entire supply chain should be assessed, qualified, and implemented via a structured 
risk-management process (72). All parties in the supply chain should make sure that their activities 
maintain business continuity and support the health of patients. SUS equipment that is purchased 
occasionally may be done on a contractual basis, but a quality and supply agreement must be used to 
buy routine SUS equipment (Sections 7.5.7 and 7.7.12).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
96
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
7.4.11 Extractables and Leachables Database
It may be convenient for the end user to begin collecting E&L guidance and testing data. Note that 
this can also be implemented in the next stage, Implementation S5: Development. At a minimum, 
however, the end user should collect extractables data at this stage.
7.5	 Implementation S5: Development
During this stage, the SUS user requirements are developed, including layout and design, specifi-
cations, and standardization. Complete user requirements should precede the procurement process 
(e.g., commercial negotiations between strategic project partners or raising a purchase order).
7.5.1	 User Requirements for Implementation
User requirements should be prepared at the start of the development process. The principal user and 
stakeholders must be identified and their requirements obtained. The user requirements are based on 
product and process knowledge, critical quality attributes, and any relevant regulatory requirements. 
The principal user should also provide the justifications for the resources required to design, purchase, 
qualify, and implement any new process, system, or equipment. These justifications can be developed 
prior to selecting an SUS or supplier, or they may be developed for a particular system. Some or all of 
the requirements can be based on a QbD approach. In this case, the product and process-control strategy 
performed earlier in the QbD process will become a prerequisite for defining the SUS requirements.
User requirements and functional specifications may be recorded together in a single document for 
low-risk, small-scale SUS. However, multiple user requirements may be needed for complex systems 
or processes. In this case, it would be critical to avoid conflicts across multiple documents. Any neces-
sary conflicts must be identified and documented. The user requirements are created by the end user 
or on the end user’s behalf; however, some supplier documentation may be necessary to supplement 
this. Supplier documentation is acceptable if the supplier follows GEP (90), has an appropriate quality 
system, and is technically capable according to ASTM E2500-07 and PDA Technical Report No. 60: Process 
Validation — A Lifecycle Approach (8,18). In some cases, the supplier documentation could replace the 
company document. The user requirements are kept current throughout the system’s lifecycle and 
should be reevaluated after any change in intended use, user needs, or altered materials specifications 
(e.g., the films used, functional specifications, regulatory assessments or supplier quality audits, tech-
nical diligence). An example of a user requirements document is included in Section 8, Appendix 1.
7.5.2	 Preparing User Requirements
Brainstorming sessions, workshops, interviews, assessments, and ad hoc discussions may be used 
to gather pertinent information about the needs of the end user. Other useful information may be 
obtained from suppliers, case histories, and workflow analyses. These requirements may not be fully 
defined initially but may be developed further during subsequent phases of the project. It is crucial to 
determine the level of interest of each stakeholder has in the project and ensure that stakeholders re-
ceive adequate and regular communications throughout the SUS process lifecycle. User requirements 
statements must be written to a level of specificity that:
• Describes the SUS function
• Allows end users to verify that the system meets their functional requirements
• Addresses the compatibility of processes and materials (e.g., polymer films)
However, they must be general enough to avoid constraining the system design. If a supplier will provide 
specific functionality, then the user requirements must be specific enough to determine that functionality. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
97
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Any particular safety concerns and training needs resulting from the requirements should be noted for 
later implementation. Finally, make sure that a change-control process is in place for this process.
A functional risk-assessment approach may be used for further evaluation of critical requirements for 
the quality and function of the SUS. For instance, if an integrated SUS is composed of components 
from multiple sources, it may be necessary to identify the CQA of each component. An example 
would be a bioreactor system in which the hardware and SUS bags are sourced from different sup-
pliers. Requirements that are not deemed to satisfy CQA may be further evaluated to determine 
whether they express a regulatory requirement or not. The project team may apply other criteria 
such as priority, clinical development stage, importance to the business, and other factors that may 
influence company decisions.
7.5.3	 Layout and Design
The layout and design of the SUS can often be achieved using a standard design format; however, in 
certain cases, process-specific requirements may result in the need for a unique design process (refer 
to Section 4). A structured approach like the one from the S88 batch-automation standard may be 
used to attain completeness of design and control over interfaces because it focuses on the actual 
batch operations (95). This approach examines three key elements:
• Operations
• Equipment (reusable parts)
• Consumable materials (SU parts)
Start the design process with the functional requirements of the SUS in mind. Figure 7.5.3-1 provides 
an example of a scope drawing, and the accompanying listing below shows typical considerations for 
designing a generic SUS within this context.
Figure 7.5.3-1	
Example of SUS Installation Scope Drawing
This schematic representation of the flow path of an SUS facility shows that design meets both spatial 
requirements and container staging. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
98
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Typical Considerations:
Operations
• Transportation, delivery, and installation
• Process operations
• Ergonomics
• Sufficient space for operations
• Manufacturing operations, including the following staging processes:
• Setting up
• Charging
• Processing
• Feeding
• Discharging
• Storing
• Dismantling
Equipment (Reusable Parts)
• Bag support
• Control system
• Heating/cooling device
• Pumps
• Scales
• Tables
• Layout (i.e., the physical arrangement)
Materials (SU Parts)
• Process-containing part (e.g., bag, cartridge, 
capsule, membrane)
• Volume
• Agitation
• Footprint
• Sampling
• Sensors
• Inlets and outlets
• Films
• Tubing
• Connectors
7.5.4	 Specification
The design process produces a series of specifications for the proposed SUS. The user requirements 
cover both MU and SU parts and can be communicated through the following means:
• Descriptive text
• Calculation
• Diagrams, drawings, and PFDs
• Reference to existing equipment
Implementation of a periodic design review procedure is critical for success. The delivery and instal-
lation process must be examined carefully to ensure that the SUS will be delivered in a form that will 
integrate into the facility.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
99
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7.5.5	 Standardization Policy
Although the inherent flexibility at the core of SUS design is an advantage, it could degenerate into a 
disadvantage by introducing unwelcome variations in the supply chain if left unchecked. Therefore, 
introducing a standard design policy across the project may reduce the incidence of variations, espe-
cially as the scale of operations becomes more complex. Implement a standardization policy as part 
of the user requirements according to the following guidelines:
• Working volumes may be chosen so that bag ranges cover a series of application ranges.
• Connections and material on bags and tubing may be chosen so that several possibilities for 
connecting are maintained (e.g., providing weldable tubing and a typical connector together).
• Setting up an SU toolbox consisting of Y pieces, sample manifolds, and lengths of tubing for special 
or infrequent applications will allow a more specific design element to be attached to a more 
standardized bag design.
• An active standardization policy may have been defined as part of the SUS strategy (Section 7.2.1). 
If so, it may not be necessary to implement it at this stage.
7.5.6	 Extractables and Leachables
In some cases, an E&L database collection may have begun in S4 (Sections 5.6 and 7.4.11). If not, 
E&L data should be compiled now. Although there is no specific regulatory guidance document for 
E&L in SU systems, the USP, FDA, and EMA have extensive E&L guidance documents for SU tech-
nology (96-100). In addition, a number of cross-industry initiatives are in place to standardize the 
approach for SUS and achieve industry and regulatory consensus or provide a cross-industry database 
of current knowledge (100–102).
7.5.7	  Procurement
Although procurement procedures will differ from company to company, it is critical to make sure 
that the end user requirements and other relevant specifications are correctly used and that the SUS-
based equipment adheres to those specifications. It is important to maintain a close partnership be-
tween suppliers and end users in order to facilitate the procurement process. Some of the key points 
to consider are as follows:
• The main procurement process will be outlined and planned in the PEP.
• Key stakeholders must be identified and their roles and responsibilities must be clearly defined. This 
is extremely important in cases where procurement precedes the implementation of a quality and 
supply agreement.
• Contractual issues must be clearly defined. The end user’s legal team should have reviewed and, 
if necessary, negotiated any modification(s) to the supplier’s general terms and conditions of sale 
to ensure that the user’s business, financial, and operational expectations are met (e.g., compliance 
with Incoterms 2011) (103).
• Good project planning and management principles must be carefully followed so that the project 
remains on track throughout its life.
• A change-notification process should be in place between the equipment supplier and the end user 
in order to monitor any design changes that take place at this point.
• Appropriate verifications must be conducted and the acceptance criteria met on a timely basis in 
order to avoid unnecessary delays.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
