 
 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR HARMONISATION OF TECHNICAL 
REQUIREMENTS FOR PHARMACEUTICALS FOR HUMAN USE 
 
 
ICH HARMONISED GUIDELINE 
 
 
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE DEVELOPMENT 
Q14 
 
 
Final Version  
Adopted on 1 November 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Guideline has been developed by the appropriate ICH Expert Working Group and 
has been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH 
Process. At Step 4 of the Process the final draft is recommended for adoption to the 
regulatory bodies of ICH regions. 
 
 
 
 
Q14 
Document History 
 
Code 
History 
Date 
Q14 
Endorsement by the Members of the ICH 
Assembly under Step 2 and release for public 
consultation  
24 March 2022 
Q14 
Adoption by the Regulatory Members of the 
ICH Assembly under Step 4 
1 November 2023 
Q14  
Error Corrections: Alignment of glossary 
terms (Intermediate precision, Performance 
Characteristic, Range, Reportable Range and 
Working Range) with ICH Q2(R2), Minor 
Format corrections to Table 1 and Table 6 and 
Figure 3 alignment to Table 6. 
4 April 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Legal notice: This document is protected by copyright and may, with the exception of the ICH 
logo, be used, reproduced, incorporated into other works, adapted, modified, translated or 
distributed under a public license provided that ICH's copyright in the document is acknowledged 
at all times.  In case of any adaption, modification or translation of the document, reasonable 
steps must be taken to clearly label, demarcate or otherwise identify that changes were made to 
or based on the original document.  Any impression that the adaption, modification or translation 
of the original document is endorsed or sponsored by the ICH must be avoided. 
The document is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind.  In no event shall the ICH or the 
authors of the original document be liable for any claim, damages or other liability arising from 
the use of the document. 
The above-mentioned permissions do not apply to content supplied by third parties.  Therefore, 
for documents where the copyright vests in a third party, permission for reproduction must be 
obtained from this copyright holder. 
 
i 
ICH HARMONISED GUIDELINE  
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE DEVELOPMENT 
Q14  
ICH Consensus Guideline 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................. 1 
1.1 
Objective  ................................................................................................................................. 1 
1.2 
Scope ........................................................................................................................................ 1 
2. 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES ........................ 1 
2.1 
Minimal versus Enhanced Approaches to Analytical Procedure Development ....................... 2 
2.2 
The Analytical Procedure Lifecycle ......................................................................................... 2 
3. 
ANALYTICAL TARGET PROFILE ................................................................................... 3 
4. 
KNOWLEDGE AND RISK MANAGEMENT IN ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 
DEVELOPMENT AND CONTINUAL IMPROVEMENT .......................................................... 4 
4.1 
Knowledge Management ......................................................................................................... 4 
4.2 
Risk Management .................................................................................................................... 4 
5. 
EVALUATION OF ROBUSTNESS AND PARAMETER RANGES OF ANALYTICAL 
PROCEDURES ................................................................................................................................. 5 
5.1 
Robustness ............................................................................................................................... 5 
5.2 
Analytical Procedure Parameter Ranges .................................................................................. 5 
6. 
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE CONTROL STRATEGY ................................................. 6 
6.1 
Established Conditions for Analytical Procedures ................................................................... 7 
7. 
LIFECYCLE MANAGEMENT AND POST-APPROVAL CHANGES OF 
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES ...................................................................................................... 7 
8. 
DEVELOPMENT OF MULTIVARIATE ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES: 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS ............................................................................................. 11 
9. 
DEVELOPMENT OF ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES FOR REAL TIME RELEASE 
TESTING: ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS ........................................................................ 14 
10. 
SUBMISSION OF ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE RELATED INFORMATION ........ 15 
10.1 General Regulatory Considerations and Documentation ....................................................... 15 
10.2 Documentation for the Enhanced Approach .......................................................................... 15 
10.3 Documentation for Multivariate Analytical Procedures  ....................................................... 15 
11. 
GLOSSARY .......................................................................................................................... 16 
12. 
REFERENCES ..................................................................................................................... 22 
13. 
ANNEX ................................................................................................................................. 23 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
ii 
 
13.1 Annex A: Examples of application of ICH Q14 principles .................................................... 23 
13.1.1 Measurement of Stereoisomers as Specific Process Related Impurities in a Small 
Molecule Drug Substance (DS) .............................................................................................. 25 
13.1.2 Measurement of Potency for an anti-TNF-alpha Monoclonal Antibody .................... 30 
13.2 Annex B: Example of Multivariate Model Lifecycle Components ....................................... 36 
 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
1 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Objective  
This guideline describes science and risk-based approaches for developing and maintaining 
analytical procedures suitable for the evaluation of the quality of drug substances and drug 
products. The systematic approach suggested in ICH Q8 Pharmaceutical Development together 
with principles of ICH Q9 Quality Risk Management can also be applied to the development 
and lifecycle management of analytical procedures. When developing an analytical procedure, 
a minimal (also known as traditional) approach or elements of an enhanced approach can be 
applied. Furthermore, the guideline describes additional considerations for the development of 
multivariate analytical procedures and for real time release testing (RTRT). 
This guideline complements ICH Q2 Validation of Analytical Procedures. 
Using the tools described in ICH Q12 Technical and Regulatory Considerations for 
Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle Management, the guideline describes principles to support 
change management of analytical procedures based on risk management, comprehensive 
understanding of the analytical procedure and adherence to predefined criteria for performance 
characteristics. Knowledge gained from application of an enhanced approach to analytical 
procedure development can provide better assurance of the performance of the procedure, can 
serve as a basis for the analytical procedure control strategy and can provide an opportunity 
for more efficient regulatory approaches to related post approval changes. 
The guideline also describes submission of analytical procedure development and related 
lifecycle information in the Common Technical Document (CTD) format (ICH M4Q, The 
Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use). 
Information related to analytical procedure development and knowledge may be submitted to 
regulatory authorities to provide additional evidence that the analytical procedure is fit for the 
intended purpose. While the minimal approach remains a valid approach, an applicant can 
decide to submit additional development data and knowledge which may facilitate regulatory 
communication for post approval change management. 
1.2 Scope 
This guideline applies to analytical procedures used for release and stability testing of 
commercial drug substances and products, hereafter referred to as ‘products’. The guideline can 
also be applied to other analytical procedures used as part of the control strategy (ICH Q10 
Pharmaceutical Quality System) following a risk-based approach. The scientific principles 
described in this guideline can be applied in a phase-appropriate manner to analytical 
procedures used during clinical development. 
2. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES 
The goal of development is to obtain an analytical procedure fit for the intended purpose: to 
measure an attribute or attributes of the material with the needed specificity/selectivity, 
accuracy, precision over the reportable range. Details of the performance characteristics 
considered for analytical procedure validation are described in ICH Q2. 
In this section the minimal and enhanced approaches to analytical procedure development are 
described. While the minimal approach remains an acceptable approach to development of a 
robust analytical procedure that is fit for the intended purpose, some or all elements of the 
enhanced approach might be used to support development and lifecycle management of 
analytical procedures. 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
2 
 
In certain cases, an analytical procedure can be applied to multiple products with little or no 
modification of measurement conditions. For a new application of such platform analytical 
procedures, the subsequent development can be abbreviated, and certain validation tests can be 
omitted based on a science- and risk-based justification. 
Data gained during the development studies (e.g., robustness data from a design of experiments 
(DoE) study) could be used as part of the validation data for the related analytical procedure 
performance characteristics and studies do not necessarily need to be repeated. 
2.1 Minimal versus Enhanced Approaches to Analytical Procedure Development  
Analytical procedure development should include the following elements as a minimum: 
• Identifying the attributes of the product which need to be tested; 
• Selecting an appropriate technology and related instruments or suitable apparatus; 
• Conducting studies to evaluate analytical procedure performance characteristics such as 
specificity, accuracy and precision over the reportable range (including the calibration 
model, lower and/or higher range limits) and robustness; 
• Documenting the analytical procedure including the analytical procedure control 
strategy. 
The enhanced approach offers a systematic way of developing and refining knowledge of an 
analytical procedure and demonstrating procedure understanding. Product and process 
understanding informs the quality attributes to be tested. The anticipated performance criteria 
for relevant performance characteristics should be documented in an analytical target profile 
(ATP). In addition to the elements of the minimal approach, an enhanced approach may include 
the following elements as appropriate: 
• Conducting risk assessment and evaluating prior knowledge to identify the analytical 
procedure parameters that can impact performance of the procedure; 
• Conducting uni- or multi-variate experiments and/or modelling to explore ranges and 
interactions between identified analytical procedure parameters; 
• Defining an analytical procedure control strategy including set-points and/or ranges for 
relevant analytical procedure parameters. These could include proven acceptable 
ranges for analytical procedures (PARs) and/or method operable design regions 
(MODRs). 
Applying elements of the enhanced approach to development can lead to a better understanding 
of the impact of analytical procedure parameters on the analytical procedure performance and 
more flexibility for lifecycle management, such as wider operating ranges and a more 
appropriate set of established conditions (ECs) with associated reporting categories. 
2.2 The Analytical Procedure Lifecycle 
Figure 1 depicts elements of the analytical procedure lifecycle as related to the product lifecycle. 
Analytical procedure development and change management approaches are described in this 
guideline whereas analytical procedure validation is described in ICH Q2. Depending on the 
intended purpose of the analytical procedure and the development approach taken, the order 
and extent of each element could vary, and several elements could occur simultaneously. 
 
 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
3 
 
Figure 1: The analytical procedure lifecycle 
 
 
3. ANALYTICAL TARGET PROFILE  
Product and process understanding (ICH Q8 and ICH Q11 Development and Manufacture of 
Drug Substances) leads to the identification of critical quality attributes (CQAs) requiring 
analytical measurement for control which may be included in the quality target product profile 
(QTPP). Measurement needs can be captured in an ATP which forms the basis for development 
of the analytical procedure. An ATP consists of a description of the intended purpose of the 
analytical procedure, appropriate details on the product attributes to be measured and relevant 
performance characteristics with associated performance criteria. The ATP includes 
measurement requirements for one or more quality attributes. The ATP drives the choice of 
analytical technology. Multiple available analytical techniques may meet the performance 
criteria. Consideration of the operating environment (e.g., at-line, in-line or off-line) should be 
included in the technology selection. Once a technology has been selected, the ATP serves as a 
foundation to derive the analytical procedure attributes and performance criteria for analytical 
procedure validation (ICH Q2). Formal documentation and submission of an ATP is optional 
but can facilitate regulatory communication irrespective of the chosen development approach. 
The ATP also facilitates ongoing monitoring and continual improvement of the analytical 
procedure. The ATP is maintained over the lifecycle and can also be used as a basis for lifecycle 
management to ensure that the existing, revised or new analytical procedure remains fit for the 
intended purpose. 
Illustrative examples of ATPs are provided in Annex A. 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
4 
 
4. KNOWLEDGE AND RISK MANAGEMENT IN ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 
DEVELOPMENT AND CONTINUAL IMPROVEMENT 
4.1 Knowledge Management  
As with product and manufacturing process development, knowledge management (ICH Q10) 
plays a critical role in analytical procedure development and during the lifecycle of the 
analytical procedure. 
Prior knowledge is explicitly or implicitly used for informing decisions during analytical 
procedure development and lifecycle management. Prior knowledge can be internal knowledge 
from a company’s proprietary development and analytical experience, external knowledge such 
as reference to scientific and technical publications or established scientific principles. 
Prior product knowledge plays an important role in identifying suitable analytical techniques. 
Knowledge of best practices, state-of-the-art technologies and regulatory expectations 
contribute to the selection of the most suitable technology for a given purpose. Existing 
platform analytical procedures (e.g., protein content measurement by UV spectroscopy) can be 
leveraged to evaluate the attributes of a specific product without conducting additional 
procedure development. 
As additional information is obtained, knowledge related to analytical procedures should be 
actively managed throughout the product lifecycle. 
4.2 Risk Management 
The use of quality risk management (QRM) is encouraged to aid in the development of a robust 
analytical procedure to reduce risk of poor performance and reporting incorrect results. Risk 
assessment is typically performed early in analytical procedure development and is updated as 
more information becomes available. Risk assessment can be formal or informal and can be 
supported by prior knowledge. 
Risk assessment tools as described in ICH Q9 Annex 1 can be used to:  
• identify analytical procedure parameters (factors and operational steps) with potential 
impact on its performance, e.g., Annex A Figure 2 (Ishikawa diagram); 
• assess the potential impact of analytical procedure parameters on the analytical 
procedure performance;  
• identify and prioritise analytical procedure parameters to be investigated 
experimentally; 
• inform the need and the extent of ongoing monitoring as part of risk review. 
Risk communication should be used to support continual improvement of the analytical 
procedure performance throughout its lifecycle. The outcome of quality risk management 
should be documented in the relevant parts of the applicant’s pharmaceutical quality system 
(PQS) (ICH Q10).  
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
5 
 
5. EVALUATION 
OF 
ROBUSTNESS 
AND 
PARAMETER 
RANGES 
OF 
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES 
5.1 Robustness 
The robustness of an analytical procedure is a measure of its capacity to meet the expected 
performance criteria during normal use. Robustness is tested by deliberate variations of 
analytical procedure parameters and should consider the duration of the analysis (including 
stability of sample preparations and reagents). Prior knowledge and risk assessment can inform 
the selection of parameters to investigate during the robustness study. Those parameters likely 
to influence procedure performance over the intended period of use should be studied. 
For most procedures, robustness evaluation is conducted during development. If the evaluation 
of robustness was already conducted during development, it does not need to be repeated during 
validation (as discussed in ICH Q2). Data from validation studies (e.g., intermediate precision) 
can complement robustness evaluation. For some analytical procedures with inherent high 
parameter variability (e.g., those requiring biological reagents) wider parameter ranges may 
need to be investigated during robustness studies. Robustness of multivariate procedures may 
require additional considerations (see Chapter 8). The outcome of the evaluation of robustness 
should be documented and also reflected in the analytical procedure control strategy. 
5.2 Analytical Procedure Parameter Ranges 
Experiments to investigate parameter ranges can provide additional knowledge about the 
analytical procedure performance. The respective analytical procedure attributes and associated 
criteria could be derived from the ATP. Univariate examination of a single parameter can 
establish a PAR for the analytical procedure. 
In an enhanced approach, the ranges for the relevant parameters and their interactions can be 
investigated in multivariate experiments (DoE). Risk assessment and prior knowledge should 
be used to identify analytical procedure parameters, attributes and associated ranges to be 
investigated experimentally. Categorical variables (e.g., different instruments) can also be 
considered as part of the experimental design. 
The outcome of development studies should provide an understanding of the relationships 
between analytical procedure parameters (inputs) and the responses of the analytical procedure 
(outputs). Based on the results, fixed set-points may be defined for some parameters. For others, 
PARs could be defined while still others could be included into an MODR. An MODR consists 
of combined ranges for two or more analytical procedure parameters within which the analytical 
procedure is shown to be fit for the intended purpose. 
Set-points, PARs and/or MODRs of an analytical procedure proposed by the applicant based 
on development and validation data are subject to regulatory approval. Moving within an 
approved PAR or MODR does not require regulatory notification. 
Analytical procedure validation for a PAR and/or an MODR is required only for those 
performance characteristics not covered by data from analytical procedure development. For 
practical reasons and following a risk-based approach, it may not be necessary or possible to 
validate the entirety of an MODR. The part of a PAR or an MODR intended for routine use 
(typically the intended operational conditions or the set point) in the analytical procedure must 
be covered by validation data. The extent of validation tests should be justified on a case-by-
case basis. 
For future changes to operational conditions within a PAR or an MODR an assessment of the 
need for and extent of additional validation tests should be performed. An analytical procedure 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
6 
 
validation strategy, e.g., as part of the analytical procedure validation protocol, can define the 
necessary extent of additional validation. 
6. ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE CONTROL STRATEGY 
An analytical procedure control strategy should ensure that the analytical procedure is fit for 
the intended purpose during routine use throughout its lifecycle. It consists of a set of controls, 
derived from current understanding of the analytical procedure including development data, 
risk assessment, robustness and prior knowledge. The analytical procedure control strategy 
should be defined before validation (ICH Q2) and should be confirmed after validation has been 
finalised. 
The analytical procedure control strategy includes analytical procedure parameters needing 
control and the system suitability test (SST) which is part of the analytical procedure. The 
analytical procedure should describe the steps necessary to perform each analytical test. This 
can include (but is not limited to) the sample, the reference materials and the reagents, sample 
and control preparations, use of the apparatus, generation of the calibration curve, the number 
of replicates, use of the formulae for the calculation of the reportable results and other 
necessary steps. The level of detail should enable a skilled analyst to perform the analysis and 
interpret the results (such as the level of detail in a regional pharmacopoeia for a similar 
product). 
The SST depends on the type and intent of the analytical procedure and is typically conducted 
with one or more predefined materials (including use of positive and/or negative controls). The 
SST is designed to verify selected analytical procedure attributes. The acceptance criteria 
should be based on analytical procedure performance criteria. The components of the SST 
should be selected using risk assessment as well as knowledge and understanding from 
development data. The test is used to verify that the measurement system and the analytical 
operations associated with the analytical procedure are fit for the intended purpose during the 
time period of analysis and enable the detection of unacceptable performance. Validity of the 
results of the analytical procedure depends on the outcome of the SST. In the enhanced 
approach, a well-designed set of SST parameters and criteria to ensure analytical procedure 
performance could represent an important aspect of risk mitigation. For analytical procedures 
relying on multivariate models, data quality should be verified using suitable software tools.  
In addition to SST, sample suitability assessment may be required to ensure acceptable sample 
response. A sample and/or sample preparation is considered suitable if the measurement 
response of the sample satisfies pre-defined acceptance criteria for the analytical procedure 
attributes that have been developed for the validated analytical procedure (often used for 
biologics). In these cases, sample suitability is a prerequisite for the validity of the result along 
with a satisfactory outcome of the SST. Sample suitability assessment generally consists of the 
assessment of the similarity of the response between a reference material and the test sample 
and may include a requirement for acceptable levels of interfering signals arising from the 
sample matrix. For analytical procedures relying on multivariate models, sample suitability 
assessment can be verified using suitable software tools which check if the sample fits within 
the model space. This is commonly called data quality check. 
Ongoing monitoring of selected analytical procedure outputs is recommended to look for any 
trends, in line with PQS expectations. Review of analytical procedure outputs facilitates the 
procedure lifecycle management and enables proactive intervention to avoid failures.  
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
7 
 
6.1 Established Conditions for Analytical Procedures 
In line with ICH Q12, applicants may propose ECs for an analytical procedure. ECs can be 
identified using tools highlighted in Chapter 2 including risk assessment, prior knowledge, and 
results from uni- and/or multi-variate experimentation. The nature and extent of ECs will 
depend on the development approach, the complexity of the analytical procedure and a 
demonstrated understanding of how parameters and other factors impact the analytical 
procedure performance. 
With a minimal approach to analytical procedure development, the number of ECs may be 
extensive with fixed analytical procedure parameters and set points. 
With an enhanced approach, there should be an increased understanding of the measurement 
requirements, the suitability of available technologies and the relationship between analytical 
procedure parameters and performance. This knowledge facilitates the identification of an 
appropriate set of ECs and related reporting categories (see Chapter 7). ECs can be reduced and 
focused on analytical procedure performance (e.g., acceptable ranges for analytical procedure 
parameters, performance characteristics with associated criteria) when justified by analytical 
procedure understanding (including prior knowledge and product/process knowledge) and risk 
management. 
ECs could consist of:  
• Performance characteristics and associated criteria (e.g., included in an ATP); 
• Analytical procedure principle (i.e., the physicochemical basis or specific technology); 
• SST and sample suitability assessment criteria; 
• Set points and/or ranges for one or more analytical procedure parameters. 
Analytical procedure parameters which need to be controlled to ensure the performance of the 
procedure as well as those where the need for control cannot be reasonably excluded should be 
identified as ECs. If the application of analytical procedure performance criteria and/or the SST 
demonstrate that a specific parameter is under control, that parameter or the parameter value 
may not necessarily need to be defined as an EC or may be assigned a lower reporting category 
as appropriate. ECs and related reporting categories are proposed by the applicant and assessed 
by the regulatory authorities for approval based on the scientific justification provided. 
Use of the enhanced approach should not lead to providing a less detailed description of 
analytical procedures in a regulatory submission. Suitably detailed descriptions of the analytical 
procedures in Module 3 of the CTD are expected to provide a clear understanding regardless of 
the approach used to identify ECs for analytical procedures. A description of an analytical 
procedure includes supportive information as well as identified ECs. 
Identification of reporting categories for ECs and the utilisation of ECs in change management 
are described in the next chapter. 
7. LIFECYCLE 
MANAGEMENT 
AND 
POST-APPROVAL 
CHANGES 
OF 
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES 
Changes to analytical procedures can occur throughout the product lifecycle and could involve 
modification of existing procedures or a complete replacement including introduction of a new 
technology. Major changes in the performance characteristics or additional information on 
quality attributes could lead to reevaluation of the ATP and/or a new procedure. Typically, 
process knowledge, analytical procedure knowledge and continual improvement are drivers for 
change. If possible, changes should lead to improved analytical procedures in line with best 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
8 
 
practices and instrumentation. The tools and enablers discussed in ICH Q12 are applicable to 
analytical procedures, irrespective of the development approach and consist of: 
• Existing risk-based categorisation of changes to analytical procedures (in regional 
regulatory framework); 
• ECs; 
• Post-Approval Change Management Protocols (PACMPs); 
• The Product Lifecycle Change Management (PLCM) document; 
• The PQS (documentation of all changes including those not requiring regulatory 
submission); 
• Structured approaches for frequent Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls (CMC) post 
approval changes. 
If ECs are not proposed in the dossier, any changes should be reported according to regional 
reporting requirements. The use of different elements of the enhanced approach can facilitate 
management and regulatory communication of post-approval changes as compared to the 
minimal approach. 
 
Figure 2: Risk-based approach for identification of ECs and reporting categories for 
associated changes in the enhanced approach 
 
 
1) Including analytical procedure control strategy 
 
2) In some cases, moderate risk changes proposed by the company may require prior 
                 approval based on health authority feedback 
If justified and validated (see Chapter 5.2), a PAR or MODR allows movement within the 
approved range(s) to be managed within a company’s PQS. Changes outside of the approved 
ranges or expansion of those ranges require regulatory communication. 
In cases where ECs are proposed, the risk associated with prospective changes should be 
assessed up front to propose the appropriate reporting category. Factors to consider include the 
criticality of the quality attribute being measured, the complexity of the technology and the 
extent of the change (see Annex A). Relevant risk reduction measures should be identified 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
9 
 
based on product and process knowledge as well as analytical procedure understanding and the 
proposed analytical procedure control strategy. Finally, the level of risk (high, medium or low) 
should be assigned. 
In general, an understanding of the analytical procedure robustness and/or prior knowledge can 
be used to support risk mitigation associated with future changes. Submitting the outcomes of 
the risk assessments to regulatory authorities when ECs are proposed can help to justify 
reporting categories for future changes to analytical procedures. 
Figure 2 summarises how risk assessment and risk reduction measures can help to identify 
appropriate reporting categories for ECs. The risk associated with changes can be reduced by 
defining relevant performance criteria which are identified as ECs. Risk reduction is possible 
when sufficient understanding is available (Table 1) to design future bridging studies (Table 2). 
Adherence to the ATP and an analytical procedure control strategy ensures that the analytical 
procedure remains fit for the intended purpose after changes. Changes to parameters that are 
not ECs do not require regulatory communication. 
The ATP could also form the basis of a PACMP which would allow changes (e.g., a change 
between technologies) to be reported at a lower reporting category provided that the pre-defined 
requirements for the change are met.  
Examples are provided in Annex A on how appropriate reporting categories can be proposed. 
Table 1: Relationship between knowledge (understanding), risk and extent of studies for 
changes to analytical procedures 
Knowledge1) 
 Low                                          High  
Risk associated with the change 
Low                                                                                          High               
Prior 
knowledge 
or 
confirmatory study according 
to a study plan derived from 
prior knowledge  
 
In depth study according to a study 
plan derived from prior knowledge  
 
 
 
Confirmatory study according 
to a study plan  
 
In depth study according to a study 
plan  
1) As described in ICH Q10 
When initiating changes to analytical procedures, QRM can be used to evaluate the impact of 
the changes and reconfirm that the originally agreed reporting category is still appropriate. The 
outcome of this risk assessment informs the design and extent of the studies needed to support 
the change including a bridging strategy to demonstrate that the revised or new procedure 
remains fit for the intended purpose. When considering a bridging strategy, a greater 
understanding of the analytical procedure can enable a reduced study design whereas a higher 
risk change may need a more in-depth study (Table 1). The implementation of an already 
validated analytical procedure at a different location, including the concept of analytical 
procedure transfer, should follow a similar bridging strategy (Table 2). 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
10 
 
For product and process changes, a reassessment and potential adaptation of the ATP, if used, 
and a reassessment of the suitability of the analytical procedure may be necessary. 
If an applicant proposes a new analytical procedure, a comprehensive risk assessment and 
evaluation should be conducted to determine any impact on the performance. The analytical 
procedure control strategy for the new procedure should be established. ECs associated with 
the new procedure should be justified when communicating the change. 
Table 2: Examples of analytical procedure change evaluation 
Risk Factor: Extent of 
change 
Bridging strategy 
Evidence of the suitability 
of a new procedure 
Change of analytical procedure 
principle 
(physicochemical/biochemical 
basis) 
Full validation of new procedure 
And 
Comparative analysis of representative 
samples and reference materials.  
And/or 
Demonstration that the analytical 
procedure’s ability to discriminate 
between acceptable and non-acceptable 
results remains comparable 
Analytical procedure 
performance characteristics are 
evaluated and criteria are met 
after the change 
And 
Results are comparable after 
change or differences are 
acceptable and potential 
impact on specification 
evaluated 
Change within same analytical 
procedure principle 
Partial or full revalidation of the 
analytical procedure performance 
characteristics affected by the change 
And, as appropriate 
Comparative analysis of representative 
samples and reference materials 
And/or 
Demonstration that the analytical 
procedure’s ability to discriminate 
between acceptable and non-acceptable 
results remains comparable 
Analytical procedure attributes 
are evaluated and criteria are 
met after change 
And, as appropriate 
Results are comparable after 
change or differences are 
acceptable and potential 
impact on specification 
evaluated 
Transfer of analytical 
procedure to a different site 
with no change in procedure 
itself 
 
Partial or full revalidation of the 
analytical procedure performance 
characteristics 
And/or 
Comparative analysis of representative 
samples and reference materials 
 
Or 
 
Justification for not performing 
additional transfer experiments 
Analytical procedure attributes 
are evaluated and criteria are 
met after change 
And/or 
Results are comparable 
Table 2 provides examples of data recommended to support a change dependent on the extent 
of the change and the identified risk category. 
To support the use of the tools described in this guideline, the company´s PQS change 
management process should be effective and in line with recommendations described in ICH 
Q12. 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
11 
 
8. DEVELOPMENT 
OF 
MULTIVARIATE 
ANALYTICAL 
PROCEDURES: 
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Multivariate analytical procedures are those where a result is determined through a multivariate 
calibration model utilising more than one input variable. The considerations provided here are 
for models using latent variables that are mathematically related to directly measured variables. 
Other approaches such as machine learning (e.g., neural networks) or optimisation techniques 
could use similar principles although the specific approach may vary and will not be discussed 
in detail. 
Whereas this chapter includes aspects unique to multivariate analytical procedures, the 
principles described in other parts of this guideline are also applicable. Development of a robust 
multivariate analytical procedure includes scientifically justified sample selection and 
distribution over the range, sample size, model variable selection and data pre-processing. 
Sample and sample population 
Multivariate models link measured model variables with values obtained from a validated 
reference analytical procedure or from reference samples. Therefore, samples in multivariate 
analysis consist of input measurements and their corresponding reference values, which are 
numeric values for quantitative measurements (e.g., assay) and classification categories for 
qualitative analytical procedures (e.g., identity). In some cases, one set of input measurements 
could be used for multiple models provided that more than one reference value exists. The 
reference values are determined using reference analytical procedure(s) or prepared reference 
samples with known values. Care should be taken to ensure that uncertainty in the reference 
analytical procedure is sufficiently low in relation to the intended performance of the 
multivariate analytical procedure and that prepared reference samples are homogeneous. The 
approach to the reference analytical procedure(s) or prepared reference samples should be 
explained and justified. 
The ranges of multivariate models are typically constructed by data from samples. Therefore, a 
careful strategy for sample selection is essential for obtaining the relevant information from the 
analytical data and contributes to the robustness of the resulting model. Based on the analytical 
procedure and measurement principle, the sample population should encompass the sources of 
variability likely to occur during manufacturing and analysis, such as raw material quality, 
manufacturing process variability, storage conditions, sample preparation and testing. Use of 
risk assessment tools can help to identify sources of variability with the potential to influence 
the measurements and resulting model outputs. 
Obtaining samples with appropriate variability at commercial scale can be challenging. 
Therefore, development laboratory and pilot scale samples are often utilised to provide enough 
variability to improve accuracy and robustness of the model. Inclusion of commercial scale 
samples is recommended to capture variability related to specific equipment and/or processing 
conditions. Careful consideration should also be given to sample distribution in the calibration 
and validation sets, as this will influence the model’s predictive capability. 
The number of samples used to create a calibration model for quantitative analysis will depend 
on the complexity of the sample matrix and/or interference by the matrix in the analyte signal 
of interest (i.e., for more complex sample matrices generally more samples are needed). 
Sufficient samples should be available for creation of calibration and validation sets of 
appropriate size and variability. Independent samples in the validation set are not incorporated 
in the calibration set or the internal test set. A validation sample set generated with samples 
from independent batches can be used to demonstrate model robustness. 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
12 
 
Data transformation  
The selection of the data transformation method(s) can be driven by the type of data, instrument 
or sample, the intended purpose of the model and/or prior knowledge. Caution should be 
exercised when performing any transformation because artefacts can be introduced, or essential 
information can be lost. Any transformation of data should be documented and justified. 
Variable selection  
Variable selection is performed during model development. For example, wavelength range 
selection is frequently applied in spectroscopic applications to select a region of a spectrum that 
gives the best estimation of the selected chemical or physical property to be evaluated 
(modelled). Variable selection depends on the measurement principle, application and other 
factors, and should be justified. 
Robustness 
Model development should minimise the prediction error and provide a robust model that 
consistently assures the long-term performance. The robustness should be built into the model 
by including relevant sources of variability related to materials, process, environment, 
instrumentation or other factors. Sources of variability can be identified from prior knowledge 
and risk assessments and evaluated using statistical tools. Robustness depends on multiple 
factors, e.g., composition of the calibration set, data transformation method, variable selection 
and the number of latent variables. 
Optimisation of the multivariate model often requires a trade-off between accuracy and 
robustness. A critical factor is the number of latent variables to be used in the calibration model 
which ensures the model is optimised for the intended purpose. Selection of the number of latent 
variables occurs during model development and is confirmed during internal testing. Too many 
latent variables can result in model overfitting, potentially resulting in decreased robustness and 
a need for more frequent model updates. Justification for the final number of latent variables 
used should be provided. Diagnostic plots provided by software packages can be useful to 
support the justification.  
Recalibration and model maintenance 
Tracking the calibration model performance is an important part of ongoing monitoring for a 
multivariate analytical procedure. Various statistical tools can be employed as diagnostics to 
ensure that the model assumptions are upheld. For latent variable models, these diagnostic tools 
can include: 
• examination of residuals to determine unmodeled features of the data (e.g., x-residuals 
or F-probability); 
• outlier diagnostics to determine if the data is within the bounds of the model 
construction (e.g., Hotelling’s T-squared or Mahalanobis distance). 
Software packages allow for the application of diagnostic tools for model prediction. 
Additionally, continued performance of the calibration model should be confirmed on a 
periodic and event-driven basis by comparison of the model predictions with the known values 
of the reference samples or reference analytical procedure results. This confirmatory testing 
helps to ensure that the calibration model continues to perform as expected. Examples of events 
that could trigger confirmatory testing include new known process variability, unexpected 
process events or scheduled instrument maintenance.  
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
13 
 
Monitoring of the model can be used to trigger model rebuilding (recalibration) as a part of 
continual improvement. In general, the same considerations hold as for the original model 
building and internal testing. Based on the cause of the model update (e.g., a process shift), new 
data may need to be included and old non-relevant data may be taken out. 
Once the new calibration model is established, the updated analytical procedure can be 
validated against the same performance criteria as the ones included in the original model. 
Aspects that are not expected to change from the model update may not need to be evaluated 
(e.g., specificity). 
Figure 3: Multivariate (MV) model lifecycle 
 
 
The multivariate model lifecycle (Figure 3) is iterative and can be broken down into 3 major 
components: model establishment, routine use and model maintenance. 
The choice of a multivariate model is based on the analytical procedure requirements and the 
measurement technology selected. Prior to model development, the performance factors for the 
model are defined, including the underlying model assumptions and desired ranges for model 
applicability. An initial risk assessment can be valuable to understand potential sources of 
variability in the materials and process that could affect the model performance and therefore 
should be considered during the model calibration. Model development, including calibration 
and internal testing, follows the considerations outlined in this chapter. Once the model is 
developed, it is validated using independent data not previously used in the calibration set. The 
last step in model establishment is development of a multivariate model maintenance plan, 
which includes the procedures and limits for outlier diagnostics, and defines the frequency and 
circumstances for confirmatory testing, if needed. 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
14 
 
Routine analysis of the multivariate analytical procedure typically includes monitoring the 
appropriateness of every measurement using outlier diagnostics. Model reassessment can be 
triggered by failure of confirmatory testing or outlier diagnostics to meet the predefined criteria, 
or from data trending indicating potential unacceptable performance of the model, the process 
or the materials being measured (examples of multivariate model lifecycle components are 
provided in Annex B).  
Model reassessment is performed within the PQS and utilises knowledge management and risk 
assessment. If unacceptable performance is identified, model development and revalidation 
may be needed, for example, to add samples into the calibration set and remove those that are 
no longer relevant. In some cases, the model may be performing appropriately, but additional 
experience may identify the need to modify the model maintenance plan. In other cases, the 
identified unacceptable performance could be related to the measurement system (e.g., a 
misaligned sample interface) and no model update would be needed. The dashed arrows in 
Figure. 3 illustrate reintroduction into the lifecycle flow based on the potential outcomes of the 
model reassessment.  
9. DEVELOPMENT OF ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES FOR REAL TIME RELEASE 
TESTING: ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Real Time Release Testing (RTRT) is the ability to evaluate and ensure the quality of in-process 
and/or final product based on process data, which typically include a valid combination of 
measured material attributes and process controls (ICH Q8). RTRT measurements work in 
conjunction with all elements of the product control strategy (e.g., process monitoring or in-
process controls) to ensure product quality. RTRT can be applied to drug substances, 
intermediates and drug products. 
RTRT can be based on an appropriate combination of one or more process measurements and/or 
material attributes to provide a value for one or more CQAs and should be specific for those 
CQAs. The relationship between the RTRT approach and the CQAs, as well as acceptance 
criteria, should be fully justified. An RTRT analytical procedure should be validated as 
recommended in ICH Q2 and it should be demonstrated that the process measurements have 
appropriate specificity for the targeted quality attribute. 
Sampling and the sample interface are important considerations when designing any on-line or 
in-line analytical procedure, including those used for RTRT. The measurement point(s) should 
be chosen to be representative of the entire material being processed with the sample duration 
or amount appropriately chosen (e.g., relative to a unit dose). Additionally, the sample interface 
should remain consistent over the duration of manufacturing and should be robust to expected 
processing and environmental variations. 
The RTRT approach should be included in the product specification (ICH-Endorsed Guide for 
ICH Q8/Q9/Q10 Implementation). In accordance with ICH Q6A Specifications: Test 
Procedures and Acceptance Criteria For New Drug Substances and New Drug Products: 
Chemical Substances and ICH Q6B Specifications: Test Procedures and Acceptance Criteria 
For Biotechnological/Biological Products, this includes a reference to the analytical 
procedure(s) and the related acceptance criteria. Quantitative RTRT results should be expressed 
in the same units as those for traditional testing. The product specification will typically also 
include the analytical procedures to be used for off-line testing. If the dossier includes a 
registered alternative control strategy to RTRT (e.g., traditional end-product testing when 
process analytics are unavailable), the related analytical procedures and when they would be 
applied should also be included in the product specifications. 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
15 
 
10. SUBMISSION OF ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE RELATED INFORMATION  
10.1 
General Regulatory Considerations and Documentation 
The analytical procedure description(s) should be included in the ICH M4Q CTD section 
3.2.S.4.2 for drug substance or section 3.2.P.5.2 for drug product. Validation data and 
supportive information needed to justify the analytical procedure control strategy should be 
included in the CTD section 3.2.S.4.3 for drug substance or section 3.2.P.5.3 for drug product. 
Other analytical procedures used as part of the control strategy should be included in relevant 
CTD sections (e.g., 3.2.S.2, 3.2.P.3 and 3.2.P.4). The analytical procedure should describe the 
steps in sufficient detail for a skilled analyst to perform the analysis (including SST) as 
elaborated in Chapter 6. Submission of validation data should reflect the guidance provided in 
ICH Q2. The performance criteria used in the validation study should be included in the 
submission. In some cases, depending on the intended purpose (e.g., dissolution testing) and/or 
the selected technique, it may be appropriate to submit development data as justification. 
Where ECs are proposed for analytical procedures as elaborated in Chapter 6, the ECs should 
be clearly differentiated from supportive information. Additional development and validation 
information can be included in sections 3.2.S.4.3 and 3.2.P.5.3 to justify ECs and their reporting 
categories. When other lifecycle management elements as described in ICH Q12 are included 
in the submission, the applicant should follow the principles described in ICH Q12 and Chapter 
7 of this document. 
10.2 
Documentation for the Enhanced Approach  
If the approach to development leads to the incorporation of enhanced elements into the 
analytical procedure control strategy, then these should be justified. 
Performance characteristics and acceptance criteria (e.g., described in an ATP) and other 
elements of the enhanced approach (e.g., MODRs or PARs), should be described in the dossier 
sections for analytical procedure description (e.g., 3.2.S.4.2 and 3.2.P.5.2). If ECs are proposed, 
then these should also be included in the analytical procedure description, accompanied by 
supportive information. The use of the enhanced approach should not lead to providing a less 
detailed description of analytical procedures in a regulatory submission. 
If ECs and related reporting categories are proposed, risk-based categorisation of changes and 
corresponding reporting categories should be included in the submission. Justification should 
be given for parameters that are ECs and those that are not ECs, as appropriate (see Chapter 6).  
Appropriate information from analytical procedure risk assessment and development studies to 
support the proposed lifecycle management strategy should be summarised and submitted in 
the regulatory submission sections for analytical procedure validation (e.g., 3.2.S.4.3 and 
3.2.P.5.3). 
10.3 
Documentation for Multivariate Analytical Procedures  
Development information related to multivariate analytical procedures should be provided 
commensurate with the level of impact of the model (ICH-Endorsed Guide for ICH Q8/Q9/Q10 
Implementation). The process development section of the dossier (e.g., 3.2.S.2.6 or 3.2.P.2) 
should include the model development information for multivariate models used as part of 
manufacturing development studies or for in-process controls or tests. Supportive development 
information for RTRT multivariate models can be included in either the appropriate analytical 
procedure validation or process development section. 
Validation information for analytical procedures used for release of drug substance or drug 
product, including RTRT, should be included in the validation information section of the 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
16 
 
dossier (e.g., 3.2.S.4.3 or 3.2.P.5.3). Additionally, these sections should include validation 
information on analytical procedures used as reference analytical procedures. The model 
development, calibration and validation information can be included directly in the CTD section 
or in an appended document. 
For multivariate models used as part of drug substance or drug product specifications, including 
RTRT approaches, the description of the validation approach and results should include:  
• Description of the validation set with independent samples; 
• The performance criteria to be met during validation of the multivariate model; 
• Evaluation of the model validation results against the performance criteria; 
• Discussion of the relationship between the model performance criteria and the 
attribute specification limits; 
• High level overview of the PQS elements for model monitoring and maintenance, such 
as diagnostic tools for determining the appropriateness of the sample data for the 
model and the approach taken when outliers are identified. 
The description of the analytical procedure used for RTRT should be provided in the CTD 
section 3.2.S.4.2 for drug substance or section 3.2.P.5.2 for drug product and typically includes: 
• The property or attribute of interest to be determined by the multivariate analytical 
procedure and the desired quantitative ranges or limits; 
• A description of the measurement principle and pertinent instrument operating 
parameters (e.g., sample presentation, sample interrogation time and measurement 
frequency); 
• An overview of how the multivariate model calibration data are obtained (e.g., sample 
preparation approach, reference analytical procedure); 
• The type of multivariate model; 
• A description of reference analytical procedure or high-level description of prepared 
reference samples; 
• Any calculations needed to adjust the model output into the reported value. 
Additionally, section 3.2.S.4.2 for drug substance or section 3.2.P.5.2 for drug product should 
include description of any analytical procedures that are part of a registered alternative control 
strategy to RTRT. Information on validation of these alternative analytical procedures should 
be included in the validation information section of the dossier (e.g., 3.2.S.4.3 or 3.2.P.5.3). 
11. GLOSSARY 
ACCURACY  
The accuracy of an analytical procedure expresses the closeness of agreement between the value 
which is accepted either as a conventional true value or as an accepted reference value and the 
value or set of values measured. (ICH Q2) 
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 
The analytical procedure refers to the way of performing the analysis. The analytical procedure 
should describe in sufficient detail the steps necessary to perform each analytical test. (ICH Q2) 
 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
17 
 
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE ATTRIBUTE 
A technology specific property that should be within an appropriate limit, range, or distribution 
to ensure the desired quality of the measured result. For example, attributes for chromatography 
measurements may include peak symmetry factor and resolution. (ICH Q14) 
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE CONTROL STRATEGY 
A planned set of controls derived from current analytical procedure understanding that ensures 
the analytical procedure performance and the quality of the measured result. (ICH Q14) 
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE PARAMETER 
Any analytical factor (including reagent quality) or analytical procedure operational condition 
that can be varied continuously (e.g., flow rate) or specified at controllable, unique levels. (ICH 
Q14) 
ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE VALIDATION STRATEGY 
An analytical procedure validation strategy describes the selection of analytical procedure 
performance characteristics for validation. In the strategy, data gathered during development 
studies and system suitability tests (SSTs) can be applied to validation and an appropriate set 
of validation tests can be predefined. (ICH Q14) 
ANALYTICAL TARGET PROFILE (ATP) 
A prospective summary of the performance characteristics describing the intended purpose and 
the anticipated performance criteria of an analytical measurement. (ICH Q14) 
CALIBRATION MODEL 
A model based on analytical measurements of known samples that relates the input data to a 
value for the property of interest (i.e., the model output). (ICH Q2) 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
A planned set of controls, derived from current product and process understanding, that assures 
process performance and product quality. The controls can include parameters and attributes 
related to drug substance and drug product materials and components, facility and equipment 
operating conditions, in-process controls, finished product specifications, and the associated 
methods and frequency of monitoring and control. (ICH Q10) 
CRITICAL QUALITY ATTRIBUTE (CQA) 
A physical, chemical, biological or microbiological property or characteristic that should be 
within an appropriate limit, range or distribution to ensure the desired product quality. (ICH 
Q8) 
CTD 
Common Technical Document. (ICH M4Q) 
DoE 
Design of Experiments. 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
18 
 
ESTABLISHED CONDITIONS (ECs) 
ECs are legally binding information considered necessary to assure product quality. As a 
consequence, any change to ECs necessitates a submission to the regulatory authority. (ICH 
Q12) 
INTERMEDIATE PRECISION 
Intermediate precision expresses intra-laboratory variations. Factors to be considered should 
include potential sources of variability, for example, different days, different environmental 
conditions, different analysts and different equipment. (ICH Q2)  
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
A systematic approach to acquiring, analysing, storing and disseminating information related 
to products, manufacturing processes and components. (ICH Q10) 
METHOD OPERABLE DESIGN REGION (MODR) 
A combination of analytical procedure parameter ranges within which the analytical procedure 
performance criteria are fulfilled and the quality of the measured result is assured. (ICH Q14) 
ONGOING MONITORING 
The collection and evaluation of analytical procedure performance data to ensure the quality of 
measured results throughout the analytical procedure lifecycle. (ICH Q14) 
PACMP 
Post-Approval Change Management Protocol. (ICH Q12) 
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTIC 
A technology independent description of a characteristic that ensures the quality of the 
measured result. Typically, accuracy, precision, specificity/selectivity and range may be 
considered. Previous ICH Q2 versions referred to this as VALIDATION CHARACTERISTIC. 
(ICH Q2) 
PERFORMANCE CRITERION 
An acceptance criterion describing a numerical range, limit or desired state to ensure the quality 
of the measured result for a given performance characteristic. (ICH Q14) 
PLATFORM ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 
An analytical procedure that is suitable to test quality attributes of different products without 
significant change to its operational conditions, system suitability and reporting structure. This 
type of analytical procedure can be used to analyse molecules that are sufficiently alike with 
respect to the attributes that the platform analytical procedure is intended to measure. (ICH Q2) 
PRECISION  
The precision of an analytical procedure expresses the closeness of agreement (degree of 
scatter) between a series of measurements obtained from multiple samplings of the same 
homogeneous sample under the prescribed conditions. Precision can be considered at three 
levels: repeatability, intermediate precision and reproducibility. 
The precision of an analytical procedure is usually expressed as the variance, standard deviation 
or coefficient of variation of a series of measurements. (ICH Q2) 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
19 
 
PROVEN ACCEPTABLE RANGE FOR ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES (PAR) 
A characterised range of an analytical procedure parameter for which operation within this 
range, while keeping other parameters constant, will result in an analytical measurement 
meeting relevant performance criteria. (ICH Q14) 
QUALITY RISK MANAGEMENT (QRM) 
A systematic process for the assessment, control, communication and review of risks to the 
quality of the drug (medicinal) product across the product lifecycle. (ICH Q9)  
RANGE 
The range of an analytical procedure is the interval between the lowest and the highest results 
in which the analytical procedure has a suitable level of precision, accuracy and response. (ICH 
Q2) 
REPORTABLE RANGE 
The reportable range of an analytical procedure includes all values from the lowest to the 
highest reportable result for which there is a suitable level of precision and accuracy. 
Typically, the reportable range is given in the same unit as the specification acceptance 
criterion. (ICH Q2) 
WORKING RANGE 
A working range corresponds to the lowest and the highest level of the quality attribute to 
be measured (e.g., content or purity) as presented to the analytical instrument and for 
which the analytical procedure provides reliable results. (ICH Q2) 
REAL TIME RELEASE TESTING (RTRT) 
The ability to evaluate and ensure the quality of the in-process and/or final product based on 
process data, which typically include a valid combination of measured material attributes and 
process controls. (ICH Q8) 
REFERENCE MATERIAL  
A suitably characterised material, sufficiently homogeneous and stable with regard to one or 
more defined attributes, which has been established to be fit for the intended purpose. Reference 
materials may include national/international reference standards, pharmacopoeial reference 
standards, or in-house primary/secondary reference materials. (ICH Q2) 
REPEATABILITY 
Repeatability expresses the precision under the same operating conditions over a short interval 
of time. Repeatability is also termed intra-assay precision. (ICH Q2) 
REPORTABLE RESULT 
The result as generated by the analytical procedure after calculation or processing and applying 
the described sample replication. (ICH Q2) 
REPRODUCIBILITY 
Reproducibility expresses the precision between laboratories (e.g., inter-laboratory studies, 
usually applied to standardisation of methodology). (ICH Q2) 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
20 
 
RESPONSE 
The response of an analytical procedure is its ability (within a given range) to obtain a signal 
which is effectively related to the concentration (amount) or activity of analyte in the sample 
by some known mathematical function. (ICH Q2) 
REVALIDATION 
Demonstration that an analytical procedure is still fit for the intended purpose after a change to 
the product, process or the analytical procedure itself. Revalidation can involve all (full 
revalidation) or a subset (partial revalidation) of performance characteristics. (ICH Q2) 
ROBUSTNESS 
The robustness of an analytical procedure is a measure of its capacity to meet the expected 
performance criteria during normal use. Robustness is tested by deliberate variations of 
analytical procedure parameters. (ICH Q14) 
SAMPLE SUITABILITY ASSESSMENT 
A sample or sample preparation is considered suitable if the measurement response on the 
sample satisfies pre-defined acceptance criteria for the analytical procedure attributes that have 
been developed for the validated analytical procedure. (ICH Q14) 
SPECIFICITY/SELECTIVITY 
Specificity and selectivity are both terms to describe the extent to which other substances 
interfere with the determination of an analyte according to a given analytical procedure. 
Specificity is typically used to describe the ultimate state, measuring unequivocally a desired 
analyte. Selectivity is a relative term to describe the extent to which particular analytes in 
mixtures or matrices can be measured without interferences from other components with similar 
behaviour. (ICH Q2) 
SYSTEM SUITABILITY TEST (SST) 
System suitability tests are developed and used to verify that the measurement system and the 
analytical operations associated with the analytical procedure are fit for the intended purpose 
and increase the detectability of unacceptable performance. (ICH Q14) 
VALIDATION STUDY 
An evaluation of prior knowledge, data or deliberate experiments (i.e., validation tests) to 
determine the suitability of an analytical procedure for the intended purpose. (ICH Q2) 
VALIDATION TEST 
Validation tests are deliberate experiments designed to authenticate the suitability of an 
analytical procedure for the intended purpose. (ICH Q2) 
MULTIVARIATE GLOSSARY  
CALIBRATION SET 
A set of data with matched known characteristics and measured analytical results. (ICH Q14) 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
21 
 
DATA TRANSFORMATION 
Mathematical operation on model input data to assume better correlation with the output data 
and to simplify the model structure. (ICH Q14) 
INDEPENDENT SAMPLE 
Independent samples are samples not included in the calibration set of a multivariate model. 
Independent samples can come from the same batch from which calibration samples are 
selected. (ICH Q2) 
INTERNAL TESTING 
Internal testing is a process of checking if unique samples processed by the model yield the 
correct predictions (qualitative or quantitative). 
Internal testing serves as means to establish the optimal number of latent variables, estimate the 
standard error and detect potential outliers. (ICH Q2) 
INTERNAL TEST SET 
A set of data obtained from samples that have physical and chemical characteristics that span a 
range of variabilities similar to the samples used to construct the calibration set. (ICH Q14) 
LATENT VARIABLES 
Mathematically derived variables that are directly related to measured variables and are used in 
further processing. (ICH Q2) 
MODEL MAINTENANCE 
The process of ensuring continued model performance over the lifecycle of a multivariate 
model, which often includes outlier diagnostics and resulting actions for model redevelopment 
or change in the maintenance plans. (ICH Q14) 
MODEL VALIDATION 
The process of determining the suitability of a model by challenging it with independent test 
data and comparing the results against predetermined performance criteria. (ICH Q2) 
MULTIVARIATE ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 
An analytical procedure where a result is determined through a multivariate calibration model 
utilising more than one input variable. (ICH Q2) 
OUTLIER DIAGNOSTIC 
Tests that can identify unusual or atypical data in a multivariate analytical procedure. (ICH 
Q14) 
REFERENCE ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 
A separate analytical procedure used to obtain the reference values of the calibration and 
validation samples for a multivariate analytical procedure. (ICH Q2) 
REFERENCE SAMPLE 
A sample representative of the test sample with a known value for the property of interest, used 
for calibration. (ICH Q14) 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
22 
 
VALIDATION SET 
A set of data used to give an independent assessment of the performance of the calibration 
model. (ICH Q2) 
12. REFERENCES 
ICH Q2 Validation of Analytical Procedures 
ICH Q6A Specifications: Test Procedures and Acceptance Criteria For New Drug Substances 
and New Drug Products: Chemical Substances 
ICH Q6B Specifications: Test Procedures and Acceptance Criteria For 
Biotechnological/Biological Products 
ICH Q8 Pharmaceutical Development 
ICH Q9 Quality Risk Management 
ICH Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System 
ICH Q11 Development and Manufacture of Drug Substances 
ICH Q12 Technical and Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle 
Management 
ICH M4Q The Common Technical Document For The Registration of Pharmaceuticals For 
Human Use 
ICH-Endorsed Guide for ICH Q8/Q9/Q10 Implementation 
 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
23 
 
13. ANNEX 
13.1 
Annex A: Examples of application of ICH Q14 principles 
The examples provided in this Annex are for illustrative purposes only. Other approaches are 
possible. They suggest how the concepts described in ICH Q14 could be applied and should not 
be used as a template or the sole basis for a regulatory submission. 
The examples have been created to illustrate: 
• How analytical procedure performance characteristics, derived from the product 
context and knowledge, could be summarised in an ATP; 
• How performance characteristics described in the ATP could be applied to select a 
suitable analytical technology, guide the development of an analytical procedure and 
help define the analytical procedure control strategy;  
• How to identify ECs for analytical procedures developed using elements of the 
enhanced approach; 
• How QRM and the adherence to associated criteria for relevant performance 
characteristics and/or the subsequent execution of a bridging study can ensure the 
post-change quality of the measured result and help to justify the respective reporting 
categories for ECs and the post approval change management of analytical 
procedures. 
As described in Chapter 4 of ICH Q14, QRM can be used to evaluate the impact of prospective 
changes for analytical procedures. The list below describes examples of risk factors and risk 
reduction measures to identify the risks associated with the changes to an analytical procedure. 
The outcome of the risk assessment (risk level: high, medium or low) feeds into the design and 
extent of the studies needed to support the change.  
Selected Risk (risk factors) 
• 
Relevance of the test  
• 
Potential clinical impact of the measured attribute (efficacy, safety, 
pharmacokinetics and immunogenicity), e.g., controlling CQA vs. non CQA;  
• 
Extent of knowledge of the attribute; 
• 
Attribute ensured by other elements of the control strategy (testing or process 
control); 
• 
Complexity of the technology 
• 
Platform technologies; 
• 
Novel vs. established technology (e.g., in pharmacopoeias); 
• 
Several attributes reported as a sum (e.g., charge variants for large 
molecules); 
• 
Biological assays, cell-based assays, immunochemical assays; 
• 
Multi-attribute analytical procedure; 
• 
Multivariate analytical procedure; 
• 
Extent of the change 
• 
Change of one or several parameters outside the already proven acceptable 
ranges; 
• 
Change of the analytical procedure within existing analytical procedure 
performance characteristics and associated criteria; 
• 
Change to a new analytical procedure using a different technology; 
• 
Change to analytical procedure performance criteria (e.g., due to tightening a 
specification limit). 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
24 
 
Risk reduction 
Risk reduction is defined in ICH Q9 as actions taken to lessen the probability of occurrence of 
harm and the severity of that harm. 
Different kinds of knowledge can lead to reduction of risk, for example: 
• 
Product and process knowledge 
- 
Knowledge about quality attributes of the drug substance/drug product and 
acceptable ranges of CQAs; 
- 
Well justified analytical procedure performance criteria cover/link to CQAs 
and their acceptable ranges; 
- 
Evidence to control the CQAs through the process parameter settings 
- 
Knowledge of the degradation pathways demonstrated by the analysis of 
relevant stressed samples; 
- 
Other product knowledge (e.g., impurity profile, particle size and distribution); 
• Analytical procedure understanding and analytical procedure control strategy 
- 
Knowledge about analytical procedure parameters and their impact on 
measurement performance; 
- 
Proven analytical procedure robustness, e.g., harmonised procedures 
(compendial tests); 
- 
Enhanced analytical procedure understanding (e.g., DoE studies) supporting 
justification of acceptable ranges (e.g., PAR, MODR); 
- 
Other knowledge from development of analytical procedure; 
- 
System Suitability Test ensures relevant analytical procedure attributes; 
- 
Ongoing monitoring of analytical procedure output; 
- 
Clear link between signal and CQA to be measured (e.g., peak 
characterisation available, specificity); 
• Bridging strategy for changes to analytical procedures 
- 
Availability of reference material, relevant historical and or stressed samples 
to support analytical procedure output assessment against performance 
criteria (demonstrated ability to control the CQA); 
- 
Comparison to output of previous analytical procedure (understanding and 
acceptance of risk for potential differences); 
- 
Demonstrated understanding of risks associated with parameter changes and 
potential interactions with other parameters; 
- 
Prior experience with similar changes, analytes or technologies including 
platform analytical procedures. 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
25 
 
13.1.1 Measurement of Stereoisomers as Specific Process Related Impurities in a Small Molecule 
Drug Substance (DS) 
 
Introduction and Background 
“Sakuratinib Maleate” is a small molecule DS with multiple chiral centres. The chirality of the 
molecule, its degradation pathway and the impurities are well characterised. From this 
knowledge and the established manufacturing process controls, the six stereoisomers (Impurity 
A-F) were found to be potentially present in the final product.  
Table 1: Analytical target profile 
Intended Purpose 
Quantitation of the six stereoisomers A-F in Sakuratinib Maleate DS for release testing 
 
Link to CQA (Stereoisomeric Purity)  
The analytical procedure should allow for the quantitation of the individual stereoisomers A-F and determination of 
the total sum to verify the CQA Stereoisomeric Purity ≥99.0% 
Characteristics of the Reportable Results  
Performance 
Characteristics 
Acceptance Criteria 
Rationale 
Accuracy 
80–120% average recovery of spiked DS with Impurities 
A-E (specified at NMT 0.1% each) 
90–110% average recovery of spiked DS with Impurity F 
(specified at NMT 0.5%) 
 
For example, at a 
specification level of 0.1%, 
20% bias would lead to a 
variation of the analytical 
result of 0.02%, which was 
found acceptable for a release 
decision. 
In a similar fashion, values 
for precision were derived. 
The recovery criteria for 
accuracy were set with 
respect to the reported result 
and taking into consideration 
any correction or response 
factors 
Precision 
Intermediate Precision RSD: 
Impurities A–E ≤15% 
Impurity F ≤10%  
Specificity 
Analytical procedure should be able to quantitate impurities 
A–F in presence of other likely process related substances 
or DS degradation products with an acceptable bias of not 
more than 0.02%  
Potential interference with 
quantitation of specified 
impurities by other regular 
components in the sample 
Reportable Range 
Impurities A–E: at least 0.05–0.12% 
Impurity F: at least 0.05–0.6%  
Reporting threshold to 120% 
of specification limit  
 
Technology Selection 
Multiple analytical technologies are available for the separation of stereoisomers. In this 
example, HPLC was chosen because development studies showed good potential for separation 
of stereoisomers. As detection mode, UV detection was selected as it was known that the 
molecule had sufficient UV absorption properties. 
 
Analytical Procedure Development 
The chiral HPLC procedure for quantitation of stereoisomers was developed using enhanced 
principles. Below is a summary of the activities conducted during enhanced development. 
• 
An understanding of the chemistry, process, and impurities that have potential to be 
present in the drug substance was established; 
• 
Reference materials were made available for development and validation; 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
26 
 
• 
Conducted risk assessment and evaluating prior knowledge to identify the analytical 
procedure parameters that can impact performance of the procedure; 
• 
Conducted modelling and multi-variate experiments including robustness testing to 
explore ranges and interactions between identified analytical procedure parameters; 
• 
Defined analytical procedure control strategy based on procedure understanding 
including set-points for relevant analytical procedure parameters and SST. 
Analytical Procedure  
For the purpose of this example, a summary of the analytical procedure is provided below. 
This does not reflect the entirety of the analytical procedure description in the dossier. 
Table 2: Summary of the analytical procedure description  
 
Column 
Chiral Column, Amylose tris-(3,5-dimethylphenylcarbamate), immobilised on 
porous, spherical, silica particles, 4.6 mm ID x 250 mm, 3 µm 
Mobile Phase 
n-hexane / ethanol / TFA (80/20/0.1) 
Flow Rate 
1 mL/min 
Column temperature 
30°C 
Detection 
UV 214 nm 
Injection Volume 
5 µL 
Standard/Sample 
Concentration 
1.0 mg/mL 
System Suitability Tests 
Controlled Parameters 
 
Resolution between critical peak pair: DS Main Peak 
and Impurity D ≥ 2.0 
Column, Temperature*, Mobile Phase, Flow Rate 
S/N at QL; DS at 0.05% >10 
Injection Volume, Column, Mobile Phase, 
Standard/Sample Concentration, Detection 
Wavelength 
Repeatability of injection of DS at 0.5% level ≤ 5% 
Injection Volume, Mobile Phase 
* For example, the retention time models built from data collected during analytical procedure development 
screens were used to assess the robustness of temperature and other parameters, that could potentially affect 
the performance characteristics (e.g., specificity). The in silico robustness was verified experimentally by 
confirming resolution at the centre point and design points that generated the minimum and maximum main 
peak retention time. 
 
Analytical Procedure Validation 
After the analytical procedure development was finalised and the analytical procedure control 
strategy established, a validation study was planned and completed according to the ICH Q2 
guideline.  
 
Description of Established Conditions (ECs), Reporting Categories, and Justifications 
The applicant proposed and justified established conditions and reporting categories, as part of 
the submission. For the purpose of this example, Table 3 describes the proposed ECs, their 
proposed reporting categories and examples of parameters that are not ECs. 
Note: The extent of ECs and associated reporting categories listed in this table depend on the 
extent of knowledge gained, information and justification provided in the dossier. The dossier 
is subject to regulatory review. The information provided in this example is only part of the 
knowledge available that will be submitted and is provided for illustrative purposes only. The 
extent of ECs (EC or not EC designation), actual reporting categories, and data requirements 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
27 
 
may differ by region. Depending on the nature and extent of the change (e.g., change to a 
different technology), a PACMP may be required. 
 
Table 3: Evaluated risk, proposed established conditions and proposed reporting 
categories  
Established Condition 
Overall 
Risk 
Category 
Proposed 
Reporting 
Category1) 
Comment 
Performance Characteristics and 
Criteria as described in the ATP: 
Accuracy, Precision, Specificity, 
Range (see Annex A , Table 1) 
High 
PA 
 
The performance characteristics and criteria 
ensure the quality of the reportable result and 
link to the CQA. 
If widening of the performance criteria is 
necessary, it will be reported as PA 
Technology: Chiral Liquid 
Chromatography  
 
Suitable chiral separation technique to 
meet performance characteristics 
defined in ATP 
 
Medium 
NM 
 
A technique that meets the performance 
characteristics and criteria ensures the quality of 
the reportable result and link to the CQA. 
There is a strong understanding between product 
knowledge, intended purpose, and the analytical 
procedure performance established to enable the 
design of future bridging studies. 
A change resulting in a widening of the 
specification acceptance criteria might require a 
higher reporting category  
System Suitability Test and parameter-
control relationship (see Annex A, 
Table 2) 
 
 
 
Medium 
NL/NM 
SST was developed for the LC procedure based 
on a risk analysis and ensures adherence to the 
performance characteristics and criteria. Control 
relationships were established through prior 
knowledge (general principles of technique) and 
during procedure development. 
If the SST criteria are widened the reporting 
category would be higher 
LC Column: Amylose tris-(3,5-
dimethylphenylcarbamate), 
immobilised on porous, spherical silica 
particles 
 
Mobile Phase Components: n-Hexane, 
Ethanol, TFA 
 
Method of detection: UV 214 nm 
Low 
NL/NM 
The LC column, mobile phase components and 
mode of detection are the main parameters, 
defining the separation mechanism and 
detection. Changing these parameters may result 
in the need to adapt the SST  
 
The other analytical procedure parameters defined as ECs are omitted for the purpose of this example 
 
The following conditions are examples of parameters that are not ECs2): 
 
Ratio of mobile phase components: n-
Hexane/Ethanol/TFA (80/20/0.1) 
 
Instrumental conditions: 
Temperature: 30°C 
 
Column length, packing particle size 
Low 
 
- 
 
These parameters are controlled by the SST. 
Robustness testing supported by modelling was 
performed at the centre point and the extrema 
that generated the minimum and maximum main 
band retention time 
Preparation of test solutions and 
reference materials: 1 mg/mL DS in 
mobile phase 
Low 
-  
The performance over the working range has 
been demonstrated through the linearity 
experiments during validation 
1) PA: Prior Approval, NM: Notification Moderate; NL: Notification Low (as per ICH Q12 definitions) 
2) Depending on the region, some of this information is included in an approval letter 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
28 
 
Change Management and Bridging Strategy 
The change described below is an example of one that could occur during the lifecycle of a 
product and analytical procedure. When the product was initially submitted and approved, 
Supercritical Fluid Chromatography (SFC) was not selected as the analytical technique due to 
unavailability in the commercial facility. Years after approval, the applicant desires to change 
the technique to SFC as it is a more environmentally-friendly technology and is now available 
at the commercial site. 
For this change, following development of the SFC procedure the applicant will perform a 
structured risk assessment to evaluate potential impact on the performance characteristics and 
the link to CQA (stereoisomeric purity) as defined in the ATP. As an outcome of the risk 
assessment, experimental bridging studies to demonstrate adherence to the performance 
characteristics and associated criteria will be performed. Validation of the new analytical 
procedure and comparative analysis of representative samples and reference materials will be 
performed. 
The applicant should not implement the new analytical procedure using the predefined reporting 
category unless adherence to the performance characteristics and associated criteria defined in 
the ATP is demonstrated during the bridging studies. If the precondition of adherence to the ATP 
cannot be met, a higher reporting category would apply. 
The example in Annex A, Figure 1 illustrates a post-approval change in technique as well as the 
steps an applicant would follow when implementing the change. The information in the table 
above (ECs and reporting categories) would need to be agreed upon up front with the regulatory 
authority. 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
29 
 
Figure 1: Example of work process of applicant to change an approved analytical 
procedure  
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
30 
 
13.1.2 Measurement of Potency for an anti-TNF-alpha Monoclonal Antibody  
 
Introduction and Background  
The example presented refers to the measurement of the relative potency of the drug, in this 
case an anti-TNF-alpha monoclonal antibody, in drug substance and in drug product at release 
and for stability testing. 
Assumptions for the example: 
• Mode of action: the neutralisation of the biological activity of soluble TNF-alpha by 
preventing TNF-alpha from binding to the TNF-alpha receptor; 
• Fc-effector functions are out of scope; 
• Specification limits for the relative potency: 80% to 125% compared to reference 
material; 
• Potency assay to be developed is able to detect a change and/or a shift in potency upon 
forced degradation. 
 
Table 4: Analytical target profile 
Intended Purpose 
Measurement of the potency of an anti-TNF-alpha monoclonal antibody in drug substance and in drug product at 
release and for stability testing.  
Link to CQA (biological activity) 
The mode of action of the drug is the neutralisation of the biological activity of soluble TNF-alpha by preventing 
TNF-alpha from binding to the TNF-alpha receptor. Target acceptance criteria: 80% to 125% relative potency1) 
Characteristics of the Reportable Result 
Performance 
Characteristics 
Acceptance criteria 
Rationale 
Accuracy 
Accuracy is assessed via a linearity experiment that covers 
the reportable range. No trend in relative bias is observed 
over the tested relative potency range 
 
The 95% confidence interval of the slope of the fitted 
regression line between theoretical and measured potency 
falls within a range of 0.8 to 1.25 
 
The upper and lower 90% confidence interval for the relative 
bias calculated at each potency level is not more than 20%1) 
Parameters are assessed based 
on compendial guidance  
 
The acceptance criteria are 
determined considering the 
intended purpose of the 
measurement 
 
Selected performance 
characteristic ensures that the 
intended analytical procedure 
delivers the quality of the 
reportable result 
Precision 
Upper 95% confidence interval for the average intermediate 
precision across levels across the reportable range (95% CI % 
geometric coefficient of variation) is not more than 20%1)  
Specificity 
Analytical procedure is specific for the intended mechanism 
of action of the active ingredient 
Critical characteristic of a 
bioassay to ensure specificity 
towards the targeted 
biological activity 
No interference from relevant process related impurities or 
matrix components 
For example, process related 
and matrix components do 
not significantly affect the 
characteristics of the dose 
response curve 
Assay is stability indicating i.e., capable of detecting a 
change in potency and/or a change in the shape of the dose 
response curve, confirmed using forced degraded samples  
To ensure that the product 
remains within specification 
over its shelf-life  
Reportable 
range 
The potency range is the range that meets accuracy and 
precision. It should include the specification range (80% to 
120% of the specification range in this case corresponding to 
64% to 150% for a specification of 80% to 125% relative 
potency1)) 
Stated range for which the 
required accuracy and 
precision characteristics are 
demonstrated 
1) Individual values are just an example and can be different from product to product. 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
31 
 
Technology Selection 
Binding assays and cell-based bioassays are suitable technologies for the measurement of the 
relative potency of an anti-TNF-alpha monoclonal antibody when considering the ATP above. 
The two assays rely on the binding of the anti-TNF-alpha monoclonal antibody to the soluble 
TNF-alpha. While the signal of a binding assay directly measures the binding, the cell-based 
assay may target a later stage event in the signalling cascade. Out of different formats of cell-
based assay, the cell-based proliferation assay was chosen as it is widely used and a well 
characterised cell line was available. 
Analytical Procedure Development  
The development of the analytical procedure described has been performed using an enhanced 
approach and was based on extensive knowledge of the molecule and relative potency assays, 
considering the following points for example: 
• Performance characteristics and associated criteria for the analytical procedure defined 
in the ATP; 
• Extensive analytical procedure understanding gained from prior knowledge and 
development studies guided by QRM principles. Factors considered during risk 
assessment are shown in Annex A, Figure 2: e.g., 
• 
The cell and its performance (cell density, cell viability, number of passages); 
• 
Stability indicating properties using forced degradation samples; 
• Robustness evaluation was conducted and its outcome was reflected in the analytical 
procedure control strategy.  
Figure 2: Ishikawa diagram 
 
 
 
 
Analytical Procedure  
For the purpose of this example, a summary of the analytical procedure is provided below. 
This does not reflect the entirety of the procedure description in the dossier. 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
32 
 
Table 5 Analytical procedure description 
Unit Operation 
Description 
Cell preparation 
Prepare a suspension of WEHI-164 cells containing 1x106 cells per 
millilitre, using assay medium containing 2 µg/mL of actinomycin D 
Reference 
solution 
and 
test 
solution preparation 
Included in analytical procedure description in the dossier but not listed 
in this table  
 
Plate preparation 
Plating cells 
Absorbance measurement 
Calculations 
Solutions & reagents preparation 
WEHI-164 cells (ATCC), TNF-alpha solution of suitable concentration, 
assay and culture medium including components and concentrations-
Actinomycin D, Tetrazolium salt WST-8 
Analytical Procedure Control Strategy 
System suitability test 
1. The dose-response curve obtained for the reference standard curve 
corresponds to a sigmoid curve with upper and lower plateaus 
corresponding to ‘cell only control’ and ‘cell + TNF-alpha control’, 
respectively 
2. The dose-response curve obtained for the test sample corresponds to a 
sigmoid curve with upper and lower plateaus corresponding to ‘cell 
only control’ and ‘cell treated with TNF-alpha control’, respectively. 
3. The coefficient of determination calculated for each standard curve 
(r2) is not less than 0.97 * 
4. Maximum value (cell only) to minimum value (TNF-alpha control) 
ratio: minimum 3.0* 
Sample suitability assessment 
Assessment of similarity/parallelism: 
- The upper asymptote ratio (Astd/Atest): 0.8–1.2* 
- The lower asymptote ratio (Dstd/Dtest): 0.8–1.2* 
- The Hill slope ratio (Bstd/Btest): 0.8–1.2* 
- The upper to lower asymptote ratio ((D–A)std/(D–A)test): 0.8–1.2* 
* The ways of assessing of similarity/parallelism as well as individual values are just examples and can be 
different from product to product. 
 
Analytical Procedure Validation 
After the analytical procedure development was finalised and the analytical procedure control 
strategy established, a validation study was planned and completed according to the 
recommendations in ICH Q2. 
 
Description of Established Conditions, Reporting Categories, and Justifications 
The applicant proposed and justified established conditions and reporting categories, as part of 
the submission. For the purpose of this example, Annex A Table 6 describes a portion of the 
proposed ECs, their proposed reporting and an example of a parameter that is not an EC. 
Note: The extent of ECs and associated reporting categories listed in this table depend on the 
extent of knowledge gained, information and justification provided in the dossier. The dossier 
is subject to regulatory review. The information provided in this example is only part of the 
knowledge available that will be submitted and is provided for illustrative purposes only. The 
extent of ECs (EC or not EC designation), actual reporting categories, and data requirements 
may differ by region. Depending on the nature and extent of the change (e.g., change to a 
different technology), a PACMP may be required. 
 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
33 
 
Table 6: Evaluated risk, proposed established conditions and proposed reporting 
categories  
 
Established condition 
Overall 
Risk 
Category 
Proposed 
Reporting 
Category1) 
Comment 
Performance characteristics 
and associated criteria as 
defined in the ATP (Annex 
A Table 4) 
High 
PA 
The performance characteristics and criteria ensure 
the quality of the reportable result and link to the 
CQA. Widening of performance characteristics 
and criteria could have an impact on the control of 
the CQA 
Technology (principle) 
Cell Based Assay 
High or 
Medium 
PA or NM 
Adherence to performance characteristics and 
criteria ensured by control strategy and defined 
bridging strategy (see below) to assess impact of 
changes 
Change would be reported as Notification Moderate 
if no impact of the change on the specification 
acceptance criteria and as Prior Approval if there is 
an impact on the specification acceptance criteria 
Analytical procedure control strategy elements (SST 1-4, sample suitability assessment) 
System suitability test  
(see Annex A Table 5) 
Medium 
NM2) 
Performance of the analytical procedure is ensured 
by 
• Direct control of individual analytical procedure 
steps through analytical procedure control strategy 
elements listed in Annex A Table 5 (and the 
dossier) 
• Defined analytical procedure control strategy 
elements which ensures the adherence to the ATP 
• Adherence to the performance characteristics and 
criteria after a change of analytical procedure 
control strategy elements 
 
If assurance of performance of the analytical 
procedure cannot be demonstrated, the change 
needs to be reported as Prior Approval 
Sample suitability 
assessment  
(see Annex A Table 5) 
Medium 
NM2) 
Cell Preparation 
Cell line: 
WEHI-164 cells (ATCC) 
Medium 
NM 
Based on demonstrated understanding of the mode 
of action (link to CQA) the suitability of the 
responsive cell line will be confirmed by 
responding to the TNF-alpha (survival of the cell 
in presence of the drug and cell death without 
drug) 
 
Adherence to ATP ensured by control strategy and 
defined bridging strategy (see below) to assess 
impact of changes 
 
System suitability test ensures the suitability of the 
cell line and its performance (number of passages, 
confluency, cell counting, cell viability, signal 
amplitude, shape of the response curve) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
34 
 
Established condition 
Overall 
Risk 
Category 
Proposed 
Reporting 
Category1) 
Comment 
Preparation of cells: 
sub culturing 
Low 
NL 
Sufficient cell performance to detect changes in the 
quality of the drug is ensured by: 
• System suitability covers the suitability of the 
cell preparation (number of passages, 
confluency, cell counting, cell viability, signal 
amplitude, shape of the response curve) 
• Changes in cell metabolism that impact 
performance of the analytical procedure and 
link to CQA will be detected 
• Changes that lead to insufficient cell 
performance will not be implemented as they 
could have an impact on the defined 
performance characteristics and would require 
prior approval 
Analytical procedure control strategy ensures 
adherence to performance characteristics and 
criteria. The extent of the bridging study will 
depend on the extent of the change  
Medium composition: 
RPMI 1640, L-glutamine, 
heat-inactivated foetal 
bovine serum, and a suitable 
antibiotic 
Low 
NL 
Preparation of a suspension 
of WEHI-164 cells 
containing 1x106 cells per 
millilitre, using assay 
medium containing 2 µg/mL 
of actinomycin D.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Low 
NL 
The other analytical procedure parameters defined as ECs are omitted for the purpose of this example 
The following is an example of a parameter that is not an EC: 
Plating format  
Low 
- 
No impact on assay output based on development 
data 
1) PA: Prior Approval, NM: Notification Moderate; NL: Notification Low (as per ICH Q12 definitions) 
2) Based on regional requirements the proposed reporting category may need to be elevated to PA 
 
Change Assessment and Bridging Strategy 
For every change, the applicant will perform a risk assessment to evaluate potential impact on 
the performance characteristics and the link to CQA (biological activity) as defined in the 
respective ATP. The outcome of the risk assessment informs the extent of the bridging studies 
used to demonstrate adherence to the performance characteristics and associated criteria. These 
can include, if necessary, full or partial revalidation of the analytical procedure performance 
characteristics affected by the change and/or comparative analysis of representative samples 
and reference material. 
The applicant should not implement the new analytical procedure using the predefined reporting 
category unless adherence to the performance characteristics and associated criteria defined in 
the ATP are demonstrated during the bridging studies. If the precondition of adherence to the 
ATP cannot be met, a higher reporting category would apply. 
The example in Annex A Figure 3 illustrates a post-approval change in the cell preparation from 
subculture to ready to use cells and includes the steps an applicant would follow when actually 
implementing the change. 
The ECs and reporting categories (see Annex A Table 6) would need to be proposed following 
ICH Q14 Figure 2 and agreed up front with the regulatory authority. 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
35 
 
Figure 3: Example of work process of applicant to change an approved analytical 
procedure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICH Q14 Guideline 
 
36 
 
13.2 
Annex B: Example of multivariate model lifecycle components 
 
Example 1 
Example 2 
Example 3 
Model 
Description 
On-line NIR to determine blending 
ranges to achieve blend uniformity 
during development 
Measurement of Content Uniformity 
and Assay of uncoated tablets by NIR 
used for product release 
Glucose Raman model used for qualitative 
identification testing on incoming raw 
material release for GMP use 
Model Category - Low Impact 
Model Category - High Impact 
Model Category - High impact 
User requirements 
Defined model requirements (e.g., 
ATP) 
Defined model requirements (e.g., ATP) 
Risk 
Assessment 
Initial assessment based on existing 
knowledge, laboratory and pilot 
studies, or DoE, as appropriate 
Formal risk assessment based on 
knowledge gained during initial 
development  
Formal risk assessment with knowledge 
gained during initial development 
Model 
Development -  
Calibration 
Scientifically sound approach based 
on laboratory and pilot data and 
previous experience 
Formal design-based approach (e.g., 
DoE) covering appropriate ranges of 
relevant variability sources with 
established acceptance criteria that are 
suitable for the intended purpose 
Formal design-based approach covering 
appropriate ranges of relevant variability 
sources (raw material, lots, packaging, 
instrument-to-instrument, user, software 
limitation) with established acceptance 
criteria that are suitable for the intended 
purpose. Establish an identification 
threshold that has the same probability of 
detection as the existing analytical 
procedure and a suitable alternative 
analytical procedure should the Raman 
analytical procedure fail 
Validation  
Assess specificity and robustness, 
optionally assess linearity and/or 
precision 
Full validation covering applicable 
performance characteristics across 
reportable ranges with established 
acceptance criteria (ICH Q2) 
Full validation covering applicable 
performance characteristics across 
reportable ranges with established 
acceptance criteria (ICH Q2). Include 
establishing suitable comparability of 
Raman procedure to existing analytical 
procedure for release (can be reference 
analytical procedure) 
Performance 
Monitoring 
Routine monitoring - maintain data 
sources (instruments), automation 
connectivity, and data integrity 
Routine monitoring - maintain data 
sources (instruments), automation 
connectivity, and data integrity 
Routine monitoring - maintain data 
sources (instruments), automation 
connectivity, and data integrity 
Real-time diagnostics - implement 
initial diagnostics to confirm model 
performance in real-time 
Real-time diagnostics - implement 
routine diagnostics to confirm model 
performance in real-time 
Real-time diagnostics - implement routine 
diagnostics to confirm model performance 
in real-time 
Periodic monitoring - if applicable, 
compare model predicted results to 
reference analytical procedure at a 
frequency that is scientifically 
justified or on an event driven basis 
as needed 
Periodic monitoring - compare model 
predicted results to reference 
analytical procedure at a frequency 
that is scientifically justified or on an 
event driven basis 
Periodic monitoring - compare model 
predicted results to reference analytical 
procedure at a frequency that is 
scientifically justified or on an event 
driven basis 
Model 
Maintenance 
Model Update - updates are common 
during the process development 
stage as new experimental data 
becomes available 
Model Update - updates should be 
triggered based on Model Monitoring 
and Maintenance Strategy 
Model Update - updates should be 
triggered based on Model Monitoring and 
Maintenance Strategy 
Change Management per PQS 
Change Management per PQS. with 
regulatory communication as required 
Change Management per PQS, with 
regulatory communication as required 
 
