7.0 
Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan 
The risk assessment triage results in an assignment of a drug shortage risk priority level to each product 
based on the product’s indication, availability of alternative therapies, and probability of a shortage. 
Section 7.0 describes how a Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan should be developed based 
on the outcomes of the risk triage. While agencies are working on new guidances, such a plan might 
also be known as a Shortage Prevention Plan or Mitigation Plan in the future.
A Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan can provide a holistic framework at a product level 
to address both the proactive and reactive management of a drug shortage. This plan should be pro-
actively developed for medically necessary, life supporting, or life sustaining products and shared with 
health authorities during inspections. Medium risk products used for short-term acute conditions or 
long-term chronic conditions can also benefit from a Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan, 
especially if the risk triage has identified potential drug shortage risks at Risk Priority Level 1.
A Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan can be an effective mechanism for managing a prod-
uct’s continuously changing drug shortage risk profile. Drug shortages may present potential oppor-
tunities for product diversion and counterfeiting. Therefore, a company’s surveillance program can 
leverage the Drug Shortage Risk Register as useful input into its process for managing product diver-
sion and counterfeiting risks that may arise due to shortages. Figure 7.0-1 depicts the steps involved 
in developing and maintaining a Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 38 ---
34
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
Drug Shortage 
Prevention & Response 
Plan
4. Create 
Communication Plan 
5. Review & 
Monitor
1. Identify  
Hazards
3. Control 
Plan 
2. Assess 
Impact
Which patient population could be 
impacted and how?
What E2E controls will be implemented to 
enable 
• prevention of shortages
• proactive “resilience and flexibility” 
• “return to normal operations” in the event of 
a shortage
List of drug shortage risks and potential 
sources
• Drug Shortage Risk Register
What risk-indicating triggers will ensure 
ongoing monitoring, e.g.
• new product indication
• new market approval
• approval of a new alternate product 
or new unlicensed product
• shortage of an alternate product
• new risks to product quality/
availability
• shutdown of a facility or withdrawal 
of GMP certificate Marketing 
Authorization (MA)
• below inventory/safety stock level 
targets
• usage volumes
What, who, when and how, e.g.
• Health Authorities (HA): visibility to Drug Shortage Risk 
Register, E2E control plan, and risk-indicating triggers
Risk Priority 
Suggested Controls/ 
Preventative Actions
Level 1
• Preventative actions and/or response plan 
required
Level 2
• Preventative actions and/or response plan 
recommended
Level 3
• Generally accepted risk level
Figure 7.0-1	
Suggested Controls and Preventive Actions for a Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 39 ---
35
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
A Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan consists of the following information:
1.	 Identification of drug shortage hazards: An end-to-end risk assessment of the product’s 
value chain until the first economic customer—its manufacturing operations, storage, and 
transportation, as shown in Figure 7.0-2—should identify potential sources of drug shortages. 
The Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan should address the management of the drug 
shortage risks listed in the Drug Shortage Risk Register. Typical visibility for a MAH ends after 
shipment to wholesale distributors.
2.	 Assessment of the impact of a potential drug shortage: Based on the product indica-
tions, an assessment should be made and documented of which patient population would be 
affected by a drug shortage and what this effect would be. Application of the risk triage model 
would identify the risk priority levels described in Section 6.2. In addition, clinical risk assess-
ments would be helpful in understanding the clinical impact of a drug shortage.
3.	 Risk control plan (short-term and long-term): This section should describe the controls 
identified from the end-to-end risk assessments of the product, how the risk control strategy will 
proactively control drug shortage risks, what measures can be taken to ensure product supply 
resilience, and a plan to respond to a shortage and ensure a prompt return to normal operations 
in the event of a shortage.
4.	 Communication plan: The Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan should include a 
communication plan for drug shortages. The AESGP, EFPIA, EGA, and PPTA collaborative 
document provides guidance on communications related to product shortages, including pos-
sible triggers for communication strategies (38).
5.	 Risk review and monitoring: The Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan should 
be a living document that is reviewed and updated whenever a product’s risk profile changes. 
Potential causes of a risk profile change for a product include approval of a new product or 
dosage form with the same or a similar indication, a new indication for the product, or a new 
market for the product; shutdown of a facility or withdrawal of its GMP certificate; increase in 
product usage volume or a drop in product inventory or safety stock to below target levels; and 
new quality or manufacturing issues. Proactive management of the Drug Shortage Prevention 
and Response Plan will ensure that shortages are mitigated in advance as much as possible.
Section 12.0: Appendix 2 provides a template for a Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan.
Figure 7.0-2	
End-to-End Value Chain for a Product
Drug 
Substance
Pharmacy
Wholesaler
Affiliates
Warehouse 
Distribution
Packaging
Drug Product
Patient
Raw 
Materials
Storage & 
Transportation
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 40 ---
36
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
8.0 
 Stakeholder Management and Communications related to 
Drug Shortages
Multiple stakeholders are affected by, and need to be involved in, addressing a drug shortage—manu-
facturers, health authorities, distributors, pharmacies, healthcare providers and, sometimes, patients, 
depending on the cause(s) and level of the shortage. The legal obligations for MAHs to notify the rel-
evant health authorities of a potential drug shortage are described in Article 13 of Commission Directive 
2003/94/EC for the European Union and in Section 506C of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
for the United States. In addition, Part 1, Section 5.71 of the EU GMP Guidelines has been updated to 
provide guidance on notification of restrictions in supply. A collaborative dialog between the company 
and the relevant health authorities is key to facilitating the control and/or prevention of a shortage and, 
ultimately, ensuring a continued supply of medicinal products for patients.
Companies need to consider many things when reacting to a current or impending shortage of one of 
their medicines in a given country or region. Developing a harmonized risk communication mecha-
nism to alert health authorities of a potential or existing shortage is important to creating a shared 
understanding of the shortage. The guidance paper Quality and Manufacturing Driven Supply Dis-
ruptions: Industry Communication Principles to Authorities provides communication principles and a 
framework to harmonize reporting and communications between MAHs and health authorities re-
garding drug shortages arising from quality and/or manufacturing disruptions. The paper proposes 
a harmonized trigger point, time point, and recipient(s) for communicating potential drug shortage 
events for nationally and centrally approved products in Europe (38).
Relevant health authorities, those where the product is marketed and where the shortage is expected to 
occur, must be notified when a meaningful disruption could occur in the supply of medicines due to 
manufacturing and quality issues, that is, when normal volumes of medicines cannot be delivered for 
further distribution. The risk matrix in Table 6.1.1-1 categorizes risks to patients in a tiered mecha-
nism for determining communication for the various risk levels based on the product’s therapeutic use 
and the availability of alternative treatments. The level of effort and formality in the risk assessment 
for determining patient impact, resulting corrective actions, and level of communication with health 
authorities should be commensurate with the level of risk to patients.
A safety or clinical risk assessment should inform the risk communication strategy so that appropri-
ate risk mitigation actions can be taken at the healthcare provider and/or patient level. For defective 
products (e.g., those with a potential lack of sterility assurance), a comparison might be needed of the 
clinical benefits and risks for patients of continued product use, especially when no alternative prod-
uct or treatment is available. Partnership and expedited dialogue with health authorities in making 
appropriate risk mitigation decisions and returning to normal operations in such cases are important.
8.1	
Key Risk-Indicating Information to Compile for Health Authorities
When anticipating a shortage may occur, companies should compile key pieces of information for 
health authorities when their involvement is needed. Knowing the reasons for the stock shortage or de-
pletion not only facilitates the implementation of corrective and preventive actions (CAPA), but it can 
also help develop practical marketplace solutions for the shortage. Based on product ownership, it is 
important to openly clarify communication accountabilities between the health authority and the (1) 
manufacturer or first distributor; (2) wholesaler, agent, trader, distributor, repackager, or relabeler; and 
(3) suppliers of the product to the patient (e.g., retail pharmacies, hospital pharmacies, physicians).
The notification content and format described in the AESGP, EFPIA, EGA, and PPTA collaborative 
paper describe what data should be provided to health authorities for effective communications in 
the event of potential drug shortages. This includes details on the MAH, the product, the causes and 
details of the potential drug shortage, the risk level (A, B, or C) determined in the first step in the risk 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 41 ---
37
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
triage (Figure 6.1-1), the expected duration of the shortage, the steps taken or planned to address the 
shortage, the countries impacted, and the notification to other parties. Additional secondary informa-
tion that can be helpful for the MAH to collect in order to reach a shared understanding of a shortage 
with the relevant health authorities and how best to address includes:
•	
Patient-Related Information
—	 Types of patients (e.g., by disease, demographics, age, genetics, origin) using the medicine. 
A good level of clinical understanding is important to assess whether any patient groups may 
be particularly affected by the shortage (e.g., neonates, patients with cancer or diabetes).
—	 Scale of the problem, for example, the number of patients likely to be affected, the duration 
of the shortage, and where the problem may be most acute. The following information can 
be useful to compile and assess:
▪	 Likely number of patients treated with the product each month and the percentage of 
patients that may be affected by the shortage or stock depletion. The current market 
share, usage profile of the product, and monthly volume of prescriptions for the prod-
uct may also be useful to review.
▪	 Monthly sales volume of the product and the proportion of this volume that may be 
affected by the shortage or stock depletion
▪	 Possible local, regional, or global impact on product supplies
•	
Distribution Information in the Country or Region
—	 Name and address of the primary distributor of the product, if any
—	 If other distributors (i.e., secondary wholesalers) supply the product
—	 If the product is supplied only to hospitals or to both hospital and retail pharmacies
—	 If the product is supplied through other channels, such as clinics and nursing homes
—	 Opportunities for parallel import, repackaging, and relabeling, depending on regulations
•	
Current Stock in Each Country or Region
—	 Whether the product is currently out of stock in the country or region, or if another version 
of the product or process is available during the stock-out period
—	 Whether the product stock is expected to be depleted in the near future (e.g., within the 
next few weeks or months) because of the supply issue
—	 Whether the product is in stock but available quantities are insufficient to meet patient needs
—	 Whether stockpiling is requested by the government, legislation, or guidance or as result of 
the Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan
This information can help determine the likely impact of the shortage on patients, if any, as well as the 
level of risk presented by the issue and whether the health authorities should be informed.
8.2	
Risk-Based Decision-Making by the Company and Health Authorities
In the event of a shortage, having a product risk assessment developed proactively using the triage 
method and the risk matrices in Section 6.1, and the key risk-indicating information compiled in 
Section 8.1 becomes very useful in determining the appropriate actions to take. In addition to the 
manufacturer or MAHs, CAPAs to address the risks may need to be owned by other stakeholders in 
the supply chain. Therefore, communication between the stakeholders, including, for example, affili-
ates of the MAH in a country or region, distribution centers, or pharmacies as well as the press, is most 
important to detect unintended consequences of a corrective or preventive measure early in the system.
Several decisions may need to be made by health authorities in response to reports of actual or pending 
product shortages:
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 42 ---
38
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
•	
Whether to become formally involved in managing the shortage or in coordinating a response to 
the shortage. The risk triage method described in Section 6.1 will be useful in determining:
—	 Whether health authorities need to become directly involved (e.g., by taking direct mea-
sures, coordinating responses, developing work plans and action items)
—	 Whether becoming directly involved is not necessary for health authorities at that time
—	 Whether health authorities need to monitor the situation closely without becoming directly 
involved
•	
Whether to facilitate the sourcing of alternative supplies of the product, for which the decision 
usually involves determining: 
—	 Whether the MAH should be allowed to import and supply a version of the product intend-
ed for a different market that may not be authorized in the country. 
—	 Whether this product could be batch packaged for the other market and supplied in that 
country’s packaging and delivery. The packaging and product information may be in a 
different language than that of the country.
—	 Whether the imported product needs to be repackaged and, if so, the level of regulatory ap-
proval and oversight required for the repackaging. 
—	 Whether the healthcare professionals should be advised that an unlicensed version of the 
product is available or that an unlicensed version of a different but clinically equivalent 
product is available.
•	
Whether to expedite approval of a request to use an alternate unlicensed facility or a post-approval 
change that has been submitted by the MAH. A related decision is whether the approval should 
be conditional, temporary, or permanent.
•	
What communication strategies will be required by the shortage or stock depletion, and how 
those strategies will ensure that companies, health authorities, healthcare professionals, and/or pa-
tients can take appropriate risk mitigation actions. After the clinical risk assessment is completed, 
the health authority may decide to advise healthcare professionals to take specific steps, such as:
—	 Giving priority to certain groups of patients (e.g., patients already treated with the medi-
cine) over others for continued treatment with the medicine
—	 Using a different medicine or treatment for new (or all) patients
—	 If a product is defective (e.g., loss of sterility assurance), weighing the clinical benefits and risks for 
patients of continued use of the product when no alternative product or treatment is available
Any time a shortage situation is encountered it should be viewed as an opportunity for the organi-
zation to review their risk register and, where relevant, assess suitable updates to their risk control 
program to improve prevention practices. This might involve examining the real root cause of why 
it occurred, modifying CAPAs to prevent recurrence of a shortage for that and similar products, and 
mitigating any gaps that the shortage event might have uncovered.
