Materials and Supplier 
Management
•	 Material sourcing
•	 Alternate or backup site (including redundancy)
•	 Inventory and safety stock management
•	 Value stream mapping 
•	 Demand forecasting
•	 Diversification, multisite sourcing with higher manufacturing capacity reserves
•	 Supplier qualification and ongoing supplier management and monitoring
•	 Supply chain or transportation line security
•	 Supplier relationship management
Business Continuity
•	 Understanding of marketplace dynamics
•	 Geopolitical considerations
•	 Worst-case scenario planning
•	 Disaster planning (e.g., natural disaster, climate impact, pandemic, significant supply-chain disruptions)
•	 Production capacity
•	 Recovery plan
•	 Reliance on domestic or foreign manufacturing and supply
•	 Personnel management in case of crises (e.g., public health emergencies e.g., pandemic, strikes)
Regulatory 
Considerations
•	 Regulatory requirements and expectations
•	 Post-approval changes
•	 Evolving regulatory landscape
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 30 ---
26
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
6.2	
Supply Chain and Value Stream Mapping
The MAH is accountable for ensuring that risks for patient safety, product quality, and product 
availability are adequately managed in the end-to-end product supply chain. In addition to assessing 
the risks with various suppliers and external service providers (e.g., CDMOs, CLOs) and addressing 
them through their supplier management controls, the MAH should also review the QRM processes 
used, especially by their key suppliers and service providers. This can help ensure that these suppliers 
and service providers have an adequate framework in place, in accordance with the principles of ICH 
Q9(R1), to assess and manage their quality and compliance risks.
Process mapping, in general, can play a key role in managing the risk of drug shortages particularly as 
supply chains continue to become increasingly complex. Mapping of the end-to-end product supply 
processes is one of the most important tools that can be leveraged for managing the risk of drug 
shortages due to manufacturing and supply problems. VSM (also known as material and information 
flow mapping), a particularly powerful tool, graphically displays the flow of the manufacturing and 
transportation processes for a product and highlights potential manufacturing, inventory, and supply 
stress points. Although VSM is often used to reduce amounts of inventory and inefficiencies across the 
supply chain, it is also used to maintain proper levels of in-process inventory to ensure predefined final 
product inventories. Maintaining agreed-upon inventory levels of products required for pandemics or 
flu seasons is an example of how VSM can be used. Figure 6.2-1 displays an example of how VSM 
serves as a useful tool to help manage drug shortages proactively and reactively. 
While VSM is a great tool for mapping products and information flow, it is not the only approach 
available. Other tools that could be used are DRIVE (Define, Review, Identify, Verify, Execute), ICOR 
(Inputs, Outputs, Controls, and Resources), Cause-and-Effect Diagrams, and Process Flowcharting.
The following elements constitute an effective mapping tool:
•	
Team Makeup: The mapping team should be cross-functional and include individuals who are 
intimately familiar with manufacturing and supply processes and equipment. The most suc-
cessful mapping exercises involve laboratory technicians and operators. Mapping requires good 
facilitation, preferably by an objective, neutral individual.
•	
Planning and Preparation: The scope of the mapping (local to a site or region or broader in 
the supply chain) should be identified in advance. The team should establish timelines and goals 
for the mapping (in this case, specific to drug shortages). The exercise will likely become part of 
a larger initiative for developing a Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan.
•	
Evaluation: The team should perform all steps of the mapping process and capture data and 
information on how the process works. The team should also have access to existing procedures 
as well as quality events to capture all stress points. Depending on the mapping technique used, 
specific symbols are used to indicate times, inventory, issues, and areas for improvement.
•	
Map: After a map of the current state is drawn, listing all the steps and handoffs in the process, 
a future-state map can be drawn using the same steps to identify risk reducing actions that will 
meet the needs of the product.
•	
Action List: To develop and maintain an effective Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan, an 
action list needs to be developed to address the gaps and risks based on the future-state map actions.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 31 ---
27
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
Figure 6.2-1	
Example of a Typical Value Stream Map 
Scheduling
Sterile Manufacturing Value 
Stream Map Example
Receiving
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
Incoming Inspection
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
Inventory
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
Component Prep
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
Compounding
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
Sterile Fill
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
Inspection
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
QC & Final Release
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
Labelling
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
Packaging
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
Planned Shipments
1× Daily
Warehousing/Ship
C/O (min)
Shifts
Uptime (%)
Cycle Time
Supply Chain/
Vendor 
Management
Operations
Customer 
Service
Global Distribution
Suppliers (e.g., Glass, 
stoppers, API)
Sales forecast
Weekly order
6-Month forecast
Weekly updates
Inventory (hrs)
120
Inventory (hrs)
33
Inventory (hrs)
0.5
Inventory (hrs)
15
Inventory (hrs)
18
Inventory (hrs)
23.7
Inventory (hrs)
4.2
Inventory (hrs)
95
Inventory (hrs)
8.3
Inventory (hrs)
13.6
Inventory (hrs)
28.8
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 32 ---
28
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
6.3	 Managing Drug Shortage Risks Due to Aging Manufacturing Facilities 
and Technologies
Manufacturing and quality risks introduced by aging or legacy facilities and technologies (e.g., out-of-
date manufacturing facilities, equipment, analytical technologies) that are not fully up to current stan-
dards or expectations can contribute to an increased likelihood of issues that could potentially result in 
drug shortages. These risks should therefore be proactively identified and managed during the lifecycle 
of the manufacturing facility, process, equipment, or analytical methods. In order to accomplish the 
objectives of ICH Q10, continual improvement is an important element of product realization and of 
maintaining a state of control. The EU GMP guidelines on pharmaceutical quality systems expect for 
medicinal products that:
Product realization is achieved by designing, planning, implementing, maintaining, and con-
tinuously improving a system that allows the consistent delivery of products with appropriate 
quality attributes. Continual improvement is facilitated through the implementation of qual-
ity improvements appropriate to the current level of process and product knowledge (46). 
ICH Q9(R1) states that a robust facility infrastructure can facilitate reliable supply; it includes suitable 
equipment and well-designed facilities for manufacturing (including packaging and testing). Multiple 
factors can affect robustness, such as an aging facility, insufficient maintenance, or an operational 
design that is vulnerable to human error. Risks to supply can be reduced by addressing these factors, 
as well as through the use of innovative technology, such as digitalization, automation, and isolation 
technology, among others.
Updating legacy facilities and technologies or implementing new innovative technologies can present 
multiple challenges, not always cost-related, that prevent companies from pursuing these strategies 
as part of lifecycle management. However, where aging facilities or technologies increase the risks to 
product quality, patient safety, and/or supply interruption, it becomes essential for manufacturers to 
address these risks.
6.3.1	 Causes and Effects of Aging Facilities, Processes, and Analytical Technologies
Manufacturing facilities, processes, and analytical technologies age and, over time, may no longer be 
capable of meeting performance requirements or delivering the expected product quality attributes. 
Some of the main reasons why facilities, processes, or analytical technologies become obsolete are:
•	
Lack of long-term planning and poor understanding of the importance of reinvestment and 
recapitalization of facilities and processes
•	
Concern about the unanticipated negative impact of improvements due to a lack of robust pro-
cess knowledge or of knowledge and experience with the new technology
•	
Short-term focus on maintaining or reducing costs, either cost of goods sold or capital expenses
•	
Negative financial return on investment due to low drug prices (e.g., generics)
•	
Challenges, long lead times, and a lack of harmonized processes for global regulatory approvals 
across multiple health authorities
•	
Absence of positive mindset, attitude, and culture for change and continuous improvement
These factors can produce the decline that occurs over time, for example:
•	
As a cost-saving effort, a company may decide to move to a limited maintenance schedule 
on equipment or reduce the availability of critical spare parts and stock of intermediates. The 
lowered or partial maintenance is believed to save costs; however, breakdowns due to the lack of 
maintenance or a negative trend in the manufacturing environment may stop production or lead 
to product rejections in the future, at a far higher cost.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 33 ---
29
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
•	
A conscious decision to drastically reduce or eliminate facility, process, and/or equipment opti-
mization and improvement activities, over the long run, can result in antiquated and noncom-
pliant facilities and processes with high levels of variability and risk. Additionally, aging facilities 
may limit the ability to increase capacity to meet the product demand.
•	
Maintaining a false assumption that equipment will not become obsolete in the future and will 
continue to be supported by the equipment manufacturer is imprudent. In almost all cases, equip-
ment is designed with an intended life span. As equipment manufacturers move to newer models, 
they often identify a point in time after which they will no longer support older models. The sub-
contractor should be responsible for informing the equipment user as early as possible about any 
changes in the technology status, including obsolescence of equipment, availability of next-gener-
ation equipment, and spare parts status, so the user can change or update the relevant equipment 
before shortages arise. When the manufacturer fails to plan for equipment obsolescence, it often 
results in a quick upgrade done at a high cost and with some loss of production time.
•	
In some cases, a process or analytical technique was designed for one product or output, and a 
change in a product or output might be incompatible with the old process or product.
Quality and GMP compliance gaps associated with such aging facilities, processes, and technologies 
should be addressed even though the existing equipment or methods may be functional and work 
smoothly without problems. Well-trained personnel with a process ownership mentality may make 
such facilities, processes, and analytical methods run, but when such personnel retire or move to 
other tasks, the facility, processes, or analytical methods see their first excursions. These events occur 
especially when the succession personnel are not trained appropriately or rely on the existing process 
without knowing its weaknesses. It is very important to invest in training qualified personnel to run 
these often manual, processes, equipment, and methods.
In addition to not meeting current regulatory expectations, the effects of aging facilities, processes, 
and analytical technologies can be detrimental and may result in a total shutdown of the production 
of a particular drug product, potentially resulting in drug shortages. The continual maintenance and 
improvement of facilities, processes, and analytical methods is essential to maintain specified product 
quality and to assure supplies of the product.
6.3.2	 Continual Improvement of Aging Facilities and Processes
Processing technology and facility designs are forever evolving. The motivation of suppliers to develop 
and distribute new technologies is mainly driven by industry seeking new solutions for current pro-
cessing problems. However, implementation of these solutions becomes challenging in spite of the 
value they can bring.
Given this, implementation of new technology has resulted not just in financial viability, but an overall 
improvement in quality and process efficiency. For example, single-use process technology has many 
advantages over traditional stainless steel equipment, such as faster equipment turnaround, which en-
hances production capacities. Also, single-use components or unit operations can be connected via 
aseptic connector or tube welders, which creates a closed system that enhances the safety of both the 
product and the operator. The technological improvements of single-use technologies have been widely 
embraced, not only for new, but existing processes, as the advantages of using this technology outweigh 
any challenges change commonly bring. [More information about single-use systems can be found in 
PDA Technical Report No. 66: Application of Single-Use Systems in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing.]
Facility and process improvements due to technology innovation are not always as dramatic as single-use 
process technology or new modular cleanroom designs; they can be gradual improvements of existing 
equipment to the next generation. Subtle, but continual improvements demonstrate the right quality 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 34 ---
30
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
attitude and ownership. Such continual improvement activities inevitably lower the risk of process or fa-
cility failure, leading to operations that run more reliably and efficiently and resulting in cost reduction.
6.3.3	 Lifecycle Management and Continual Improvement of Analytical Technologies
During the commercial lifecycle of a product, analytical technologies continue to improve. However, 
commercial product analytical control systems—in-process, release, and stability test methods, specifi-
cations and acceptance criteria, and reference-standard controls—tend to improve minimally, if at all. 
This slow pace of change can be attributed to such factors as high cost, resource requirements, and the 
complexity of the global regulatory environment for making PACs. Revisions to control systems can 
take two to five years, depending on their extent and the number of countries that need to approve 
the PAC. Revisions can take even longer for complex molecules for which physicochemical character-
ization data are limited, development of new methods is challenging, and new methods require new 
equipment in laboratories. Even if a new method is developed, collecting data to establish acceptance 
criteria and obtaining regulatory approvals from multiple health authorities for PACs, can take time.
A proactive approach to control system lifecycle management is important to ensure alignment with 
contemporary product knowledge and industry standards. In addition, companies manufacturing 
follow-on biologics, for example, are publishing detailed physicochemical characterizations of innova-
tor products using new or improved technologies. Lifecycle management of analytical control systems 
should be reviewed periodically (e.g., every five years), not only in response to control system issues 
identified (e.g., through investigations), during routine commercial use.
Ensuring that the analytical control system addresses relevant product quality attributes and that these 
product quality attributes are well controlled throughout the product’s commercial lifespan is im-
portant. Periodic assessments of an analytical control system should determine whether the system 
continues to control drug substance and product quality at the product’s release and at the end of 
its shelf life. Such determinations should be based on comprehensive reviews of current information 
about the molecule, including adequate monitoring of relevant product quality attributes, current 
manufacturing process capability, alignment of acceptance criteria with process capability, compliance 
with evolving regulatory requirements and expectations, the ability to fulfill its intended purpose, and 
current analytical technologies.
Periodic assessments of the control system should include evaluations of gaps or improvement oppor-
tunities, for example, when a new critical quality attribute is identified because of new information 
on a molecule, such as antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, when superior technology is 
available, or when new regulatory requirements are implemented. Such gaps and improvement op-
portunities should be used to determine whether new methods are needed or if current methods need 
to be revised or eliminated. Some examples of when an update to the control system may be needed 
are when:
•	
The current method has a high failure rate, low throughput rate, or analyst ergonomic or safety 
limitations
•	
The method is no longer suitable for the control system
•	
The current method validation is no longer applicable
•	
Superior technology is available
•	
New or revised specifications or acceptance criteria need to be implemented
Acceptance criteria for current control system test methods should be evaluated against manufactur-
ing and process capability (via analysis of lot-release data) and stability data (via annual stability and 
qualification-lot data). The process capability index measures the extent to which the process oper-
ates within its specification limits, given process variability (see PDA Technical Report No. 59 (Revised 
2012): Utilization of Statistical Methods for Production Monitoring). A larger index indicates an in-
creased likelihood that a result will be within the specified limits.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 35 ---
31
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Release acceptance criteria can be evaluated by comparing 95 or 99 tolerance intervals of historical 
batches to current acceptance criteria. If the acceptance criteria do not match manufacturing capabil-
ity, those criteria may require revision. Drug substance and drug product shelf-life acceptance criteria 
can be evaluated by analyzing historical trend plots.
Revisions to current analytical control systems (test methods, acceptance criteria, or shelf-life specifica-
tions) require submission of an application to the relevant health authorities. Therefore, they should 
be coordinated as much as possible with manufacturing process improvements, transfers, and other 
activities requiring regulatory approval. Early discussions with relevant health authorities regarding 
reporting level and documentation requirements for anticipated PACs well before these changes occur 
will allow both the health authorities and the company to plan for the changes in a manner that will 
help reduce the risk of drug shortages.
6.4	
Reducing Drug Shortages Through Expedited Post-Approval Changes
When companies face a potential drug shortage, they can mitigate the risk by expediting a change that 
may have already been submitted to a national health authority for approval. For example, a company 
is experiencing an unexpected increase in demand in Country 1 that cannot be met with the current 
capacity of Facility A. If Facility B has been approved for manufacture of the product by multiple coun-
tries and it meets the GMP expectations of Country 1, though Country 1 has not yet approved Facility 
B, Facility B can produce additional products using the same manufacturing process. In this example, 
requesting an expedited review and approval of the PAC application for Facility B in Country 1 can be 
a viable alternative to mitigate the risk of the drug shortage. Section 6.4 describes how PACs can be 
expedited while demonstrating that patients are not exposed to any added risk because of the change.
Current regulatory PAC processes vary among countries in the levels and terminology of change cat-
egories, requirements for documentation of changes, the need for preapproval facility inspections, and 
timelines for approval. For these reasons, companies usually need to run multiple versions of a manu-
facturing process in parallel for the same product, depending on when each national health authority 
is likely to approve a change. Doing so is logistically challenging from the standpoint of production, 
inventory management, and supply. In some countries, when the anticipated PAC approval timelines 
do not match the forecasted demand, it can lead to the lack of availability of the product. This situ-
ation is especially challenging for biological products due to the highly complicated manufacturing 
processes involved; it can become even more complex when multiple changes pertaining to a product 
are under review at the same time by different countries. 
In such cases, the company should communicate with the health authorities responsible for trade 
where a potential drug shortage might occur and request an expedited review of pending PACs or of-
fer a previous version of the product if available in the inventory. Health authorities assess PACs using 
science and risk-based approaches while ensuring that they meet national legislative and regulatory re-
quirements. The outcome of these assessments, ideally, should be the same regardless of the geographic 
location of the assessor; it almost always is. However, it would be beneficial if the regulatory approval 
processes for PACs could be harmonized. Harmonization would also facilitate continual improvement 
and product realization, two objectives of ICH Q10. 
An example of an effort towards harmonization of regulatory expectations is The International Coali-
tion of Medicines Regulatory Authorities’ (ICMRA) Pharmaceutical Quality Knowledge Management 
System Initiative (PQKMS) (47). According to ICH Q10, Annex 1, companies that demonstrate an 
effective PQS and process and product understanding, including the use of QRM principles, may be 
eligible for enhanced regulatory approaches. This is sometimes referred to as “regulatory flexibility,” where 
there may be an opportunity to “optimize science and risk-based post-approval change processes to maxi-
mize benefits from innovation and continual improvement” (22). Additionally, ICH Quality Guideline 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 36 ---
32
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
Q12: Technical and Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle Management provides 
a framework via PQS to facilitate the management of PACs in a more predictable and efficient manner 
throughout the product lifecycle. Such opportunities may include managing more PACs in the PQS 
only, rather than as a prior-approval PAC. The intent of the guideline is to promote continual improve-
ment and innovation, while strengthening quality assurance and reliable product supply (48). The In-
dustry One-Voice-of-Quality for PAC (1VQ for PAC) initiative has developed solutions and guidance 
on how a company can demonstrate an effective PQS (49, 50). The PIC/S paper, Recommendation: How 
to Evaluate and Demonstrate the Effectiveness of a Pharmaceutical Quality System in relation to Risk-Based 
Change Management, may facilitate a health authority’s assessment of a company’s change management 
system and has the potential to provide transparency to how effectively PACs are assessed within that 
change management system (51).The concept has been proposed that health authorities provide incen-
tives to companies for innovation and implementation of new technologies that reduce risk and lead to 
measurable shortage prevention. Some examples of innovation that health authorities might encourage 
with incentives are the replacement of conventional open processes with isolator technology, the use of 
closed rather than open manufacturing processes, enhancements in microbial and adventitious agent 
controls, introduction of rapid microbiology methods, and the implementation of technologies that 
reduce manufacturing cycle times, improve process capability, make a process more efficient, or enhance 
a product’s analytical capabilities.
Companies and health authorities could work together to enable, where appropriate, streamlined re-
view and approval of the following changes, provided that agreed-upon acceptance criteria from health 
authorities are met and that these changes do not introduce increased risks to patient safety or product 
quality or efficacy:
•	
Enhanced redundancy
—	 Additional manufacturing site or line already approved in at least one significant market or 
country that can serve as a reference
—	 Additional raw material or and API suppliers
—	 Additional suppliers of container closure or other processing components
—	 Additional dosage forms already approved in at least one reference country
•	
Improved process and product controls
—	 New or improved equipment and technology
—	 Manufacturing changes that lead to improved process capability
—	 New analytical technologies that enhance product controls, including adventitious agent 
controls
•	
Other types of changes (provided that validated and preset criteria are met)
—	 Change in reference standards
—	 Use of new working cell banks
—	 Addition of a product to a multiproduct facility
—	 Scale-up of a manufacturing process
—	 Extension of shelf life with supporting documentation
—	 Change in utilities (e.g., HVAC, clean steam) or their operation with no impact on product quality
—	 Change in equipment (design and/or operating principle) with no impact on product quality
—	 Change in steam-in-place or clean-in-place process
—	 Change in environmental monitoring program (e.g., sample location and frequency)
—	 Change in cleaning methods
In all cases, the company concerned should be able to demonstrate that it has an effective PQS in 
place. In this regard, companies should expand their PQS to address PAC planning and assessment, 
especially how to conduct risk assessments and how to demonstrate risk control. The industry should 
work with health authorities to develop predefined global change protocols (gCP) that can be available 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 37 ---
33
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
and used as a standard (non-product-specific) template for the categorization, predefined data require-
ments, and implementation of the different types of changes. Health authorities have provided guide-
lines on procedures and data requirements for PACs, such as Health Canada’s Guidance Document: 
Post-Notice of Compliance (NOC) Changes: Quality Document and WHO’s Annex 3: Guidelines on pro-
cedures and data requirements for changes to approved biotherapeutic products (TRS No. 1011). Common 
gCPs that are developed in partnership with health authorities for the different types of changes can 
help standardize activities and requirements across the industry for a particular change type such that 
expectations are clearly known prior to considering the change. This would help expedite the review 
and approval of the PAC. Such gCPs could potentially result in a lower regulatory reporting category 
and expedited review from multiple health authorities yet address individual health authority require-
ments. The gCP should include validation activities and even acceptance criteria (where possible) that 
should be expected for the different types of changes.
Each company could then use the gCP for the relevant type of change as a starting point in develop-
ing the submission for each of the changes in the PAC Management Protocol for their product. The 
company should update the predefined gCP with the specific aspects of the change for their particular 
product. The change(s) should not have a negative impact on product quality, safety, or efficacy. The 
company should describe and demonstrate through the gCP that the change does not present an in-
creased risk to patients. Some of the changes listed in this section can be associated with potential high 
risks. Therefore, it is important that the risks associated with the change(s) are adequately identified, 
assessed, and controlled. The risk assessment for the change(s) should be included in the submission 
for the change to demonstrate that appropriate risk control measures are in place and provide assur-
ance that patient safety, product quality, and product efficacy are not impacted.
