9.0 
Conclusions
The objective of ensuring an uninterrupted supply of safe, efficacious products to patients is shared by 
regulators, legislators, healthcare providers, and industry bringing them together to communicate for 
jointly developing solutions that serve the best interests of patients. As the risk to the patient popula-
tion from a drug shortage rises, the level of rigor, effort, and cross-functional collaboration within an 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 43 ---
39
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
organization to address the risk should also increase. This effort should be coupled with effective 
communication among the organization, health authorities, and other relevant stakeholders to 
proactively manage drug shortage risks. 
Although challenging, the industry should address the concerns associated with drug shortages, given 
the objective of protecting patients from harm. Proactively identifying relevant drug shortage hazards 
and robustly managing drug shortage risks in the end-to-end product value chain, as well as effectively 
and promptly communicating potential shortages to all stakeholders, is essential to reduce the risk of 
drug shortages.
TR-68 provides a practical framework that companies can use, a triage model to assess drug shortage 
risks, and templates for developing a Drug Shortage Risk Register and a Drug Shortage Prevention and 
Response Plan at a product level. It also describes ways that industry can engage more proactively with 
health authorities to request expedited review and approval of certain PACs by multiple health authorities 
to reduce the risks of drug shortages. This could be achieved by using agreed-upon PAC management 
plans and harmonized gCPs. Such protocols would be helpful for companies to address the risk of drug 
shortages due to aging facilities, processes, and analytical technologies by modernizing their facilities and 
implementing new technologies. This technical report also leverages the guidance developed by the AESPG, 
EFPIA, EGA, and PPTA collaboration for communications between MAHs and health authorities.
10.0 
References
1.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q9(R1): Quality Risk 
Management; ICH: Geneva, 2023.
2.	 Birgli® AG. An Evaluation of Medicines 
Shortages in Europe with a more In-Depth 
Review of these in France, Greece, Poland, 
Spain, and the United Kingdom; European 
Association of Euro-Pharmaceutical 
Companies (EAEPC): Zug, Switzerland, 
2013.
3.	 Gloor, C. A Brief Update to the 2013 Birgli 
Report on Medicines Shortages in Europe; 
Birgli Limited: Cheshire, UK, 2023.
4.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Drug Shortages: Root Causes and Potential 
Solutions; U.S. FDA: Silver Spring, Md., 
2020.
5.	 U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland 
Security & Governmenatl Affairs. Short 
Supply: The Health and National Security 
Risks of Drug Shortages; GPO: Washington, 
DC, 2023.
6.	 European Medicines Agency. Reflection Paper 
on Medicinal Product Supply Shortages Caused 
by Manufacturing/Good Manufacturing 
Practice Compliance Problems: Implementation 
Plan 2012-2015; EMA: London, 2012.
7.	 European Medicines Agency. Workshop on 
Product Shortages due to Manufacturing 
and Quality Problems: Developing 
a Proactive Approach to Prevention. 
European Medicines Agency Events. 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/events/
workshop-product-shortages-due-
manufacturing-quality-problems-
developing-proactive-approach (accessed 3 
Jun 2023).
8.	 European Medicines Agency. Developing 
a Proactive Approach to the Prevention of 
Medicines Shortages due to Manufacturing 
and Quality Problems; Report from a 
Stakeholder Meeting at the European 
Medicines Agency - 9 October 2015; EMA: 
London, 2015.
9.	 European Commission. Pharmaceutical 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 44 ---
40
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
Strategy for Europe; European Commission: 
Brussels, 2020.
10.	 European Medicines Agency. Moving Together 
Towards Better Prevention of Medicines 
Shortages in the EU: Feedback from the HMA/
EMA Multistakeholder Workshop on Shortages, 
1-2 March 2023; EMA: London, 2023.
11.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Strategic Plan for Preventing and Mitigating 
Drug Shortages; U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 
2013.
12.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Report 
to Congress: Drug Shortages for Calendar 
Year 2021; U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services: Silver Spring, MD, 2022.
13.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Report to Congress: Drug Shortages CY 2022; 
U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services: Silver Spring, MD, 2023.
14.	 The White House. Building Resilient 
Supply Chains, Revitalizing American 
Manufacturing, and Fostering Broad-Based 
Growth; The White House: Washington, 
DC, 2021.
15.	 Europe, E P a C o. Directive 2001/83/
ECD on the Community code Relating to 
Medicinal Products for Human Use; Council 
of Europe: Strasbourg, 2001.
16.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Final Concept Paper: ICH Q9(R1) - Quality 
Risk Management; ICH: Geneva, 2020.
17.	 European Commission. Commission 
Directive 2003/94/EC of 8 October 2003 
Laying Down the Principles and Guidelines 
of Good Manufacturing Practice in Respect 
of Medicinal Products for Human Use 
and Investigational Medicinal Products for 
Human Use, EudraLex - Volume 4 - Good 
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Guidelines; 
European Commission: Brussels, 2003.
18.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
FD&C Act, Subchapter V, Part A–Drugs 
and Devices, Sec. 506C – Discontinuance or 
Interruption in the Production of Life-Saving 
Drugs; 21 USC 356c: Discontinuance or 
interruption in the production of life-saving 
drugs. U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services: Washington, DC, 1997.
19.	 Ramnarine, E, et al. Preventing and 
Managing Drug Shortages. PDA Letter 
2014, Apr 29 2014, 36-39.
20.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Guidance for Industry: Planning for the 
Effects of High Absenteeism to Ensure 
Availability of Medically Necessary Drug 
Products; Center for Biologics Evaluation 
and Research. U.S. Department of Heatlh 
and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 
2011.
21.	 European Medicines Agency. Guidance 
on Detection and Notification of Shortages 
of Medicinal Products for Marketing 
Authorisation Holders (MAHs) in the Union 
(EEA); EMA: London, 2019.
22.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical 
Quality System; ICH: Geneva, 2008.
23.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Report to Congress: First Annual Report on 
Drug Shortages for Calendar Year 2013; 
U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services: Rockville, MD, 2014.
24.	 European Federation of Pharmaceutical 
Industries and Associations. Optimising 
Post-Approval Change Management for 
Timely Access to Medicines Worldwide; Efpia: 
Brussels, 2017.
25.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Guidance for Industry: Changes to an 
Approved NDA or ANDA; Specifications 
– Use of Enforcement Discretion for 
Compendial Changes; Center for Drug 
Evaluation and Research. U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services: Silver 
Spring, Md, 2004.
26.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 
CFR 314.70 Supplements and other changes 
to an approved NDA; U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services: Washington, 
DC, 2016.
27.	 International Pharmaceutical Supply 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 45 ---
41
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Chain Consortium. Rx-3260. The 
Premier Pharmaceutical Supply 
Chain Consortium. www.rx-360.
org/AlertsNews/Rx360Newsletters/
Rx360NewsNovember2010/ 
MessagefromChair/tabid/211/Default.aspx 
(accessed 4 Dec 2023).
28.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Code 
of Federal Regulations, Title 21, Chapter 
9, Subchapter V, part A, Section 356c; 
U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services: Silver Springs, MD, 2020.
29.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Manual of Policies and Procedures, MAPP 
4190.1 Rev. 3: Drug Shortage Management; 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research: 
Silver Spring, MD, 2018.
30.	 European Medicines Agency. Reflection 
Paper on Medicinal Product Supply Shortages 
Caused by Manufacturing/Good Manufactur-
ing Practice Compliance Problems; EMA: 
London, 2012.
31.	 European Medicines Agency. Public Infor-
mation on Medicine Shortages. Human 
Regulatory. https://www.ema.europa.eu/
en/human-regulatory/post-authorisation/
availability-medicines/public-information-
medicine-shortages (accessed 1 Jul 2023).
32.	 World Health Organization. Assessing the 
Magnitude and Nature of Shortages of Es-
sential Medicines and Vaccines - Focus on the 
WHO European Region; WHO Regional 
Office for Europe: Copenhagen, 2020.
33.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food 
and Drug Administration Safety and In-
novation Act; Public Law 112-144. GPO: 
Washington, DC, 2012.
34.	 European Commission. Commission 
Directive (EU) 2017/1572 of 15 September 
2017...as regards the Principles and Guide-
lines of Good Manufacturing Practice for Me-
dicinal Products for Human Use; European 
Commission: Brussels, 2017.
35.	 European Commission. Part I, Chapter 5: 
Production, EudraLex – Volume 4 – Guide-
lines for Good Manufacturing Practices for 
Medicinal Products for Human and Veteri-
nary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 
2014.
36.	 Health Canada. Guidance for Industry: 
Management of Drug Submissions; File num-
ber: 13-119235-57, Health Products and 
Food Branch. Canada Minister of Public 
Works and Government Services: Ottawa, 
Ontario, 2013.
37.	 Health Canada. Drug Shortages Canada. 
Drug Shortages Homepage. https://www.
drugshortagescanada.ca/ (accessed Sep 11, 
2013).
38.	 AESGP, efpia, EGA, PPTA Collaborative. 
Quality and Manufacturing Driven Supply 
Disruptions: Industry Communication Prin-
ciples to Authorities; European Medicines 
Agency,: London, 2014.
39.	 European Medicines Agency. Good Practice 
Guidance for Communication to the Public 
on Medicines’ Availability Issues: Recommen-
dation for EU National Competent Authori-
ties and EMA to Ensure Adequate Public 
Information; EMA: London, 2019.
40.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality 
Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and 
Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations; 
PDA, Inc.: Bethesda, Md., 2012.
41.	 European Federation of Pharmaceutical 
Industries and Associations. EFPIA Good 
Practice: Reducing Risk for Drug Products 
Shortages; Efpia: Brussels, 2013.
42.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 66: Application of Single-Use 
Systems in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing; 
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2014; p 152.
43.	 European Medicines Agency. Good Practices 
for Industry for the Prevention of Human 
Medicinal Product Shortages; EMA: London, 
2023.
44.	 European Medicines Agency. Good Practices 
for Patient and Healthcare Professional Or-
ganisations on the Prevention of Shortages of 
Medicines for Human Use; EMA: London, 
2023.
45.	 European Medicines Agency. Criteria for 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 46 ---
42
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
Classification of Critical Medicinal Products 
for Human and Veterinary Use: Shortages 
Due to GMP Non-Compliance/Quality 
Defects; EMA: London, 2016.
46.	 European Commission. Part I, Chapter 
1: Pharmaceutical Quality System, 
EudraLex – Volume 4 – Guidelines for Good 
Manufacturing Practices for Medicinal 
Products for Human and Veterinary Use; 
European Commission: Brussels, 2013.
47.	 International Coalition of Medicines 
Regulatory Authorities. ICMRA-Iindustry 
Virtual Workshop on Development of 
a Pharmaceutical Quality Knowledge 
Management System. Pharmaceutical 
Quality Knowledge Management System 
(PQKMS). https://icmra.info/drupal/en/
strategicinitatives/pqkms (accessed 1 Jul 
2023).
48.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q12: Technical and 
Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceutical 
Product Lifecycle Management; ICH: 
Geneva, 2019.
49.	 Ramnarine, E, et al. Industry One-Voice-
of-Quality (1VQ) Solutions: Effective 
Management of Post-Approval Changes 
in the Pharmaceutical Quality System 
(PQS)—through Enhanced Science and 
Risk-Based Approaches. PDA J Pharm Sci 
Technol 2020, 74 (4), 456-67.
50.	 Vinther, A, et al. Industry One-Voice-of-
Quality Solutions Management Review of 
Post-Approval Changes Guide. 2021, 75 
(5), 454-57.
51.	 Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/
Cooperation Scheme (PIC/S). 
Recommendation: How to Evaluate 
and Demonstrate the Effectiveness of a 
Pharmaceutical Quality System in relation 
to Risk-Based Change Management; PIC/S: 
Geneva, 2021.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 47 ---
43
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
11.0 
Appendix 1
Company:
Drug Shortage Risk Register 
(Template as part of TR-68 (Revised), ©2024 PDA, Inc.)
Date:
ID
Product and 
Strength
Potential 
Drug Shortage 
Hazard
Hazardous 
Situations
Countries/ 
Regions that Could 
be Affected
Affected 
Internal Area
Initial Risk 
Level
Risk Indicators
Planned 
Risk Control 
Actions
Risk Level After 
Risk Control
Person(s) 
Responsible
Status
Due Date
Unique 
reference 
number
Identify product and 
strength
Risk description in a 
newspaper headline 
style; reference as 
applicable
Root cause or risk 
assessment title
Identify countries/ 
regions that could be 
affected
All sites/locations, 
affiliates, and 
functional areas 
affected by a shortage
Risk Level or indication 
of the risk as high or 
medium. Note: Based 
on a consideration 
of current shortage 
prevention controls and 
their likely effectiveness 
Potential leading and 
lagging indicators for 
this drug shortage risk
Planned mitigation 
actions, (CAPA number, if 
applicable)
Risk Level after mitigation 
or whether residual risk is 
high or medium
Who is responsible for 
coordination of the 
mitigation action(s)
“Planned,” “In 
process,” “Delayed,” or 
“Completed”
Current deadline 
for completing 
recommended actions 
[dd.mm.yy]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 48 ---
44
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
12.0 
Appendix 2
Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan 
Risk Triage Approach for Proactive Management of Drug Shortage
(Template is part of TR-68 (Revised), © 2024 PDA, Inc.)
Complete this triage model for each dosage form by assessing the product categorization, the impact 
of the shortage on patients, and the end-to-end controls used to prevent or mitigate the risk. Use the 
form proactively to identify ways to prevent a shortage or reactively to respond to a shortage.
A.	 Basic Data
API name
Drug Product Name
Pharmaceutical Form and 
Strengths
ATC (Anatomical Therapeutic 
Chemical) Code
Pack Size(s)
Therapeutic Indication(s)
Route(s) of Administration
Contact Person/Contact 
Information
Other Information1
1	 Other information available may include, for example, countries where marketed, reference to market authorization; in case of response 
plan: affected by the supply disruption, shortage details including impacted countries, expected end date.
B.	 Impact to Patient
Mark the Risk Level as A, B, or C based on the product’s therapeutic use and availability of alternative 
therapies using the criteria below.
Availability of Alternatives
No Alternatives 
Available
Alternative Products 
Available/API 
Available
Same Product/API 
Available
Therapeutic Use & Consequences 
if Alternate Product not Available
Medically necessary product, 
life supporting or life 
sustaining
Fatal or severe irreversible 
harm if the patient is not 
treated with the product
Risk Level A
Risk Level A
Risk Level B
Acute short term or chronic 
long term
Severe harm but reversible if 
patient is not treated with the 
product
Risk Level A
Risk Level B
Risk Level C
Other indications
Inconvenience if patient is not 
treated with the product
Risk Level B
Risk Level C
Risk Level C
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 49 ---
45
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
C.	 Risk Priority Level (1, 2, or 3) Based on Likelihood of a Shortage
Based on the Risk Level (A, B, or C) identified in Section B, the probability of a shortage, and the 
consideration of the drug shortage prevention controls currently in place and their likely effectiveness, 
indicate the Risk Priority Level (1, 2, or 3) using the criteria below.
Likelihood of Shortage
High
Medium
Low
Therapeutic Use & Consequences if 
Product not Available
Risk
Level A
Risk Priority
Level 1
Risk Priority
Level 1
Risk Priority
Level 2
Risk
Level B
Risk Priority
Level 1
Risk Priority
Level 2
Risk Priority
Level 3
Risk
Level C
Risk Priority
Level 2
Risk Priority
Level 3
Risk Priority
Level 3
D.	 Risk Control Activities for a Proactive Drug Shortage Prevention Plan
Based on the potential Risk Priority Level (1, 2, or 3), describe suggested controls to be established, the 
communication plan (in the event of a shortage), and other considerations. This can be done either in 
text or table form. See a potential table format below.
Risk Priority
Suggested Controls / Preventive Actions
Level 1
…
Level 2
…
Level 3
Generally accepted risk level 
E.	 Risk control Activities for a Drug shortage Response Plan
Develop a drug shortage response plan for implementation in the event of a drug shortage and discuss 
the plan, as needed, with the relevant health authorities.
1.	 Identify the reason(s) for the shortage or temporary disruptions (check all that apply):
•	
Manufacturing Issues
 Industry, e.g., capability, capacity, storage, transport/distribution/shipment, regulatory 
and quality compliance, CDMO
 Component, e.g., raw materials, API, excipient, equipment
 Government, e.g., changes in legislation or guidance, enforcement, intellectual property 
rights protection
 Multistakeholder, e.g., infrastructure (e.g., power supply), registration process
 Time to manufacture and batch release
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 50 ---
46
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
•	
Business Issues
 Unexpected product demand
 Industry, e.g., quotas
 Regulatory delay
 Wholesale, distribution, e.g., parallel trade, demand, known real manufacturer
 Government, e.g., national protectionism, export ban, health economics, channel strategies
 Multistakeholder, e.g., commercial priorities, stockpiling, number of competitors
•	
Economic and Geographic Issues
 Industry, e.g., market withdrawals, delayed introduction
 Wholesale, distribution, e.g., commercial tendering
 Governments, e.g., price reductions, tax structure, reference pricing, reductions in spending
 Multistakeholder, e.g., exchange rate, tightening of payment, payment delay, affordability
•	
Reliability Issues
 Wholesale, distribution, healthcare provider, e.g., off-label use, compassionate use, 
competitor sourcing
 Governments, e.g., environmental standards
 Multistakeholder, e.g., competent staff, illegal product introduction, theft, stolen 
material, counterfeits, substandard, national disasters, health emergencies, pandemic, 
demand increase
•	
Others, please specify ____________________________
2.	 Assess risks to patients from the shortage per Section B (attach risk assessment), including the 
expected duration of the situation and the patient groups likely to be affected by the shortage 
(e.g., neonates, people with diabetes).
3.	 Create (and attach) a short-term action plan, based on Section D and/or discussions with rel-
evant health authorities, to include actions that can be taken to address the shortage in the near 
term (e.g., when alternative therapies are available).
4.	 Execute the communication plan based on the shortage’s characteristics (e.g., Dear Health Care 
Provider letters, informed consent forms, or patient letters) 
5.	 Create (and attach) a longer-term action plan based on Section D above, including actions and 
timelines needed to return the product supply to normal.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 51 ---
47
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
F.	 Risk Review and Updates
Identify the triggers for reviewing and updating the Drug Shortage Prevention and Response Plan.
Check the trigger(s) that will drive reviews and revisions of the Drug Shortage Prevention 
and Response Plan:
 New product indication
 New market approval
 Approval of a new alternative or unlicensed product
 Shortage of an alternate product
 New risks to product quality or availability
 Shutdown of a facility or withdrawal of GMP Certificate
 Inventory or safety stock levels below target level
 Increase in product usage volumes
 Others, please specify ____________________________ 
G.	 Approvals Required 
Name
Title and Function
Signature
Date
Person Responsible
QA Decision-Maker
Senior Management Function
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 52 ---
48
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
•	 Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
•	 Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
•	 Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an 
Authorized User 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
•	 Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other 
than an Authorized User 
•	 Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available 
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
•	 Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic 
Publication 
•	 Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA 
Electronic Publication 
•	 Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication 
or its content 
•	 Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or 
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose 
•	 Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any 
text or graphics 
•	 Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information 
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material 
To License or purchase Reprints
•	 Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a fee.  
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact: 
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway, 
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
•	 Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.  
To order reprints, please contact:  
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150, 
Bethesda, MD 20814.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 53 ---
Risk-Based Approach for Prevention and Management of Drug Shortages
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside 
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are 
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. 
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the 
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a 
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available. 
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s 
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products Advisory Board, Biopharma-
ceutical Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the 
PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and determines whether or not to publish the document as an 
official PDA Technical Report. 
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged 
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be 
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org. 
PDA Officers and Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck 
Chair-Elect: Melissa Seymour, BMS
Secretary: Bettine Boltres, PhD, West Pharmaceutical Services
Treasurer: Emma Ramnarine, Boehringer Ingelheim
Immediate Past-Chair: Susan Schniepp, RCA
President: Glenn E. Wright
Directors 
Lisa Bennett, Seer Pharma
Christiana Campa, PhD, GSK
Andrew Chang, PhD, Novo Nordisk, Inc.
Cylia Chen, MA, Amgen
Mirko Gabriele, PhD, Thermo Fisher Scientific
Marc Gloglovsky, ValSource Inc. 
Andrew Hopkins, Abbvie
Stephan O. Krause, PhD, Bristol Myers Squibb
Ivy Louis, VIENNI Training & Consulting LLP
Amy McDaniel, BMS
Brigitte Reutter-Haerle, Vetter Pharma International GmbH
Osamu Shirokizawa, Life Scientia, Ltd.
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Carrie Horton, Project Manager, Regulatory Affairs
Josh Eaton, Senior Director, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing and Press 
Relations
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer
Sanctioning Advisory Board: RAQAB
Denyse Baker, Eli Lilly and Company Limited, (Chair)
Eva Urban, CSL Behring AG, (Vice-chair)
Masahiro Akimoto, Heartseed Inc.
Lisa Benette, SeerPharma
Chuck Bornhoeft, Rion
Vinny Browning III, Amgen, Inc.
Ursula Busse, PhD, Tigen Pharma
Marcello Colao, GSK Vaccines
Rosane Cuber, Bio-Manguinhos/FIOCRUZ
Karolyn Gale, Emergent BioSolutions, Inc.
Beth Haas, Haas Pharma Consulting, LLC
Kir Henrici, The Henrici Group, LLC
Dinesh Khokal, Pharmaceutical Industry Expert
Beth Kirschenheiter, Bristol Myers Squibb
Hue Kwon, Samsung Bioepis
Demetra Macheras, AbbVie, Inc.
Toni Manzano, Aison
Anette Yan Marcussen, NNE A/S
Amanda McFarland, ValSource, Inc.
Vishal Sharma, Vienni Training and Consulting LLP
Michele Simone, Bracco
Kelly Waldron, ValSource
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 54 ---
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
