3.0 
Recognizing Drug Shortages as a Global Problem
The primary objective in the management of drug shortages is preventing harm to patients. In any situation, 
it is important to maintain the continuity of supply such that all patients receive the medicines they need 
every time they need them to manage their medical condition. The risk of potential drug shortages should 
be considered when making decisions related to the supply and/or manufacture of drug products and their 
corresponding active substances. This technical report addresses how drug shortages caused by manufacturing 
and quality issues can be anticipated and avoided using a risk-based approach at a product level.
A good example of a shortage that had global impact and needed to be managed by multiple health 
authorities was “The Great Acetonitrile Shortage” in 2008-2009. Acetonitrile is used as a solvent in many 
analytical procedures that are included in submissions for the approval of drug products and in chemical 
reactions for the manufacture of active pharmaceutical ingredients (API). The two main manufacturers 
of this solvent, both located in the same area in China, were required to stop manufacturing acetonitrile 
to reduce air pollution for the 2008 Summer Olympics. A few months later, in September of 2008, 
acetonitrile production in Texas was interrupted due to hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico. The combination 
of these two events caused shortages of several APIs and drug products. Only a few companies were aware 
that the product would not be manufactured for a year and, subsequently, had built up their inventories of 
the product in advance. Most regulatory agencies accepted alternative analytical methods on a short-term 
basis. The FDA also allowed changes to existing validated test methods within an approved application, 
either a new drug application (NDA) or an abbreviated new drug application (ANDA), to accommodate 
using less acetonitrile or an alternative solvent to acetonitrile. The Agency allowed companies to process 
this as a minor change in the Annual Report for the given drug application as long as the change met 
the criteria stated in the FDA Guidance for Industry: Changes to an Approved NDA or ANDA and Code of 
Federal Regulations [(21CFR314.70(d)(2)(vii)] (25, 26).
This example illustrates that, in some cases, drug shortages can occur very suddenly and for reasons 
that are difficult to predict. Common antibiotics such as amoxicillin have also experienced shortages 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 11 ---
7
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
Figure 3.0-1	
Examples of the Diversity of Factors and Stakeholders that Could Contribute to Drug Shortages 
MANUFACTURING
•	 Process Variability
•	 State of Control
•	 Facilities / Equipment
•	 Storage / Distribution
•	 Capacity, Capability
•	 Outsourcing & Suppliers
•	 Regulatory & Quality
•	 Changes in legislation, guidance, 
enforcement, and enforcement
•	 IP protection
•	 Infrastructure
•	 Registration process
BUSINESS
•	 Quotas
•	 Parallel Trade 
•	 Demand
•	 Real manufacturer known
•	 National protectionism
•	 Export ban
•	 Health economics
•	 Channel strategies
•	 Commercial Priorities
•	 Stockpiling
•	 Not ordering
•	 Number of competitors
ECONOMIC / GEOGRAPHIC
•	 Market withdrawals
•	 Delayed introduction
•	 Commercial tendering
•	 Price reductions 
•	 Tax structure
•	 Reference pricing
•	 Reductions in spending
•	 Exchange rate
•	 Tightening of payment
•	 Delayed payment
•	 Affordability
RELIABILITY
•	 Off label use
•	 Compassionate use
•	 Competitor sourcing
•	 Environmental standards
•	 Competent staff
•	 Illegal product introduction
•	 Theft, Stolen material
•	 Counterfeits, Substandard
•	 National disasters 
•	 Health Emergencies
•	 Pandemic
Manufacturer & Marketing 
Authorisation Holder
Agents, Brokers, Traders, Distributors,  
Wholesalers, Repackers, and Relabellers etc.
Patient
Governments
Multiple or Other Stakeholders incl. Media
Manufacturing Facility
Distribution Center
Wholesale 
Distribution
Hospital & 
Pharmacy
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 12 ---
8
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
globally due to supply-chain disruptions. Hence, it is important for companies and regulators alike 
to do their best to anticipate potential drug shortages and prevent them from happening. Improved 
surveillance and communications through forums and consortiums, such as the International Supply 
Chain Consortium (Rx-360), can help in managing widespread impact in such instances (27).
The 2013 Birgli® report identified three principal types of causes for drug shortages—economic, business, 
and manufacturing supply chain issues—that are still highly relevant today (2). Since then, an awareness 
of the diversity of possible root causes for shortages has continued to evolve (4). Figure 3.0-1 illustrates 
the impact across manufacturers, MAHs, wholesale distributors, hospitals and pharmacies, governments, 
and other stakeholders based on the current understanding of multifactorial root causes for driving drug 
shortages (27). It is important to acknowledge the role of the media in public perception of shortages. 
Figure 3.0-1 illustrates why it is important to recognize the landscape of stakeholders and stakeholder 
interdependencies as a complex ecosystem. It underscores the need for appropriate and timely com-
munications among all the players to better manage unintended consequences of actions that any one 
stakeholder might take to prevent or manage drug shortages.
3.1	
Evolution of Terminologies 
T﻿hhough single, internationally harmonized definitions do not currently exist for “drug shortage,” 
“meaningful disruption,” and “medically necessary product,” various definitions of these terms have been 
published. The FDA defines drug shortage as “a period of time when the demand or projected demand for 
the drug in the United States exceeds the drug’s supply ” (28). In general, the FDA Drug Shortage Staff 
focuses on shortages of medically necessary products that have a significant effect on public health (18, 23, 
29). The EMA earlier described drug shortages as “disruptions to the manufacturing supply chain” (6, 30) 
and updated the definition of shortages in 2019 to be more specific in terms of the gap between supply 
and demand (21). In addition, individual EU member states have local definitions of drug shortages (31). 
The EU’s current definition of “critical medicines” also includes the criteria of therapeutic use, 
availability of alternative(s), and supply-chain vulnerabilities. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) refers to a “shortage” as a situation where the supply of medicines, health products or vaccines 
identified as essential by the health system is considered to be insufficient to meet public health and 
patient needs. WHO indicates that: 
On the demand side: a “shortage” will occur when demand exceeds supply at any point in 
the supply chain and may ultimately create a “stockout” at the point of appropriate service 
delivery to the patient if the cause of the shortage cannot be resolved in a timely manner 
relative to the clinical needs of the patient (32).
The understanding of these terms may also vary in some respects by the different stakeholders in the 
supply chain (MAHs, regulatory authorities, distributors, wholesalers, providers, and patients). How-
ever, there is alignment on the concept that these definitions are based on the fundamental importance 
of ensuring an uninterrupted supply of medicines to prevent harm to patients. They are also aligned 
with public-service obligations held by MAHs and wholesale distributors in relation to ensuring the 
supply of medicinal products in the markets in which they operate.
3.2	
Reporting Requirements and Current Regulatory Landscapes Related 
to Drug Shortages
Reporting potential shortages to relevant health authorities is a legal requirement. In the United States, 
Section 506C of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act establishes notification requirements to 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 13 ---
9
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
manufacturers of product discontinuance (18). Title X of the Food and Drug Administration Safety 
and Innovation Act, enacted in July 2012 to address drug shortages, also led to Section 506C being 
amended to require annual reporting of drug shortages to the U.S. Congress (33). However, it has 
been noted that manufacturers are not required by law to report increased demand or export restric-
tions for life supporting or life sustaining products (5).
In the European Union, Article 13 of EU GMP Directive 2017/1572 defines the legal requirement 
for a manufacturer “to inform the competent authority and, if applicable, the MAH of any defect that 
could result in a recall or an abnormal restriction on supply” (34). Local legislation implementing this 
directive in the member states has demonstrated individual approaches being followed by each coun-
try. Additionally, in August 2014, Chapter 5: Production of EudraLex – Volume 4 – Guidelines for Good 
Manufacturing Practices for Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use, Part 1, was updated to 
introduce guidance in relation to supply restrictions and their notification to the MAH (Sec. 5.71). It 
specified that such notifications “should be done in a timely manner to facilitate reporting of the re-
striction in supply by the MAH, to the relevant competent authorities” (35). Other health authorities 
(e.g., individual EU member states, Health Canada, Swissmedic, Therapeutic Goods Administration) 
are also implementing regulatory requirements in this regard. ICH Q9(R1) further highlights the need 
for appropriate and timely management of health authority notification.
While reporting requirements and mechanisms for drug shortages vary across different health 
authorities and are subject to varying legal requirements, the expectation of visibility to shortage 
information has increased over the last several years. More information can be found at the websites 
of the individual health authorities on local drug shortage situations.1 Other associations, such as the 
American Society of Health System Pharmacists, also may provide information on drug shortages and 
their management through their websites. Health Canada has provided a multistakeholder toolkit 
that provides strategies and tools for key players in the supply chain. This list demonstrates the variety 
of stakeholders (e.g., manufacturers, group purchasing organizations, regional health authorities, 
pharmacists, health care professionals, federal government among others) that should be responsible 
for addressing drug shortages at specific stages in the supply chain (36, 37). The differences in 
reporting requirements and approaches in different countries continue to make it challenging to 
draw meaningful comparisons of data on drug shortages or to quantify the problem at a global or 
regional level. The European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (EFPIA), 
European Generic and Biosimilar Medicines Association (EGA), Association of the European Self-
Care Industry (AESGP), and Plasma Protein Therapeutics Association (PPTA) jointly developed a 
harmonized communication framework for potential drug shortages, which includes harmonized 
trigger points for notifying competent authorities of drug shortages that are due to quality and 
manufacturing problems. The paper also provides a detailed listing of information systems from 
EMA and some EU member states that provide information on drug shortages (38). In 2019, EMA 
also published a good practice guidance for EU national competent authorities to communicate 
medicines availability issues to the public (39).
In the United States, Congress legislates the FDA’s authority to act in response to drug shortages. 
In October 2013, FDA published its Strategic Plan for Preventing and Reducing Drug Shortages. It 
addresses mitigation strategies for manufacturers, such as notifying the FDA of potential shortages 
promptly so that manufacturers and the FDA can jointly take steps to reduce supply disruption. 
Another element of the FDA’s drug shortage strategic plan focuses on preventive strategies, such as 
providing positive incentives for manufacturing and quality improvements and using proactive risk-
based approaches for early identification and prevention of manufacturing and quality problems (11).
1	 Refer to individual country websites as web addresses change frequently.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 14 ---
10
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
The annual FDA Report to Congress on drug shortages summarizes discussions and actions related to 
drug shortages in the United States and Puerto Rico, providing appropriate guidance on how to man-
age drug shortages to minimize their effects on patients (12, 13, 23). 
In 2012, the EMA published a Reflection Paper on Medicinal Product Supply Shortages Caused by Manu-
facturing/Good Manufacturing Practice Compliance Problems and a supporting Implementation Plan 
2012-2015. In 2019, HMA and EMA published a Guidance on Detection and Notification of Shortages 
of Medicinal Products for Marketing Authorization Holders (MAHs) in the Union (EEA), which also 
recommends that MAHs utilize PDA TR-68 as a reference.
The increased transparency of shortages, coupled with the mandatory requirements for early notifica-
tion to health authorities of potential shortages, has allowed authorities and MAHs to work together 
more proactively to control and prevent potential drug shortage risks before they result in a supply 
disruption.
Although not all shortages result in patient harm, health authorities try to determine the causes of 
shortages that do affect patients and “near misses” that could have resulted in patient harm. The objec-
tive of doing so is to be prepared to proactively implement actions that can prevent recurrences. For 
this reason, FDA, EMA, and many other health authorities have taken the crisis around drug short-
ages seriously and regulations continue to evolve to heighten the attention, sensitivity, and response 
to shortages.
3.3	 Framework for Managing Drug Shortages due to Manufacturing and 
Quality Problems
As illustrated in Figure 3.0-1, the potential causes of drug shortages are often multifactorial and 
complex. Business, environmental, and economic policies are also important in controlling the risks 
to drug availability across the end-to-end product value chain, manufacturing being a key step. There-
fore, efforts must be concentrated on maintaining uninterrupted manufacturing and distribution and 
minimizing the risks that packaged drugs will be unavailable. 
In the context of product value or supply chain, a drug shortage starts whenever an API, excipient, 
API starting material, reagent, solvent, component, or even packaging material cannot be made avail-
able for the manufacturing process. This can occur due to several reasons, including manufacturing, 
quality, and GMP compliance issues, inadequate manufacturing capacity to meet increased product 
demand, lack of redundancy, complexity of the supply chain, evolving global regulatory requirements 
and the complexity associated with implementing them, and dynamic market conditions. Country- or 
region-specific import testing requirements can add complexity to supply chains and restrict compa-
nies from recovering quickly, potentially turning “near misses” into actual drug shortages. 
Manufacturing and quality issues are often listed as a cause of drug shortages in many regions. In this 
context, shortages might occur as a result of issues related to such factors as the supply of materials, 
maintenance and technical operation of facilities and equipment, unavailable equipment, or variable 
manufacturing processes. Any of these factors may result in the generation of nonconforming batches or 
in GMP- or regulatory-compliance issues being identified by the company, health authorities, or others.
As part of the EMA interassociation drug shortages project, PDA and the International Society 
for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE) coordinated efforts at both the product and systems levels 
to address the prevention of drug shortages caused by manufacturing and quality problems. They 
advised that companies need to focus on operating effectively in an environment of increasing global 
complexity while continuing to supply products. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 15 ---
11
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
TR-68 provides a holistic, risk-based framework at a product level for the prevention and management of 
drug shortages caused by manufacturing and quality issues. Risk-based approaches and risk-based decision-
making are more broadly expected, accepted, and integrated into regulations and regulatory oversight 
mechanisms. However, the industry and regulators are still on a learning curve around the consistent 
application and dynamic use of risk-based approaches and risk-based decision-making in this area.
4.0 
Management Responsibilities
A drug manufacturing company’s interest is in developing, producing, and making pharmaceutical or 
biopharmaceutical medicines available to patients in a financially sustainable manner. Once approved by 
relevant health authorities, a drug should be available with no interruptions to supply; the manufacturer is 
accountable for producing and making the drug available while the wholesale distributors have a general 
service obligation to bring the drug to the patients. Senior management of the MAH is accountable for 
decisions that may impact the company’s ability to cause, prevent, and/or recover from drug shortages. It 
is also accountable for ensuring the availability of their medicinal products in the amount needed and of 
the right level of quality. To ensure continued supply, it is important for management to ensure regulatory 
compliance, as well as compliance to GMP and good distribution practices (GDP), and a robust quality 
culture that is maintained and enhanced over time. Elements of this quality culture include:
•	
Competent employees
•	
Desired behaviors
•	
Learning environment
•	
Decision-making (in areas that can impact 
the availability of drugs, such as decisions 
related to new supplier approvals, quality 
defects, deviations, and change controls)
•	
Proactive QRM (i.e., ability to foresee and 
prevent drug shortages)
•	
Environments where people can speak up 
freely about issues
•	
Opportunities for improvement and 
interest in continuous improvements (e.g., 
technologies, systems, working methods)
Maintaining compliance with GMP requirements across all sites and functions is a prerequisite 
to ensure uninterrupted supply. Senior management of the MAH is ultimately accountable for 
maintaining manufacturing sites and other areas covered by pharmaceutical regulations, at a minimum, 
in compliance with GMPs and relevant regulatory requirements and/or commitments. This includes 
the MAH accepting accountability for oversight and the mitigation of any product quality and/or 
supply risks at third-party suppliers or service providers (e.g., contract development and manufacturing 
organizations (CDMO), contract laboratory organizations). Contracts and third-party relationships 
should be established with clear expectations and obligations related to quality and managing capacity 
constraints that might impact product supply or result in shortages.
Where noncompliance is identified, either by company employees via internal audits or other means 
or through health authority inspections, all efforts should be made to correct it and ensure compliance.
When a drug shortage is anticipated, senior management is responsible for initiating a dialog with 
the pertinent regulatory authorities. The objective of the dialog should be to reach a viable solution 
that considers the elements of patient safety, GMP/GDP and regulatory compliance, drug availability, 
technical abilities, and sustainable business operations.
Applied quality principles aimed at continually improving quality performance are also expected to 
be fully integrated into business operations and to go beyond compliance with the minimum GMP/
GDP requirements.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 16 ---
12
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
There are many ways in which the MAH can ensure uninterrupted supply and receive early warning of 
potential supply issues; this technical report provides a structured approach to achieve such an overview 
using a risk triage model. Companies can consider assigning a customer service representative, a role 
analogous to an internal auditor or risk manager, to monitor issues that may lead to drug shortages (see 
Section 3.3). Those assessments would provide management with the timely information necessary 
to understand the risks to patients and the business because of drug shortages. Such a responsibility 
would be valuable because of the diversity of causes of drug shortages.
Once management obtains information about shortages, it must develop an action plan for addressing 
the drug shortage risks and make risk-based decisions on how resources will be managed and, 
potentially, how capital is invested to ensure appropriate capacity and redundancy.
