5.0 
Risk-Based Approaches for Prevention of Drug Shortages
A holistic approach to the prevention and management of drug shortages focused on patient safety is 
important and complex. There are multiple elements, both at the system and product levels, that work 
individually or in combination to prevent a shortage:
•	
At the product level, an end-to-end understanding of the value chain for manufacturing and 
distribution provides the ability to understand and implement end-to-end controls.
•	
At the system level, appropriate oversight and a robust pharmaceutical quality system (PQS) 
ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations (22).
Both approaches should also establish mechanisms that provide early warning signals of potential 
shortages, including near-misses, assess potential root causes for the shortage considering multiple aspects 
(Figure 3.0-1), drive targeted manufacturing and product quality improvements (e.g., introduction of 
new technologies, continual improvement, innovation), and enable timely communications with key 
stakeholders and health authorities. Other foundational elements should: 
•	
Ensure strong management accountability
•	
Foster a sustainable quality culture that enables employees to speak up
•	
Reward behaviors that drive joint ownership between operations and quality units for timely 
issue resolution
•	
Build people skills and capabilities that drive change leadership and excellence in pharmaceutical 
operations
•	
Establish a governance model that tracks operational and quality performance with appropriate 
metrics (40).
As part of a robust quality system, companies should implement QRM principles and knowledge 
management capabilities to accomplish the following (1, 22):
•	
Proactively identify what controls are, and are not, in place for shortage prevention (for critical 
products at least)
•	
Proactively identify and control risks of interruption in manufacturing and product supply
•	
Link to clinical and safety risk assessments for their products
•	
Facilitate risk-based decision-making by companies and health authorities in response to 
shortages in order to control and reduce harm to patients
Opportunities for informed and timely decision-making based on QRM principles, knowledge 
management, and a good understanding of patient impact in the event of a shortage allow companies 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 17 ---
13
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
to proactively manage and prevent drug shortages. When drugs become unexpectedly unavailable in 
the manufacturing supply chain, risk-based decision-making enables companies to provide key risk-
indicating information to health authorities in a timely manner before the shortage becomes severe 
(38).
In addition to internal risk and knowledge management, it is helpful to have systems that generate 
reliable and up-to-date information about the marketplace for a company’s products (e.g., trends in 
demand, usage volumes, market-share data). This combined body of information can also be very use-
ful in decision-making for both the company and health authorities in order to respond to a shortage. 
It can help both parties understand what the risks of a shortage are to patients, what advice to commu-
nicate to healthcare providers, and what measures to take in order to respond quickly to a drug short-
age. Information about the supply position for competitor products and alternative therapies is also 
important for assessing the risks of shortage-related issues, although this information may not always 
be readily available due to confidentiality and other considerations. This information can be used, for 
instance, in the event of a shortage when the supply of an alternative product, where available, can be 
increased to minimize the impact to patients. 
Figure 5.0-1 depicts the key components of a holistic framework at the end-to-end product-value-
chain level and in terms of the end-to-end product, process, system, inventory, and diversification 
controls for proactive prevention and management of drug shortages.
People
Oversight & 
Early Signals
Mfg. & Quality 
Improvements
Enforce Laws 
& Regulations
Technology & 
Innovation
Drug 
Substance
Pharmacy
Wholesaler
Affiliates
Warehouse 
Distribution
Packaging
Drug Product
Patient
Enablers:
•	 Timely targeted Communication
•	 Understand Root Causes
•	 Make Risk-based Decision and Manage Knowledge
Value Chain of Manufacturing & Distribution
Economy
Business
E2E Controls (Product, Process, Systems, Inventory, Diversification)
Raw 
materials
Storage & 
Transportation
Patient Focused
Figure 5.0-1	
Holistic Framework for End-to-End Drug Shortage Prevention 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 18 ---
14
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
5.1	
Concepts of Risk and Knowledge Management
According to ICH Quality Guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical Quality System, QRM and knowledge man-
agement are enablers of the PQS. As such, QRM and knowledge management are intended to facili-
tate the practical integration of all elements of the PQS “to enhance the quality and availability of 
medicines around the world in the interest of public health” (22).
A good understanding of the manufacturing process and end-to-end supply chain, up to the transfer of 
product from the MAH to the first economic customer (i.e., to wholesale distributors), is necessary for ap-
propriate QRM to identify, assess, control, and review the risks of potential drug shortages. Once the hazards 
are identified and the risks are assessed, appropriate risk control measures can be implemented to reduce (con-
trol, mitigate, or eliminate) the risks of potential drug shortages before they lead to actual drug shortages. Of 
course, not all hazards can be anticipated; in such instances, as soon as new information on a hazard becomes 
available, risk-review activities can ensure timely assessment and implementation of risk control actions.
Knowledge management supports the PQS by facilitating easier access to product and process knowl-
edge throughout the product’s lifecycle. This availability of knowledge regarding process-performance 
and product-quality monitoring systems can enhance process understanding. In addition, ICH Q10 
calls for process and product monitoring throughout product development and commercial manu-
facturing, so the information can be used to establish and actively manage a timely control strategy 
for manufacturing. Finally, management review of process performance and product quality should 
identify appropriate actions for continual improvement, such as the capture and dissemination of 
knowledge and the identification of post-approval changes (PAC).
Most companies have mechanisms to respond to drug shortages when they occur; however, these 
mechanisms might not be comprehensive or fully integrated into company procedures. A comprehen-
sive approach for managing potential drug shortages should involve: 
•	
Ability to respond quickly to minimize the impact of a shortage
•	
Framework for anticipating drug shortage triggers and risks and for establishing mechanisms to 
control risks and prevent shortages 
•	
Mechanisms and processes for timely communications 
The EFPIA Good Practice Guide: Reducing Risk for Drug Product Shortages describes a “good practice” 
model that a company can adopt to prevent and/or manage potential drug shortage situations (41).
A company’s QRM policy and related procedures should address risks to patient safety in the context 
of product quality and availability. Typically, risk ranking levels in a company’s QRM policy include 
ranking for GMP and regulatory compliance risks and patient safety risks based on product quality. 
Table 5.1-1 provides an example of a risk ranking scale that incorporates considerations for both prod-
uct quality and product availability in the ranking of patient safety risks.
While manufacturing and quality issues could impact product quality or patient safety, there may 
be instances when product quality or patient safety are not impacted. Still, there may be issues with 
regard to compliance with GMP or GDP or regulatory commitments provided in the product dossier. 
When handling GMP and regulatory compliance issues or deviations that may negatively impact the 
release of a product, the company must quickly identify the potential issue and work on a solution(s) 
to mitigate the risk of a drug shortage. Hence, it is important that the education and qualification of 
employees who manage deviations include aspects associated with the assessment of potential supply 
impact in case an issue evolves further. It is also important to establish mechanisms for escalating these 
GMP, GDP, and regulatory compliance issues to the appropriate level of management, as solutions 
might often require the allocation of resources and identification of alternatives. Companies often 
handle such issues internally, but they should involve the relevant health authorities early on in case 
there is a potential risk of a drug shortage, and a solution is unachievable in a short timeframe.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 19 ---
15
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.1-1	 	
Examples of Risk ranking: Patient safety Ranking Incorporates Product Quality and Product Availability
Risk Ranking
Impact to Patients  
(Product Quality and/or Product Availability)
Impact to GMP Compliance
High 
• Irreparable patient harm or death
• Shortage of a medically necessary (life supporting 
or life sustaining) product
• Consent decree or warning letter
• Withdrawal of GMP certificate or manufacturing 
authorization
• Critical health authority observations or repeat 
inspection observations
• Systemic breakdown of GMP systems
• Recall
Medium
• Reversible patient harm
• Shortage of product used for acute short-term or 
chronic long-term product indications
• Major health authority observations
• High complaint rate
Low
• No product or patient impact
• No shortage or multiple sources available for 
products that are not medically necessary
• Minor observations
• Minor departures from GMPs
The process of knowledge management follows the QRM process according to ICH Q9(R1). Understanding 
and managing risks provides knowledge that can then be used to appropriately prevent and manage risks on 
an ongoing basis. Thus, the QRM process explained in PDA TR-54 is a foundation for the understanding 
and implementation of appropriate knowledge management. It is important in this context to understand 
which questions are answered by the knowledge available and who needs the knowledge to enable the preven-
tion and management of risks, including the risks of drug shortages. Therefore, an understanding of quality 
risks based on the available knowledge about the product, manufacturing process, value chain, and overall ef-
fectiveness of the quality system forms the foundation for all efforts performed and resources spent. Without 
this fundamental understanding, activities related to risk and knowledge management may not be fruitful.
5.2	
The Importance of Interacting with Health Authorities
There is a legal requirement for MAHs to notify relevant health authorities of any potential drug 
shortages in the European Union and in the United States (17, 18). Therefore, early interactions should 
take place between a pharmaceutical company and relevant health authorities when a meaningful 
disruption in supply is expected (38, 42). Laws and regulations related to drug shortages are continuing 
to evolve and are defining or clarifying responsibilities for stakeholders, such as industry, patient, and 
healthcare professional organizations, with respect to ensuring uninterrupted drug supplies to patients 
(43, 44).
Health authorities generally prefer to be involved in several aspects of drug shortage management and 
response. For example, they might want to:
•	
Oversee how the company or MAH is managing the shortage
•	
Engage other manufacturers of the same product or alternatives to increase their production
•	
Coordinate actions, communications, and responses to the shortage among various stakeholders, 
including other MAHs and manufacturers, as well as patients, healthcare professionals, and govern-
ment agencies that purchase medicines
•	
Ensure that adequate corrective actions are taken to prevent recurrences
At a higher level, health authorities may wish to contribute to an environment in which supply chains 
become more robust and shortages can generally be prevented. This can support the primary goal of health 
authorities, which is generally the protection of public health and the availability of medicinal products.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 20 ---
16
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
Health authorities usually take a risk-based approach to shortages. For example, they participate in 
the management of and response to shortages that may have an impact on patients now or in the near 
future. Health authorities, however, generally do not have the resources to become closely involved 
in all aspects of shortages. Risk assessments can help identify shortages that require their attention. 
Health authorities and industry have a mutual interest in understanding the causes of shortages, even 
where there is little to no impact on the patient population, to prevent them from recurring.
Knowing which shortages may or may not impact patients requires careful analysis as well as effective 
multistakeholder and media communications management, and the situation may vary from country 
to country. Robust risk assessment based on robust knowledge management of the manufacturing and 
supply processes and active, timely dialog with health authorities and other relevant stakeholders can 
facilitate this determination.
