1.0  Introduction
PDA Technical Report No. 68: Risk-Based Approach for Prevention and Management of Drug Shortages 
was originally developed in 2014 as part of the interassociation collaborative response to the European 
Medicines Agency’s (EMA) initiative on medicinal product shortages caused by manufacturing, 
quality, and/or good manufacturing practice (GMP) issues. This revision updates the 2014 version 
to recognize emerging regulatory expectations and current terminology. The risk-based approach and 
concepts in the original technical report are broadly recognized and remain unchanged.
This revision recognizes the advances made in pharmaceutical manufacturing and aligns the text of 
TR-68 with the current regulatory environment, for example, the International Council for 
Harmonisation (ICH) Quality Guideline Q9(R1): Quality Risk Management, ICH Quality Guideline 
Q12: Technical and Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle Management, regional 
regulations and guidelines, and terminologies used for drug shortages that have since been published. 
Examples for preventive measures to avoid drug shortages consider lessons learned since TR-68 was 
first published in 2014. Elements in the templates and forms included in this revision have been 
updated to reflect current regulatory expectations and terminology used in the European Union and 
its Member States and in the United States, while it also supports compliance with global expectations 
on managing and preventing drug shortages.
Sustainable access to safe, efficacious, and high-quality products every time a patient needs them is 
just as important as the therapeutic advances that have transformed the lives and survival of patients 
worldwide. The ICH Q9(R1) defines harm as “damage to health, including damage that can occur 
from loss of product quality or availability” (1). Ensuring uninterrupted availability of and access to 
products, especially medically necessary, lifesaving or life sustaining critical medicines that do not have 
effective alternatives, is essential.
1.1	
Background
Drug shortages have become more frequent, more severe, and longer-lasting globally since the early 
2000s for a variety of reasons. As globalization increases, the complexity of supply chains grows, global 
and regional regulatory expectations evolve, and economic and business motivators change. The driv-
ers behind drug shortages in different geographic areas and countries vary, and those causes are usually 
multifactorial. The range of causes includes financial, economic, and business concerns, increased or 
unanticipated market demand (e.g., pandemic), evolving regulatory expectations, manufacturing and 
quality issues, capacity constraints, lack of redundancy, and supply chain issues (2-5). Recognition has 
evolved that the multifactorial root causes for shortages extend beyond manufacturing and quality is-
sues, as has the need for multistakeholder interaction and collaboration to address the local issue of a 
shortage in a multiregional environment. 
The emerging global challenge of supply disruptions is drawing greater focus from the pharmaceuti-
cal industry, regulators, legislators, healthcare providers, patient organizations, and patients, and drug 
shortages are now covered in the media to a much larger extent. ICH Q9(R1) places greater emphasis 
on product availability risks—a noteworthy change from the original guideline—in the context of 
quality and manufacturing issues, including GMP noncompliance, that can be a “significant cause 
of product availability issues (e.g., product shortages).” Furthermore, while “manufacturing and sup-
ply chain diversity can be enablers of product availability, increasingly complex supply chains lead to 
interdependencies that can introduce systemic quality/manufacturing risks impacting supply chain 
robustness” (1). Thus, the interests of patients are served by risk-based drug shortage prevention and 
mitigation activities that help to proactively manage supply chain complexities and ensure timely avail-
ability of needed medicinal products.
The legislative and regulatory processes for shortage-related issues continue to evolve. In 2012, EMA 
published a reflection paper and implementation plan for drug shortages that affect patients. EMA followed 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 6 ---
2
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
up by holding workshops with stakeholders in October 2013 and again in October 2015 (6-8). In 2016, 
the European Heads of Medicines Agencies (HMA) and EMA established a joint task force to develop 
and coordinate actions for better prevention, identification, management, and communication of issues 
affecting the availability of medicines to improve the continuity of medicines supply across Europe. In 
2020, the European Commission’s Pharmaceutical Strategy further elaborated upon the need for proactive 
measures to address the issue of drug shortages (9), and in March 2023, the HMA/EMA Task Force held 
a third workshop to inform and update stakeholders on the HMA/EMA Task Force’s deliverables and 
activities. This workshop provided an opportunity for the diverse groups to share their perspectives and 
discuss their respective ongoing or planned initiatives to address medicines availability issues (10).
The focus on drug shortages has also increased in the United States. In 2013, the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) established a Drug Shortage Task Force, which published a strategic plan for 
preventing and reducing drug shortages. The task force continues to identify the root causes of drug 
shortages and advance long-term solutions, reporting annually to Congress. As in many countries, 
notification of a potential drug shortage is a legal requirement in the United States, and early and timely 
notifications has reduced the number of shortages by enabling manufacturers and health authorities to 
jointly take steps to minimize supply disruption (11). The annual reports to Congress for calendar years 
2021 and 2022 included the impact of the increased risk of shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic 
and the actions taken to address them; both reports highlighted the crucial role early notifications 
played to reduce the impact and threat of shortages (12, 13). In 2021, the White House published 
a report, Building Resilient Supply Chains, Revitalizing American Manufacturing, And Fostering Broad-
Based Growth, that emphasized the importance of increasing the resilience and transparency of global 
supply chains, incentivizing quality management maturity, and increasing economic sustainability of 
U.S. manufacturing (14). A 2023 Majority Staff Report of the U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland 
Security and Governmental Affairs, Short Supply: The Health and National Security Risks of Drug 
Shortages, concluded that active drug shortages had risen by 30% between 2021 and 2022, lasted one-
and-a-half years longer on average, and impacted patient care. According to the report, overreliance 
on foreign resources was deemed a national security risk, FDA lacked critical information to mitigate 
shortages, and both industry and regulators lacked end-to-end supply chain visibility (5).
Consequently, health authorities and the pharmaceutical industry have undertaken more proactive 
efforts and increased multistakeholder engagement to recognize the importance of managing 
stakeholder interdependencies. There is greater awareness of how the unintended consequences of 
actions taken by any one stakeholder group can negatively impact other stakeholder processes. The 
European Union, United States, and other countries acknowledge the broad range of multifactorial 
root causes, recognize the need for multistakeholder interactions and collaborative solutions, appreciate 
the importance of end-to-end supply chain visibility, and share a common understanding and political 
will to significantly reduce shortages. The awareness and acknowledgment of this complex ecosystem 
is gradually growing, as depicted in Figure 1.0-1.
It is essential for the senior management of a firm that is the Marketing Authorization Holder (MAH) 
to have control of and be accountable for ensuring the uninterrupted supply of their products as long 
as it is within their control (15). Senior Management decisions impact not only a firm’s ability to cause 
shortages but also to prevent and recover from shortages in an expedient manner. As stated in ICH Q9 
(R1), the principles of quality risk management (QRM) that enable risk-based decision-making by 
both companies and health authorities are fundamental for the proactive prevention of drug shortages.
This concept of prevention and the use of risk-based principles cannot be overstated in terms of 
importance. The November 2020 ICH Concept Paper that formed the basis for the revision of ICH 
Q9 stated that “addressing lifecycle risks to manufacturing reliability and quality assurance is the 
foundation for supply predictability” (16).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 7 ---
3
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
1.2	
Purpose and Scope
This revision of TR-68 addresses the following aspects for proactive prevention of drug shortages and 
provides useful tools to assist in preparation:
•	
A holistic, risk-based framework at a product level for the prevention and management of drug 
shortages caused by manufacturing and quality issues
•	
A risk triage model that can be used to assess drug shortage risks and implement appropriate 
controls in the end-to-end value chain for the manufacturing and distribution of a product (Sec-
tion 11.0, Appendix 1)
•	
Templates for developing a Drug Shortage Risk Register and a Drug Shortage Prevention and 
Response Plan at a product level (Section 12.0, Appendix 2)
The concepts and approach presented in this report may be adopted and applied by other stakeholders 
in the entire supply chain, such as wholesale distributors, as well as suppliers and vendors of materials 
used in processing, for example, filters, single-use bags, flow paths, resins, and solvents.
TR-68 focuses on addressing shortages caused by manufacturing and quality issues toward batch release. 
T﻿hhe next step in the supply chain after manufacturing and release is usually called the “handover, to 
the first economic customer,” after which the MAH often has limited-to-no visibility (e.g., shortages 
related to issues that arise in distribution channels, pharmacies, or hospitals). Shortages after the 
“handover, to the first economic customer” are out of scope of this technical report. Nevertheless, there 
may be situations where the MAH is responsible for distribution as well and, therefore, is responsible 
for mitigating shortages in these instances. TR-68 does apply in these situations.
Figure 1.0-1	
Mock-up of the Holistic Process for Manufacturing and Supply, and the Types of Influencing Factors
Transportation
Manufacturing
Business
Economy
Reliability
API
Patient
Raw Materials,
Components
Wholesale Distribution: e.g., Agents, Brokers, Traders, 
Distributors,  Wholesalers, Repackers, and Relabellers
Bulk
Manufacturer &  
Marketing Authorisation Holder
Finished Drug 
Product (FDP)
Make available…
…at the right place
Governments, media, and other stakeholders
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 8 ---
4
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
The framework provided in TR-68 also supports and enables MAHs and manufacturers to meet the 
requirements of Section 506C of the U.S. Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and Article 13 of EU 
Commission Directive 2003/94/EC Laying Down the Principles and Guidelines of Good Manufacturing 
Practice in Respect of Medicinal Products for Human Use and Investigational Medicinal Products for 
Human Use to notify relevant health authorities in the event of a drug shortage (17, 18).
Development of PDA’s risk-based approach for prevention and management of drug shortages at a 
product level began in 2012 as part of the Paradigm Change in Manufacturing Operations (PCMO®) 
project and incorporated input from the EMA-sanctioned industry interassociation task force and 
multistakeholder events. An overview of the risk-based approach was published in April 2014 in a PDA 
Letter article and is elaborated in detail in this technical report (19). PDA also held a drug shortage 
workshop in September 2014 and participated in various HMA/EMA multistakeholder workshops, 
including the one held in 2023; key outcomes from the workshop discussions have been incorporated 
into this revision of TR-68. Additionally, PDA’s Technical Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality 
Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations and its series of best-
practice and companion case-study documents provide detailed guidance and practical application on 
how to implement QRM for the management of product quality risks in manufacturing operations, 
supply chains, and operations of third parties (e.g., suppliers, contract manufacturers). PDA Technical 
Report No. 59: Utilization of Statistical Methods for Production Monitoring describes additional risk-
based activities that use statistical methodologies for quality control and manufacturing.
2.0  Glossary and Abbreviations
Critical Medicine
Critical medicines, sometimes called “essential 
medicines” or “medically necessary drugs,” are 
considered critical for public health, taking into 
consideration the therapeutic indication of the 
medicines, the availability of alternative treatments, 
and the vulnerability of the supply chain (20).
Corrective Action and Preventative 
Action (CAPA)
Action to eliminate the cause of a detected 
nonconformity or other undesirable situation. 
Critical Shortage
A shortage where no alternative treatment is 
available (10).
Drug Shortage or Shortage
A shortage of a drug or medicinal product that 
occurs when supply does not meet demand at a 
national level, where a: 
Shortage allows for identification of 
current, impeding, or anticipated disruption 
of supply of a medicinal product. 
Supply refers to the total volume of stock 
of the individual medicinal product that is 
placed on the market by the MAH. 
Demand relates to the request for 
a medicinal product by a healthcare 
professional, veterinarian, or patient in 
response to a clinical need. For demand to 
be satisfactorily met, the medicinal product 
will need to be acquired in time and in 
sufficient quantity to allow continuity of 
best care of patients or animals. 
National level refers to the situation in 
a specific country, that is, if there is an 
insufficient supply of medicine to meet the 
demands of the country overall. Logistics-
related issues leading to regional supply 
disruption of a medicinal product (e.g., 
delivery difficulties, national redistribution 
of stock) are a short-term and localized 
problem and should not be taken into 
account (21). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 9 ---
5
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Drug Shortage Prevention & Response 
Plan 
A document that provides a structured action 
plan to proactively prevent drug shortages and 
also respond to a shortage in the event that one 
occurs. This also may also be known as a “Drug 
Shortage Prevention and Mitigation Plan.”
Drug Shortage Risk Register
A single source of information on risks that can 
result in drug shortages, associated risk levels, 
risk control actions with owners, status, due 
dates, and residual risk after appropriate risk 
control actions have been taken. 
Harm
Damage to health, including the damage that 
can occur from loss of product quality or 
availability (1).
Knowledge Management
Systematic approach to acquiring, analyzing, 
storing, and disseminating information related 
to products, manufacturing processes, and 
components (22).
Life supporting or Life sustaining Drug 
Life supporting or life sustaining drug is a term 
used to describe a product that is essential to, or 
that yields information that is essential to, the 
restoration or continuation of a bodily function 
that is important to the continuation of human 
life (23).
Meaningful Disruption 
A meaningful disruption is a change in 
production that is reasonably likely to lead 
to a reduction in the supply of a drug by a 
manufacturer that is more than negligible and 
affects the ability of the manufacturer to fill 
orders or meet expected demand for its product. 
A meaningful disruption is not an interruption 
in manufacturing due to matters such as routine 
maintenance and does not include insignificant 
changes in manufacturing so long as the 
manufacturer expects to resume operations in a 
short period of time (23).
Medically Necessary Drug
Any drug product used to treat or prevent a 
serious disease or medical condition for which 
there is no other adequately available drug 
product that is judged by medical staff to be an 
appropriate substitute (20).
Potential Drug Shortage
A potential drug shortage is described as the 
occurrence of internal or external situations 
(single or in a combination of both), which 
could result in an interruption of supplies of a 
medicinal product, if not properly addressed 
and controlled (24).
Quality Risk Management
A systematic process for the assessment, control, 
communication, and review of risks to the qual-
ity of the drug (medicinal) product across the 
product lifecycle (1).
Residual Risk
Risk remaining after risk control measures have 
been implemented (1). In the context of drug 
shortages, this is considered to be the risk of a 
shortage after preventive and other risk control 
measures have been implemented.
Risk
The combination of the probability of occur-
rence of harm and the severity of that harm, 
where harm is defined as “damage to health, 
including the damage that can occur from loss 
of product quality or availability” (1).
Risk-based Triage for Drug Shortages
A process of assessing and assigning priorities 
for managing drug shortage risks based on criti-
cality and impact to patients.
Risk Priority Level
A relative priority ranking assigned to a risk 
based on a combination of (a) therapeutic use 
of a product and patient impact due to product 
unavailability, (b) availability of alternatives, and 
(c) likelihood of a shortage.
Value Stream Map
A tool used to document, analyze, understand, 
and improve the flow of information or 
materials required to produce a product or 
service for a customer as it makes its way 
through the value stream (a set of actions that 
take place to add value for customers from the 
initial request through realization of value by 
the customer).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- Page 10 ---
6
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 68 (Revised 2024)
2.1	
Abbreviations
ANDA	Abbreviated New Drug Application
API	
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient
CAPA	 Corrective Action and Preventative 
Action
EMA	
European Medicines Agency
FDA	
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
GDP	
Good Distribution Practice
GMP	 Good Manufacturing Practice
ICH	
International Council for 
Harmonisation
MAH	 Marketing Authorization Holder 
NDA	
New Drug Application
PAC	
Post-Approval Change
PQS	
Pharmaceutical Quality System
QRM	 Quality Risk Management
VSM	
Value Stream Mapping
WHO	 World Health Organization
