

=== PAGE 42 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Facility Layout Considerations
As the BSC requires a Grade B background and the isolator requires a Grade C/D background (CCS-
dependent), the room layout of the facility will be different to fulfill CGMP requirements. Additional
considerations, such as the BSL necessary for the product, may also have an impact on the facility layout
design. It may include a containment area surrounding the BSC or isolator room provided by a relatively
negative pressure directly adjacent to a higher positive-pressure area, causing a “sink” or “bubble,” in order
to prevent transfer into other parts of the facility. An example of a layout for a production suite with an
installed BSC compared to a production suite with an isolator is shown in Figure 4.3-5.
Figure 4.3-5 Isolator and Biosafety Cabinet Environment Options (positive-pressure cascade
and bubble in the air locks)
Rationale
Since most ATMPs should be manufactured under aseptic conditions to protect them from particulate or
microbiological contamination, barrier systems are recommended. Isolators can provide improved
sustainability benefits and compliance with EU GMP Annex 1. However, BSCs are often used as they offer
flexibility due to their open design, especially during the early stages of process development. For working
with viral vectors and/or multiple products, an isolator provides a barrier that isolates the highly potent
product from both the operator and the environment. Furthermore, an isolator provides an automated and
validated solution to inactivate any potent product remaining after the end of the batch or campaign (e.g.,
H O decontamination). Costs may or may not be a discriminating factor as the initial CapEx savings of
2 2
BSC are often offset by the higher lifecycle costs of the OpEx.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 41

=== PAGE 43 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Topic 5. Supplementary Technical Information
Q 5.1. What is important to consider in a mock-up for biosafety cabinets and isolators?
Recommendation
A mock-up for the BSC or isolator at the vendor’s site should be built to ensure that all reasonably
practicable steps have been taken to ensure good aseptic practice when performing the necessary motions
for the process, ergonomics for the operators, and the ability to perform the required maintenance. With an
isolator system, the vendor normally performs a mock-up with wood, cardboard, or similar rigid materials
because, after the isolator system is installed, the glove position can only be changed with a significant effort
and cost. With BSCs, the designs are normally standard and vary only with the size of the BSC.
Nevertheless, it is important to ensure that the process can be performed with good aseptic technique within
the size constraints of the selected BSC, and so it might be most appropriate to perform with a mock-up (or
an actual unit) of the intended size.
The mock-up exercise should consider the following:
• Working position, including whether the operator will be seated or standing.
• Positions of all equipment within the Grade A area.
• Positions of all components and materials including hangers, trays, or stands required to support
materials.
• Position of process waste.
• Location for all product-contact tools before and during the process, with special consideration for
ensuring that they are continuously bathed in first air and are not touching any potentially
contaminated surface at any time.
• Process sequence/flow and all required manipulations and interventions.
• Location of critical surfaces relative to first air and required operator movements.
• Locations of continuous viable and nonviable sampling in the Grade A area to accurately capture
any activity within the working position and to ensure that EM materials, where required, can be
introduced and placed within the working zone without breaking first air over the process or process
equipment.
• Operator hand/arm/glove movements throughout when considering the locations of the working
position to ensure the operator’s hand/arm/glove does not move over critical surfaces.
• All required manipulations and variations in setup, including loading and unloading of any
materials from equipment, air locks, or RTP, should be tested by both right- and left-handed
individuals, and the testing should include personnel of varying heights and arm lengths to ensure
that the configuration will be suitable for a wide range of operators performing the process.
• Frequency and duration of operations.
• Weight/force for each action.
• Setup and performance of cleaning and disinfection actions.
42 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 44 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
For the mock-up, it is highly recommended to involve the operator(s) responsible for handling the
equipment in routine production. The mock-up process should be conducted by a minimum of two trained
operators so the second person can observe and record actions or violations that may not be apparent to the
person conducting the process. The results from the mock-up should be documented.
The mock-up may be performed using simplified representations of tools, materials, and equipment
manufactured from basic materials to aid in rapid, low-cost iteration. This use of a low-cost model is
especially worthwhile during the initial process or initial isolator/BSC design and layout when there may be
multiple iterations of the design. However, for the final mock-up testing, it is important to ensure that the
selected representations are adequate to challenge the weight/force that may be required for the actual
manipulations.
Besides rigid mock-up studies, computerized mock-ups and virtual-reality mock-ups can also support the
physical mock-up (see Figure 5.1-1, Figure 5.1-2, and Figure 5.1-3). Physical, computerized, or virtual
mock-ups are often retained by the operating company in order to be used to test new process movements or
interventions before incorporating them into the process or to provide preliminary training to new operators.
As a consequence, cost spent on making the model realistic can be an investment in the process maintenance
over time.
Figure 5.1-1 Computerized Mock-Up
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 43

=== PAGE 45 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.1-2 Virtual-Reality Mock-Up
Figure 5.1-3 Physical Mock-Up
44 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 46 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Rationale
The manufacture of ATMPs commonly involves many complex sequences of operations that may be
performed manually by operators. This combination means that, without careful planning and design of the
aseptic operation, there is a serious risk of failure. Ensuring that the equipment design is compatible with
and optimal for the intended process is highly important to the ultimate success of the equipment–process
pairing. Good aseptic practice may conflict with the quickest or simplest manufacturing process and,
therefore, without careful planning and design of the process operations via a mock-up, the default process
may compromise sterility. The physical and virtual-reality mock-ups also provide an opportunity to define,
refine, practice, and train on the required aseptic processing procedure.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 45

=== PAGE 47 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 5.2. Are there any differences in the frequency of chamber leak-integrity testing
procedures between an isolator and a biosafety cabinet?
Recommendation
For isolators, the leak test should be performed frequently with the interval established, based on the
frequency of intended operations in an appropriate risk assessment (1, 7-10).
The leak-testing frequency for isolators should not be limited to periodic evaluation, but rather should
include such situations as:
• After changing gloves and sleeves (documented in the glove change management protocol)
• Following any maintenance or repair that has breached the sealed structure
• Supporting failure investigations, especially those involving viral and/or bioburden contaminations
PDA Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators (2020)
recommends that the leak-testing (integrity) be performed at defined periods, at a minimum, at the
beginning and end of each batch or campaign and following any intervention that would affect the integrity
of the unit (10).
The testing procedures performed for leak integrity in isolators are described in Annex E.3 Quantitative leak
testing of ISO EN 14644-7. Table E.1 in ISO 14644-7 indicates the oxygen method (only for negative
pressure), the pressure-change method, or the Parjo method (very rarely used; mainly in atomic industries)
as being appropriate for very tight ISO containment of Class I devices (11). In addition to a tightness
classification, ISO 10648-2 describes three different methods for leak-testing negative-pressure, rigid-wall
separative devices as the oxygen method, the pressure-changes method, and the constant-pressure method
(12). The oxygen, pressure-change, and constant-pressure methods are listed as appropriate test methods for
isolators with ISO containment Class III. Apart from other methods, PDA Technical Report No. 34: Design
and Validation of Isolator Systems for the Manufacturing and Testing of Health Care Products also
suggests leak-testing using a tracer gas, in which a tracer gas is released inside the isolator, and testing for
the presence of the gas is performed outside the isolator (9).
As BSCs are an open system, a leak test cannot be performed before each batch as is done with an isolator
system. A containment test method, as shown in Figure 5.3-1 and Figure 5.3-2, could be used instead of the
leak test. This testing is typically performed upon first commissioning and validation for use and may be
repeated periodically (e.g., annually or biannually) to check on the continued performance of the system, or
when required for significant investigations into the system’s operation.
46 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 48 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 5.3. What are the similarities and differences between a biosafety cabinet and an
isolator in the objective, procedure, documentation, and expectations of an airflow
visualization (smoke study)?
Recommendation
The airflow visualization, or smoke study, is a method used to aid in the evaluation of the CGMP-required
airflow generated by a BSC, isolator system, or containment enclosure. Common criteria for these studies
commonly include such elements as unidirectional airflow in Grade A areas and airflow around the
apertures between Grade A and lower-grade areas. Differences in the application of airflow visualization
arise as a result of the intended purpose of the equipment. For example, some systems are intended for the
protection of the operator from the product while other systems are meant for the protection of the product
from external contamination.
For isolator systems, the airflow is designed to ensure that the first air from the HEPA filter flows over the
sterile product and sterile equipment used in its manufacture. This is achieved by unidirectional airflow over
the product and associated critical surfaces. In isolator systems, the objective of the airflow visualization is
to verify that the airflows create a “sweeping action over and away from the product under dynamic
conditions” as defined in the FDA Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic
Processing—Current Good Manufacturing Practice, EU GMP Annex 1, PIC/S Annex 1: Manufacture of
Sterile Medicinal Products, and WHO TRS 1044 - Annex 2: WHO Good Manufacturing Practices for
Sterile Pharmaceutical Products (13-15).
The airflow visualization procedure (smoke study) demonstrates that the airflow meets the design
objectives. The study is focused on aiding in the visualization of the air as it moves down from the filter face
over and away from the critical product and material surfaces. It ensures there are no airflows towards the
product from sources that may generate particulates/contaminants (e.g., manual operations, moving machine
parts). The airflow visualization studies include visualization of flow at the following points:
• Downflow across the chamber/work zone at the working position.
• Airflow with sweeping action over and away from the product.
• Airflow around large objects that may generate turbulence.
• Airflow, for example, during manual operation, interventions, and transfers that demonstrate the
absence of turbulence on critical surfaces and that first air is not disturbed.
• Airflow during the processing of open units demonstrates that no air turbulence enters open units.
• Airflow at apertures between zones of differing pressure that demonstrates flow from the critical
area outward without reflux or entrainment.
Airflow visualization should be performed at rest and in operation, including manufacturing setup in Grade
A zones and during the performance of interventions. The studies should demonstrate that air does not
ingress from the lower-grade cleanroom/zone to a higher-grade cleanroom/zone.
For BSCs, the airflow visualization mandated by the regulatory design standards specifications still applies.
For example, NSF/ANSI 49 – 2019 Biosafety Cabinetry: Design, Construction, Performance, and Field
Certification requires the following airflow visualization be successfully performed at least annually (16):
• Airflow work zone along the centerline of the work surface is downward.
• Airflow along the entire perimeter of the sash at the outside of the cabinet is inward into the grill
before the work zone and does not intrude into the work zone.
• Airflow behind the sash, on top of the access opening, does not escape from the BSC.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 47

=== PAGE 49 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• Airflow behind the window, at the sides and top of work area, is not leaking out of the BSC.
At all times, for visualization in either BSC or isolators, the actual setup of the process equipment, materials,
and product should match the intended operations. The airflow visualization testing should comply with the
requirements defined previously in this section and, in addition, should ensure that there are no obstructions
to airflow grills.
For BSCs as containment enclosures, the primary purpose is to ensure that any hazardous product material
liberated in the airflow is transported away from the operator to prevent the risk of harm. This airflow
visualization is used mainly for semi-open Class I or Class II BSCs, according to BS EN 12469
Biotechnology - Performance Criteria for Microbiological Safety Cabinets, and does not quantify the
potential contaminants. The procedure, therefore, demonstrates that the airflow meets the objective and is
focused on aiding visualization to ensure there are no airflows towards the cleanroom, surrounding
environment, and operator (17). This includes visualization of flow at the following points:
• Airflow around large objects that may generate turbulence.
• Airflow around continuous viable and nonviable sampling equipment.
• Airflow around hand movement and equipment while performing required operations.
• Airflow during interventions.
• Airflow remaining undisturbed by external airflow from the surroundings.
The documentation of the airflow visualization should be similar regardless of the objective of the study.
Visual recordings of the process should be made from as many angles as are necessary to capture the flow
(first air) at each critical point, including in dynamic conditions (i.e., when the system is in use). The FDA
and European Medicines Agency recommend that the documentation provide a detailed summary of what
equipment and supplies are present, the number of personnel present, and a list of all activities simulated.
In addition to airflow visualization studies, there are other methods that are commonly employed for BSC
that are nonvisible but use a variety of detectors in order to classify the performance of the system in
quantitative terms. These tests include, but are not limited to, a segregation test, KI-Discus (potassium
iodide) test, or other containment tests.
Unexpected airflows between clean zones can also be detected using the segregation test, according to Chap.
4.2.11 of ISO 14644-3:2019 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments, Part 3: Test Methods.
The lesser classified area is challenged with a defined concentration of aerosol particles, and the particle
concentration in the protected area is then measured. The difference between the two concentrations results
in the determination of a protection factor (18).
For hazardous applications in semi-open BSCs, the KI-Discus test method, according to EN 12469, is
routinely used as a containment test. This relatively static test uses small salt particles from potassium iodide
with a defined momentum to show the concentration difference between the interior of the BSC and exterior
zone in front of the BSC, expressed as a “protection factor” (see Figure 5.3-1).
48 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 50 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.3-1 Containment Test Method on a Biosafety Cabinet (potassium iodide test)
For hazardous applications, fume cupboards can be evaluated using a quantitative containment test wherein
an alcohol dispersion with a defined momentum and a defined concentration is measured instead of
potassium iodide. On the outside of the cabinet, the alcohol concentration is measured around the dynamic
horizontal movement of a dummy equipped with two metal arms in the workspace (see Figure 5.3-2). After
a concentration analysis is performed, a containment performance class may be defined.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 49

=== PAGE 51 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.3-2 Containment Test Method on a Fume Cupboard (alcohol dispersion test)
Rationale
Airflow visualization, in its many forms, is an effective way to demonstrate that the process and product are
protected by the designed unidirectional airflow from adverse influences such as particle-generating
activities or the external environment. Since air in its natural state cannot be seen, the introduction of tools
that enable its visualization (and, if needed, the quantitation of a tracer compound) provides a powerful
mechanism to confirm the initial conclusions from the CFD models used during design. When performed
under all of the conditions that represent routine production and interventions, it can be demonstrated that
the intended process does not contribute additional risk to the environment through the disruption of airflow.
50 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 52 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 5.4. What methods are used to maintain facility cascade/pressure stability?
Recommendation
Pressure cascades can be measured using two methods. The first method is to directly measure the pressure
difference between two adjacent areas where common areas exist. For ease of validation, it is recommended
that individual tubing be used between each high- and low-pressure sample-point location, although it is
also possible (albeit more complex) that the monitoring points be connected together via a manifold. The
advantage of this first method is a direct response to a pressure cascade change of state. The second method
is to measure the absolute pressure of each space and calculate the differential. The advantage of this
method is typically the use of fewer sensors and a wider view of the comparison of pressures between
multiple spaces across the facility. However, this advantage is offset by a wider error range for
measurement, as two sensors are required for the calculation of each differential. In either case, a loss of
local pressure would be identified (see Figure 5.4-1).
Figure 5.4-1 Shows the Pressure Difference Measurement Between the Isolator Chamber and
Above the Supply HEPA Filter
A suitable measurement interval for pressure readings should provide a balance between small variances
caused by internal fluctuations within a controlled space and the loss of control parameters, while enabling
the averaging of results accurately over longer periods. The process and use of the cleanrooms (e.g., entries,
exits, frequency of use, movements) should be used to determine the measurement and recording frequency
as this may be different throughout each zone within the facility.
If a pressure loss has been observed, the air-handling unit should react immediately to balance the pressure
loss. Pressure loss should be recorded, and an alarm should signal. The reason for the pressure loss must be
investigated. Alarm signals should be timed to avoid signaling for routine operational events such as entries
and exits.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 51

=== PAGE 53 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Manual operation in BSCs and isolators, or the opening of a door at a PAL or MAL, are the most critical
factors of an influence on the air stability in a system. Fast movements should be avoided. A higher degree
of automation could reduce or even eliminate manual operations and the resultant air influence. Delays in
alarms should be minimal (i.e., < 3 min) and should be justified as part of the CCS.
For cleanrooms, air locks with door interlocks on all doors and pressure stabilization are recommended to
avoid pressure fluctuations between the air lock and the processing room. Furthermore, disruption of the
differential pressure between the air locks and the adjacent cleanrooms will disrupt the function of the air
locks as a pressure sink (negative relative to surrounding spaces), air bubble (positive relative to surrounding
spaces), or pressure cascade (positive on one side and negative on the other side). (See Figure 4.3-1.)
Rationale
Stable pressure zones and maintaining the differential pressure between adjacent spaces are important for
the safe manufacture of ATMPs and are essential to keeping aseptic conditions and preventing
contamination and cross-contamination in adjacent areas. A pressure-zone concept, with a risk evaluation
based on the assigned function of every room, as well as the personnel and material flows, should be part of
the overall layout of the rooms within the facility.
52 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 54 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Recommended Reading
The following materials are suggested as additional reading with relevant information and regulatory
guidance from health authorities and references to applicable publications or PDA technical documents.
American Society of Mechanical Engineers
American Society of Mechanical Engineers. ASME BPE-2022 (Revision of ASME BPE-2019):
Bioprocessing Equipment; ASME: New York, NY, 2022.
ASTM International
ASTM International. ASTM E2500-20 Standard Guide for Specification, Design, and Verification of
Pharmaceutical and Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing Systems and Equipment; ASTM: West
Conshohocken, PA, 2020.
European Commission
European Commission. Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6
November 2001 on the Community Code Relating to Medicinal Products for Human Use; OJ. Publications
Office of the European Union: Brussels, 2001.
European Commission. Guidelines on Good Manufacturing Practice Specific to Advanced Therapy
Medicinal Products, EudraLex – Volume 4 – Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for
Human and Veterinary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2017.
European Medicines Agency
European Medicines Agency. Guideline on the Quality of Water for Pharmaceutical Use; EMA: London,
2020.
International Council for Harmonisation
International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q9(R1): Quality Risk Management; ICH:
Geneva, 2023.
International Organization for Standardization
International Organization for Standardization. ISO/TS 23565:2021 Biotechnology — Bioprocessing —
General requirements and considerations for equipment systems used in the manufacturing of cells for
therapeutic use; 2021.
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 10648-1:1997 Containment Enclosures — Part 1:
Design Principles; 1997.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 53

=== PAGE 55 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. Baseline Guide Vol. 3: Sterile Product
Manufacturing Facilities, 3rd Edition. ISPE: Bethesda, MD, 2018.
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. ISPE Baseline® Guide Vol. 5: Commissioning and
Qualification, 2nd Edition; ISPE: Bethesda, MD, 2019.
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. ISPE Good Practice Guide: Sampling Pharma Water,
Steam, & Process Gases. ISPE: Bethesda, MD, 2016.
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. ISPE Good Practice Guide: Good Engineering
Practice, 2nd Edition. ISPE: Bethesda, MD, 2016.
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. ISPE Good Practice Guide: Process Gases, 2nd
Edition. ISPE: Bethesda, MD, 2023.
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. ISPE Good Practice Guide: Approaches to
Commissioning and Qualification of Pharmaceutical Water and Steam Systems, 3rd Edition. ISPE:
Bethesda, MD, 2016.
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. ISPE Good Practice Guide: Critical Utilities GMP
Compliance. ISPE: Bethesda, MD, 2020.
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. ISPE Guide: Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products
– Allogeneic Cell Therapy. ISPE: Bethesda, MD, 2024.
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. ISPE Guide: Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products
– Autologous Cell Therapy. ISPE: Bethesda, MD, 2021.
Parenteral Drug Association
Parenteral Drug Association. Points to Consider for Risks Associated with Sterilizing Grade Filters and
Sterilizing Filtration, 2020.
Parenteral Drug Association. Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023), 2023.
Parenteral Drug Association. Points to Consider for Sensitivity to Oxidation by Peroxide, 2020.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022): Fundamentals of an Environmental
Monitoring Program, 2022.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 51: Biological Indicators for Gas and Vapor-Phase
Decontamination Processes: Specification, Manufacture, Control and Use, 2010.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality Risk Management for
Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations, 2012.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 62: Recommended Practices for Manual Aseptic
Processes, 2013.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 65: Technology Transfer, 2014.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 66: Application of Single-Use Systems in
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing, 2014.
54 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.