

=== PAGE 29 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
7. Oxygen
a. Any O distribution line installed should be classified. The classification of the distribution
2
line generally depends on the intended use (e.g., O sparging applications during cell
2
expansion to maintain oxygen potential in the media/stock solutions).
b. The design should include the control to provide a continuous supply of O gas (e.g.,
2
source-tank switchover) at an appropriate flow rate (e.g., pressure design to achieve flow
rate) and distribution uniformity.
c. Appropriately qualified source and terminal sterile filtration should be considered if O is
2
used for product-contact purposes.
d. Distribution systems serving different processes or different equipment within the process
should ensure that the design prevents the risk of cross-contamination.
e. Pipes must be marked with “O ” signs and should indicate the flow direction.
2
8. Process air and process gas
a. Any process air/process gas distribution (other than N or O ) line installed should be
2 2
classified. Process air/process gas typically refers to air or gas intended for direct product-
contact purposes (e.g., distributed into vessels containing product); therefore, the
classification of the process air/process gas should be suitable for product contact. For such
purposes, appropriately qualified terminal sterile filtration should be considered.
b. For some gases (e.g., clean compressed air) it may be important to limit or reduce moisture
or hydrocarbon content during and after generation, prior to the point of use. Consideration
should be given to the cleanliness of the source (e.g., canisters, bulk supply, compressors)
and alternatives should be sought that are of suitable cleanliness for the intended use (e.g.,
oil-free air compressors). Appropriate post-generation treatment (e.g., dryers, coalescing
filters) should be specified for the process gas and the selected method of generation.
c. Design should include the control to provide desirable flow rate and distribution uniformity
during use.
d. Distribution systems serving different processes or different equipment within the process
should ensure that the design prevents the risk of cross-contamination.
e. Pipes must be marked with “Process Air” signs and should indicate the flow direction.
9. Instrument air and compressed air
a. Instrument air/compressed air typically refers to air used to support such processes as
instrumentation use. Hence, the system is typically not considered as being in direct
product or process contact. Nevertheless, the system should be qualified and
commissioned.
b. Pressure control should be instituted to ensure that the pressure at use is appropriate per
instrument/equipment design.
c. Pipes must be marked with “Instrument/Compressed Air” signs and should indicate the
flow direction.
Rationale
Utilities used for the manufacturing of ATMPs should be qualified and validated, as in any other
pharmaceutical product, in accordance with their intended use. If utilities such as liquid or gas (so-called
“clean” utilities) come in contact with the pharmaceutical product, the quality should be demonstrated to
meet CGMP requirements through both the system design and routine monitoring.
28 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 30 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Topic 4. Process Equipment
Q 4.1. When choosing a biological safety cabinet for the manufacture of ATMPs, what
factors are important?
Recommendation
A BSC is flexible in its use, although it typically does not have the same levels of integrated control and
monitoring systems as an isolator. Instead, it relies on operators to manually decontaminate the Grade A
space, maintain it through good aseptic practice, and appropriately monitor the environment. This increased
reliance upon the operator means that operations should be carefully planned with an understanding of the
barrier system limitations of the BSC and should incorporate appropriate risk mitigations to safeguard the
aseptic operations. According to EU GMP Annex 1, the BSC is not classified as barrier technology.
The room environment where the BSC is located should support the maintenance of the Grade A
environment within the operational zone for the barrier system in use. This dictates the need for a Grade B
environment to surround the BSC.
Biosafety Cabinets
BSCs are widely used in the manufacturing of ATMPs as they are easy to install and maintain. Further,
BSCs generally occupy a modest footprint that permits highly flexible operations within the enclosure due
to the ease of access to the working area. BSCs allow access to the inner working zone via an open sash.
Note: BSC - Class III are the sole exception to the open-sash design. (Further descriptions of the different
classes are provided in this section.)
Surfaces inside BSCs are typically cleaned and disinfected manually, which requires intensive training of
operators to validate this procedure. Hence, BSCs require comprehensive QRM to ensure maintenance of
aseptic conditions during all activities within the critical zone.
The open-sash operation of most BSC designs provides direct access by the personnel to the ATMP
products being handled. Consequently, due to the exposure of personnel gowning to the products being
worked within the BSC work zone, personnel gowning must support aseptic operations. The increased
gowning requirements, as compared to those required for isolators, are more expensive and translate into a
more complex and costlier EM program. Material transfer into the BSC poses a high risk, as transfers are
done through the open sash, and materials are further decontaminated upon entry. The continuously open
sash, with forearms and hands penetrating the opening to perform the manipulations, and the risk of airflow
disturbance or air mixing during those manual operations contributes to the comparatively higher risk of
BSCs.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 29

=== PAGE 31 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 4.1-1 Biosafety Cabinet
The three main classes of BSCs are:
Class I BSC
Class I cabinets provide personnel and environmental protection by filtering air through a HEPA filter
before it is exhausted. These cabinets do not protect the product from potential contamination and are
suitable for general manipulations of low-to-moderate risk agents where product sterility is not a priority.
Class I BSCs should never be used for ATMP-manufacturing activities.
Class II BSC
Class II cabinets are designed to protect the product, personnel, and environment, making them acceptable
for handling ATMPs with a requirement for aseptic conditions. There are multiple subtypes of Class II
BSCs, each with different operating conditions that dictates their suitability for the production of different
classes of ATMP (see Figure 4.1-2 below).
Class II Type A1 BSC
Often used in clinical and research laboratories for standard microbiological work with no chemical
evaporation. Type A1 cabinets maintain a minimum inflow velocity of 75 feet per minute and recirculate
70% of the air while exhausting 30% outdoors after filtration. They are not suitable for handling volatile or
toxic chemicals. Type A1 BSCs are usually only used in development laboratories where the ATMP will not
be administered to a human.
Class II Type A2 BSC
Similar to Type A1 BSCs but with an increased inflow velocity of 100 feet per minute, enhancing
containment. Type A2 cabinets can handle minute amounts of volatile chemicals if vented with an
appropriate thimble (canopy) connection to the facility’s HVAC system.
30 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 32 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Class II Type B1 BSC
Designed for work that involves minute quantities of toxic chemicals and radionuclides, providing these
operations occur toward the rear of the work area and are exhausted directly outside. Type B1 maintains a
balance where 70% of the air is exhausted and 30% is recirculated, both through HEPA filters.
Class II Type B2 BSC
Also known as total exhaust cabinets, these are suitable for handling significant quantities of toxic chemicals
and radio nuclides. They maintain a minimum inflow of 100 feet per minute and exhaust 100% of the air.
All inflow and downflow air is removed via the ducts out of the building, allowing no recirculation within
the cabinet.
Class II Type C1 BSC
A versatile cabinet that functions under both Type A and Type B conditions with a switch to change
between modes depending on the chemicals used. This type of BSC provides flexibility in laboratories that
handle both biological samples and chemicals, adjusting the exhaust accordingly.
Class III BSC
Offering the highest level of protection, Class III cabinets are gas-tight enclosures used with high-risk
microbiological agents and hazardous chemicals. Materials are manipulated through attached gloves.
Figure 4.1-2 Airflow Pattern in a Biosafety Cabinet
Operating Considerations for the BSC
• Easy-to-perform manual processes through the sash opening
• Flexibility to adjust how the BSC is used based on the needs of the process
• Rapid changeover from process to process
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 31

=== PAGE 33 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Constraint Considerations for the BSC
• Material transfers can be difficult due to the need for manual sanitizing on the entry to the Grade A
zone.
• An assistant is often needed to conduct the material transfer so the person who is manufacturing can
continuously maintain their hands within the Grade A zone.
• Wrist rests should be purchased to avoid the operator covering the exhaust and effectively bringing
the contaminated air into the Grade A environment.
• Long gloves are required as gowns cannot be sanitized upon entry to Grade A and should not enter
this zone.
32 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 34 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 4.2. What factors are important when choosing an isolator for the manufacture of
ATMPs?
Recommendation
An isolator typically has integrated monitoring of the Grade A environment using viable and non-viable
(total particulate) monitoring in addition to air-velocity and pressure monitoring. This provides the ability to
control and monitor the environment while the isolator is in use. This control and monitoring strategy should
be planned and maintained. Isolators have the capability of undergoing an automatic decontamination cycle
as they can be fully closed from the external environment. This ability during operations also provides
effective separation from operators who can only interact with the interior through glove ports. Maintenance
of Grade A conditions within an isolator is made simpler through this separation.
Isolators are considered closed barriers to the surrounding environment and may be placed in a Grade C or
Grade D environment based on the CCS and the requirements of the market being served. In EU GMP
Annex 1, closed isolators (examples Figure 2.3-2, Figure 4.2-1, and Figure 4.2-2) require a background of
Grade D or higher and, for open isolators with small openings for a continuous or semicontinuous
infeed/outfeed of materials, a Grade C background is required. The isolator system provides a Grade A work
zone and should be equipped with an integrated, automated, and validated decontamination system (e.g.,
vaporized or nebulized H O ).
2 2
Isolators
During operation, the operator’s only access to an isolator is through the gloves mounted on the glass
panels. The quality of the gloves, set up and design of the workspace, are important and offer flexibility.
Working with gloves through the barrier might be more challenging and could require enhanced training to
perform sensitive work, which could result in longer operation times.
According to the EU GMP Annex 1, isolators are classified as a barrier technology. Open or closed isolators
may be attached to adjacent chambers, permitting the closed transfer of materials in and out, as shown in
Figure 4.2-1 with a MAL to the left of the main isolator chamber. The MAL system provides a fast method
for decontamination of materials in and out via a closed and interlocked chamber which maintains the Grade
A classification within the isolator. The VPHPused in the MAL decontamination cycle might pose a risk to
the transferred material and should be carefully assessed. Additional process technologies, such as an
incubator, centrifuge, or robotic system, can be attached and integrated within an isolator system to provide
a closed and continuous working environment.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 33

=== PAGE 35 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 4.2-1 Closed Isolator with Material Air Lock, Centrifuge, and Incubator
The permissible maximum leak rate of the isolator should account for the criticality of the manufactured
product. As a recommendation, the leak rate should be a maximum of 5% volume rate per hour (the typical
capability of today’s systems often falls within 3–5%).
A routine monitoring program should include frequent leak-testing of the isolator and integrity-testing of the
glove/sleeve system. Supporting data from leak-testing should align with segregation policies and
compliance requirements.
Figure 4.2-2 An Example of a Closed Isolator System for the Manufacturing of ATMPs
34 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 36 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) studies are powerful tools to predict the spreading of particles and
aerosols. Particles and aerosols should be transferred to air-return duct filters in the fastest and shortest
pathway possible. The design process should make use of appropriate engineering controls, such as CFD
(Figure 4.2-3), to demonstrate the control of the airflow towards the safety filters within the air-return ducts
(Figure 4.2-4). The criticality of the manufactured ATMP should always drive the necessary design
attributes for both tightness (i.e., leaks) and air flow controls. For potent products, additional HEPA filters
should be fitted before the air-return ducts to avoid spreading particles and aerosols outside the isolator
chamber.
Figure 4.2-3 Computational Fluid Dynamics Studies
Figure 4.2-4 Safety Filter Before the Air-return Ducts
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 35

=== PAGE 37 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Operating Considerations of Isolators
• Provides controlled closed environment to protect the product and the operator.
• Surface decontamination with vaporized hydrogen peroxide (VPHP) or other decontamination
agent systems is automated and validated.
• Controlled material transfer in and out of the isolator system through RTPs or MALs with
automated, validated decontamination cycles (see Figure 4.2-1).
• Isolation of the pharmaceutical product within a small, closed environment that avoids spreading
highly potent pharmaceutical products to surrounding areas.
• Higher BSL requirements can be accommodated due to the closed environment, automated
decontamination, and the possibility of inactivation.
• More sustainable due to lower surrounding cleanroom environment (Grade D), which means less
room EM, less gowning, and less related training.
Constraints of Isolators
• Isolators require careful design to ensure that all required aspects of the process can be executed
through the designated glove ports and to verify that all required material transfers can occur
through the designated RTPs or MALs.
• Isolators may, in some circumstances, be less flexible in terms of significant process or equipment
changes.
• Isolators require routine leak-testing of the chamber(s) and integrity-testing of the gloves, sleeves,
and glove ports to ensure that the Grade A environment is maintained.
36 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 38 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 4.3. What should be considered when comparing biosafety cabinet and isolator
design?
Recommendation
The design of an ATMP facility needs to be focused first considering its containment. The design of the
containment and its background environmental classification are key considerations that will drive all other
design elements (see Table 4.3-1). The choice of containment measures will be based on the existing
facility design constraints, size and layout of the facility, new build budgets, and other company activities
(see Table 4.3-2).
Regulators are increasingly pushing industry for containment measures similar to isolators, even if
processing is not performed within an isolator.
Table 4.3-1 Background Grades and Assurances Considerations
Primary Background Considerations Summary (not exhaustive)
Containment Requirements
– Grade A
Biological Grade B • Only partial barrier with processing occurring through
Safety Cabinet the open sash, with gowned forearm and gloved hand
(BSC) Class II exposure to the inside of the BSC.
• Manual decontamination.
• Sanitization of items (and hands) upon entering the
Grade A environment each time.
• Wrist rests recommended to fix in place the operator’s
arms and assist in reproducible airflow patterns (and to
avoid arms resting on the air exhaust).
• Considered high-risk by regulators due to the close
proximity of the operator to the process and the only
barrier being the operator’s clothing within the Grade A.
Isolator – Grade D* • Complete barrier between operator, and the process is
Closed fixed and sealed.
• Decontamination of items occurs during a validated
decontamination/sanitization cycle.
• Gloves can be reliably integrity-tested using automated
methods.
• Glove ports are set in place, so airflow movement is
well-controlled.
• Considered as the higher sterility assurance provider by
regulators due to automation of
decontamination/sanitization and increased physical
barriers.
*Note: Grade D is the minimum grade expected. Grades can be higher depending on the nature of the
ATMP and the need for low-particulate transfer (e.g., such as during isolator loading operations, if any) as
defined by the CCS.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 37

=== PAGE 39 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Operational Comparison of Biosafety Cabinets and Isolators
BSCs and isolators are typically equipped with a filter of at least a HEPA classification. The type of HEPA
filter installed is expected, at a minimum, to have particulate removal of 99.99% when tested, in accordance
with internationally acceptable standards. The filtration capability of HEPA filters in BSCs and isolators
should provide a Grade A operating work zone.
Since a BSC is operated via an open sash compared with the closed operating mode of an isolator, there is a
greater need to manage particulates and contaminants through good aseptic practice. Products in the work
zone of the BSC may be exposed to particulates from gowning worn by personnel since the personnel are
required to manipulate the products directly via gloved hands.
In contrast, an isolator provides a closed environment where personnel indirectly access the work zone
through integrated gloves. The use of gloves attached to the isolator may make product-handling
inconvenient (i.e., due to the loss of some physical dexterity) in an isolator compared to a BSC. However,
indirect access not only protects the product and process but also protects the operator as there is no risk of
transfer of contamination to the operator’s gowning.
Production within isolators also reduces the gowning requirement for operators since they may be gowned
in accordance with the requirements of the background environment. This means operators working with
isolators may be gowned for Grade D (or C) operations, while operators working with BSC must gown for
Grade A operations. The lower gowning requirements can save some expense in training, gowning, time,
and EM, making the isolator more sustainable over the long term.
The surface cleaning and decontamination/disinfection in a BSC is done manually using sterile wipes. In an
isolator, the cleaning is performed manually while the decontamination is performed with an integrated,
automated, and validated technology such as vaporized or nebulized H O or another decontamination
2 2
agent.
Material transfers in a BSC are performed with the open sash, as one operator transfers items to the operator
working in the BSC. During this process, it is important to avoid contamination of the surrounding area with
the material transferred through the open sash by careful decontamination of external surfaces and/or
removal of packaging. Transfer technologies attached to the BSC, such as RTPs, can provide lower-risk
transfers. Isolators use transfer systems like MALs and/or RTPs to provide a safe and rapid transfer after a
vaporized or sprayed decontamination agent cycle. The exposure of the decontamination agent to the
materials being transferred should be investigated for chemical and penetration capability.
According to EU GMP Annex 1, the BSC is not classified as a barrier technology, whereas isolators are.
38 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 40 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Comparison Between Biosafety Cabinet and Isolator for Facility Design
Table 4.3-2 Comparison Between Biosafety Cabinet and Isolator for Facility Design
Facility Design Class II BSC Isolator
Contamination Control
Operator Protection
Sustainability
GMP Annex 1 Compliance
Cleanroom Footprint
Integration into an Existing
Cleanroom
Equipment Lead Time
Key:
Lowest Advantage Highest Advantage
Capital Expenditure and Operating Cost Considerations
The capital expenditure (CapEx) and operational expenditure (OpEx) costs for BSCs and isolators need to
be evaluated considering the individual circumstances (see Table 4.3-3), such as:
• Manufacturing time (short or long)
• Complexity of the process
• Availability of trained and experienced personnel for the selected technology
• Degree of automation (e.g., robotics)
An isolator system is typically more complex than BSC, and the complexity contributes to the higher cost of
purchasing an isolator system (see Table 4.3-4). Similarly, this complexity translates to higher operational
and maintenance costs for the equipment (e.g., parts replacement, complex filter design, enhanced training
for the skillset required for operation), but lower investment costs for the secondary containment, as the
isolator system is placed in a minimum of a Grade D environment.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 39

=== PAGE 41 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 4.3-3 Capital Expenditure and Operating Cost Considerations
Primary Containment – Background Requirements Considerations Summary
Grade A
Biological Safety Cabinet (BSC) Grade B High OpEx and Low CapEx
Class II
Isolator – Closed Grade D* High CapEx and Low OpEx
*Note: This is the minimum grade expected. Grades can be higher depending on the nature of the ATMP
and the need for low particulate transfer as defined by the CCS.
Cost Comparison Between the Use of Biosafety Cabinet and Isolator
Table 4.3-4 Cost Comparison Between the Use of Biosafety Cabinet and Isolator
Consideration Cost Class II BSC Isolator
Equipment Initial Investment
(capital)
Low-volume Products
(operational and
maintenance costs)
Medium/High-
volume Products
(operational and
maintenance costs)
Room Initial Investment
(capital)
Operational and
Maintenance Costs
Gowning Gowning Cost
Environmental
Monitoring Cost
Key:
Lower Cost Higher Cost
40 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.