

=== PAGE 10 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Abbreviations
ATMP Advanced Therapy Medicinal HVAC Heating, Ventilation, and Air
Products Conditioning
BSC Biosafety Cabinet MAL Material Air Lock
BSL Biological Safety Level Non-RCV Non-Replication-Competent Virus
CCS Contamination Control Strategy PAL Personnel
CFD Computational Fluid Dynamics RCV Replication-Competent Virus
EM Environmental Monitoring RTP Rapid Transfer Port
GMO Genetically Modified Organisms VPHP Vapor Phase Hydrogen Peroxide
GMP Good Manufacturing Practice WFI Water for Injection
HEPA High Efficiency Particulate Air
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 9

=== PAGE 11 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Topic 1. Risk Management
Q 1.1. How can a risk assessment be created for an ATMP facility?
Recommendation
The manufacture of any product, including an ATMP, necessarily entails some degree of risk. The degree of
risk often correlates with such factors as the number of manual interventions, the type of environment in
which those interventions occur, and the open or closed nature of the process. For example, autologous
therapies produced in small batches (small-scale) often have a higher risk per unit produced when manual
manipulations are numerous. The facility design element of a formal facility risk assessment should always
be included as part of the Design Review process in the organization, but it is even more important when
processes have varying levels of risk. Based on the process design principles and nature of the work to be
performed in the facility, the organization can define the risk profile of the facility and work to mitigate
those risks through appropriate design controls associated with the equipment (e.g., isolators, BSCs) and
appropriate process improvements (e.g., single-use systems, closed processing, automation, improved
intervention design). As part of the same facility risk assessment, design controls can also be considered to
manage risks related to biological hazards.
Facility risk assessment should be undertaken by an interdisciplinary team and should be guided by a risk-
assessment facilitator of appropriate experience along with a scribe to record the risk assessment. The scope
of the facility risk assessment should include both facility and equipment design and selection, as well as
product, personnel, and environmental risk categories. Including personnel and environmental safety aspects
in the risk assessment is recommended as it is likely that safety-related controls could also have an impact
on product quality. Control measures for one risk category should be assessed for impact on other risk
categories. For example, the use of a virus in cell therapy manufacturing may pose health risks to personnel
while facilities producing the viral vectors have additional safety considerations due to the active replication
of viral vectors, albeit in a controlled process and environment. Where applicable, specialized safety
personnel, such as those with biosafety, toxicology, microbiology, and virology expertise, should be
involved in the performance of the risk assessment and in the design of the mitigations of the identified
risks.
Facility risk assessments should consider, but are not limited to, the following elements:
1. Material
a. Presence of adventitious agents (e.g., potential presence of replication competent agents).
b. Material handling and transfer into and out of critical process areas (e.g., appropriate design
and classification of pass-through containers, surface decontamination/disinfection during
transfer of frozen materials, transfer of sterile parts/consumables)
10 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 12 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
c. Controls and material-flow requirements when viruses, cellular materials, or genetically
modified organisms (GMOs) are present in the facility (including raw material, product,
sample, and waste flows)
d. Incoming control of materials for quality, microorganisms, and adventitious agents (e.g.,
vendor qualification, vendor audit, vendor certification, in-house sampling and testing,
controls at loading dock, warehouse)
2. Facility and equipment
a. Equipment, material, and waste flow (e.g., material or equipment moving to a higher-grade
area, cross-contamination due to non-unidirectional flow)
b. Personnel flow (e.g., cross-contamination risk due to personnel working or supporting
different batches or different products at the same time)
c. Cleanability of equipment and facility, including contact materials (e.g., selection of
materials of construction that are nonadditive, non-absorptive, or non-reactive, including
primary equipment, gaskets, filters, and selection of product-/process-compatible
lubricants)
d. Need for dedicated, segregated, self-contained areas and separation by time (e.g.,
manufacturing process using infectious viral vectors)
e. Containment adequacy (e.g., ability to contain potential aerosol release, examination of
open processing for possible routes of contamination)
f. Radiation shielding (e.g., use of x-ray irradiation equipment in process may require
additional consideration directed by local regulations)
g. Aspects of commissioning, qualification, maintenance, and environmental monitoring
(EM) (e.g., handling of pass-through containers, process gases)
3. Multiproduct processing (e.g., handling multiple batches of product and/or multiple products
simultaneously to ensure chain of identity to avoid mix-ups, limit risks of cross-contamination,
prevent processing errors, and ensure process adherence)
a. Pressure-cascade design, which meets the containment design and aseptic processing
requirements for all materials, especially highly potent materials and the appropriate
controls for transitioning from area to area (e.g., air lock and pass-throughs with
appropriate interlocks and purge times before opening to other zones or classifications)
b. Utilities that ensure appropriate quality, reduce risk of contamination, ensure adequacy of
supply and appropriate control (e.g., steam, process gases, power, clean compressed air,
instrument air, heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), water for injection (WFI)
and/or purified water, liquid nitrogen, carbon dioxide)
4. Cleaning, decontamination, disinfection, sanitization, and sterilization
a. Equipment and facility cleaning/decontamination design (e.g., design of automated
decontamination, cell-virus inactivation process)
b. Waste decontamination (e.g., solid or liquid, in-process or waste treatment system)
c. Accident and spill response, decontamination, and cleaning
d. Equipment and material disinfection, sanitization, and sterilization
5. Airflow design
a. Airflow within the facility design should consider the acceptability of recirculation of air
within the facility or whether single-pass air (i.e., no recirculation) is required
b. Zone control within the HVAC air-handling units should consider separation by cleanliness
and/or by process
c. Differential pressure management to ensure appropriate containment and/or cleanliness
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 11

=== PAGE 13 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6. External environment
a. Impact of activities performed in the facility on the external environment (e.g., waste
treatment requirement, construction)
b. Seasonal changes of incoming air and source water, where applicable, to ensure that
adequate pretreatment is included in the utility system design
c. Pest control measures
Rationale
A facility risk assessment can help determine the most appropriate design of facilities and selection of
equipment. In particular, it is important to consider not only quality risks but also environmental and safety
risks. Examples of how hazards can affect both safety and quality aspects include, but are not limited to:
1. Certification and qualification test for a BSC covers product, personnel, and environmental risk but
placement and layout of BSC should also be verified according to manufacturer and/or standard
requirements (e.g., NSF/ANSI 49). The layout will then likely impact personnel, material, sample,
and waste flows and potentially affect the cross-contamination control strategy. If the risk cannot be
adequately controlled with the use of a BSC, a closed system or isolators should be used.
2. Waste treatment is part of the biological risk management in the facility, and the type of waste
treatment will impact personnel and material flow and potentially affect the cross-contamination
control strategy.
3. Facility decontamination processes may leave residues that subsequently impact product quality and
patient safety but may also represent a risk to operator safety.
4. Cross-contamination between manufacturing areas of different products (e.g., live vs. inactivated
microorganisms) will impact product quality and patient safety, as well as put operators at risk.
5. Design requirements for BSL containment of GMOs or other highly potent products may conflict
with aseptic processing requirements. For example, a negative-pressure cascade may be
recommended to contain GMO within the facility, but aseptic processes rely on a positive-pressure
cascade to prevent contamination from entering the facility.
12 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 14 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 1.2. How does the ATMP risk assessment determine the biosafety level
requirement?
Recommendation
A list of biological materials, including GMOs, should be maintained and reviewed regularly against local
requirements as part of a risk management program. The list serves as a basis for the organization to
determine the risk group classification of each material, and the risk group is determined by the hazard
posed by the biological agents and toxins (if any) used in the manufacturing process. Although risk group
classification depends on localities, the definition is generally in line with those from the World Health
Organization (WHO) and U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (4, 5):
• Risk Group 1 (no or low individual and community risk)
̶ A microorganism that is unlikely to cause human or animal disease.
• Risk Group 2 (moderate individual risk, low community risk)
̶ A pathogen that can cause human or animal disease but is unlikely to be a serious hazard to
laboratory personnel, the community, livestock, or the environment. Laboratory exposures
may cause serious infection, but effective treatment and preventive measures are available,
and the risk of the spread of infection is limited.
• Risk Group 3 (high individual risk, low community risk)
̶ A pathogen that usually causes serious human or animal diseases but does not ordinarily
spread from one infected individual to another. Effective treatment and preventive
measures are available (not considered in this document).
• Risk Group 4 (high individual and community risk)
̶ A pathogen that usually causes serious human or animal disease and that can be readily
transmitted from one individual to another, directly or indirectly. Effective treatment and
preventive measures are not usually available (not considered in this document).
Upon understanding the risk group classification of the materials involved in the product, the organization
should consult with the local environmental health and safety regulatory bodies and the inspecting
regulatory bodies of the countries in which the product is licensed to determine the BSL requirements for
the manufacturing facility. The organization can then determine the controls required to manage the risk
using facility risk assessment. Typically, risk group classification and control requirements are heightened
for the following situations:
• Novel biological materials (e.g., new gene insertion or deletion, novel virus)
• Biological material that is replication competent as opposed to biological material known to be no
longer capable of replication
• Viral vectors and their risk to the operator and cross-contamination
The organization should also consider the requirements related to the use of GMOs. Many countries
maintain specific facility and procedural requirements for facility-handling of GMOs, and the containment
requirements are typically applied in addition to the typical pharmaceutical facility cleanliness requirements.
Risk management principles should be applied when determining the control points. The risk assessment
and mitigations should aim to minimize the risk to as low as is reasonably practical.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 13