vi. any known quality defects/fraudulent adulterations, both globally and
at a local company level related to the material;
vii. known or potential impact on the CQA and CPP of the ATMP; and
viii. other factors as identified or known to be relevant to assuring patient
safety.
(e) Document the risk profile as low, medium, or high based on the above
assessment and use this outcome to determine the PRP. On this basis, the
MAH should establish and document the elements of PIC/S GMP that are
needed to be in place in order to control and maintain the QTPP.
(f) Once the PRP and the appropriate GMP have been defined, ongoing risk
review should be performed through mechanisms such as:
i. number of defects connected to batches of respective material
received;
ii. type/severity of such defects;
iii. monitoring and trend analysis of material quality;
iv. observation of trends in drug product quality attributes; this will
depend on the nature and role of material; and
v. observed organisational, procedural or technical/process changes at
the material manufacturer.
(g) Incorporate the PRP into the CTA or MA as applicable.
(h) The QTPP, once approved in the production process by the Competent
Authority, should guide the manufacturer through what controls are important
and expected and which can be exempted. The manufacturer should have a
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -87- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
control strategy established that justifies the level of testing performed for
incoming starting materials.
5.24 Particular attention should be paid to avoiding contamination and to minimising
the variability of the materials. Specifications related to the product (such as those
in pharmacopoeial monographs, CTA, or MA), will dictate whether and to what
stage substances and materials can have a defined level of bioburden or need to
be sterile.
5.25 For products where final sterilisation is not possible and the ability to remove
microbial by-products is limited, the controls required for the quality of materials
and on the aseptic manufacturing process assume greater importance. Where a
CTA or MA provides for an allowable type and level of bioburden, for example at
the ATMP active substance stage, the control strategy should address the means
by which this is maintained within the specified limits.
5.26 The selection, qualification, approval and maintenance of suppliers of starting
materials, raw materials and materials that come in direct contact with the
products during manufacture and storage (e.g. single use systems) together with
their purchase and acceptance should be documented as part of the
pharmaceutical quality system. The level of oversight should be proportionate to
the risks posed by the individual materials taking account of their source,
manufacturing process, supply chain complexity and the final use to which the
material is put in the ATMP. The supporting evidence for each supplier / material
approval should be maintained. Personnel involved in these activities should
have a current knowledge of the suppliers, the supply chain and the associated
risks involved. Where possible, these materials should be purchased directly from
the manufacturer or a manufacturer approved supplier. (Replaces PIC/S GMP
Guide Part I Section 5.27)
5.27 For starting material of human origin, the agreement between the ATMP
manufacturer (or, as appropriate, the MAH) and the supplier (including blood and
tissue establishments) should contain clear provisions about the transfer of
information. In particular, this should include test results performed by the
supplier, traceability data, and transmission of health donor information that may
become available after the supply that may have an impact on the quality or
safety of the ATMPs manufactured. National laws that are required as part of the
donation and procurement of human blood and blood components,
haematopoietic progenitor cells, human tissues and cells for manufacturing
purposes need to be adhered to. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section
5.28)
5.28 The quality requirements established by the manufacturer in the MA or CTA for
materials classified as critical during QRM process (according to PRP profile)
should be discussed and agreed with the suppliers during the product life cycle.
Appropriate aspects of the production, testing and control, including handling,
labelling, packaging and distribution requirements, complaints, recalls and
rejection procedures should be documented in a formal quality agreement.
(Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.28)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -88- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Human Blood, Tissues and Cells Used as Starting Materials
5.29 The donation, procurement and testing of human blood, tissues and cells used
as starting materials for ATMPs should be in accordance with the applicable
national law.
(a) The procurement, donation and testing of blood, cells and tissues is
regulated in some countries. Such supply sites must hold appropriate
approvals from the Competent Authority(ies) which should be verified as
part of supplier management.
(b) For cell therapies, the maintenance of the aseptic processing from time of
procurement of cells through manufacturing and administration back into
the patient should be ensured.
(c) Where such human cells or tissues are imported, they must meet
equivalent national standards of quality and safety. The traceability and
serious adverse reaction and serious adverse event notification
requirements may be set out in national law.
(d) There may be some instances where processing of blood, tissues and cells
used as starting materials for ATMPs will be conducted at blood or tissue
establishments. This is permissible only if authorised by national law (e.g.
the material would be otherwise compromised and processing involves only
minimal manipulation).
(e) Blood, tissue and cells are released by the Responsible Person (RP) in the
blood or tissue establishment before shipment to the ATMP manufacturer.
After that, normal medicinal product starting material controls apply. The
test results of all tissues / cells supplied by the tissue establishment should
be available to the manufacturer of the medicinal product. Such information
must be used to make appropriate material segregation and storage
decisions. In cases where manufacturing must be initiated prior to receiving
test results from the tissue establishment, tissue and cells may be shipped
to the medicinal product manufacturer, provided controls are in place to
prevent cross-contamination with tissue and cells that have been released
by the RP in the tissue establishment.
(f) A technical agreement clearly defining the responsibilities should be in
place between all involved parties (e.g. manufacturers, tissue
establishment, sponsors, MAH).
(g) The transport of blood, tissues and cells to the manufacturing site must be
controlled by a written agreement between the responsible parties. The
manufacturing sites should have documentary evidence of adherence to
the specified storage and transport conditions.
(h) Continuation of traceability requirements started at tissue establishments
through to the recipient(s), and vice versa, including materials in contact
with the cells or tissues should be maintained.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -89- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Seed Lot and Cell Bank System
5.30 A system of master and working virus seed lots and/or cell banks is
recommended if the production of allogeneic ATMP involves cell culture or
propagation in embryos and animals. This can prevent the unwanted drift of
properties, which might ensue from repeated subcultures or multiple generations.
5.31 The number of generations (doublings, passages) between the seed lot or cell
bank, the active substance and finished product should be consistent with
specifications in the MA or CTA.
5.32 As part of product lifecycle management, establishment of seed lots and cell
banks, including master and working generations, as well as maintenance and
storage, should be performed under appropriate GMP conditions. This should
include an appropriately controlled environment to protect the seed lot and the
cell bank and the personnel handling it. During the establishment of the seed lot
and cell bank, no other living or infectious material (e.g. virus, cell lines or cell
strains) should be handled simultaneously in the same area or by the same
persons. For all stages prior to the establishment of the master seed or cell bank
generation, principles of GMP may be applied. For all pre-master bank stages,
documentation should be available to support traceability. All issues related to
components used during the development with potential impact on product safety
(e.g. reagents of biological origin) from initial sourcing and genetic development
should be documented.
5.33 Following the establishment of master and working cell banks and master and
working seed lots, quarantine and release procedures should be followed. This
should include adequate characterisation and testing for contaminants. Their
on-going suitability for use should be further demonstrated by the consistency of
the characteristics and quality of the successive batches of product. Evidence of
the stability and recovery of the seeds and banks should be documented and
records should be kept in a manner permitting trend evaluation.
5.34 Seed lots and cell banks should be stored and used in such a way as to minimise
the risks of contamination (e.g. stored in the vapour phase of liquid nitrogen in
sealed containers) or alteration. Control measures for the storage of different
seeds and/or cells in the same area or equipment should prevent mix-up and take
into account the infectious nature of the materials to prevent cross-contamination.
5.35 Cell based ATMPs are often generated from a cell stock obtained from limited
number of passages. In contrast with the two-tiered system of Master and
Working cell banks, the number of production runs from a cell stock is limited by
the number of aliquots obtained after expansion and does not cover the entire life
cycle of the product. Cell stock changes should be addressed in the MA/CTA and
thereby covered by a validation and comparability protocol, as the inter-donor
variability may change the product.
5.36 Storage containers should be sealed, clearly labelled and kept at an appropriate
temperature. A stock inventory must be kept. The storage temperature and,
where used, the liquid nitrogen levels should be continuously monitored.
Deviation from set limits and corrective and preventive action taken should be
recorded.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -90- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
5.37 It is desirable to split stocks and to store the split stocks at different locations to
minimise the risks of total loss. The controls at such locations should provide the
assurances outlined in the preceding paragraphs.
5.38 The storage and handling conditions for stocks should be managed according to
the same procedures and parameters. Once containers are removed from the
seed lot / cell bank management system, the containers should not be returned
to stock.
CHAPTER 6 QUALITY CONTROL
6.1 In-process controls have a greater importance in ensuring the consistency of the
quality of ATMPs than for conventional products. In-process control testing
should be performed at appropriate stages of production to control those
conditions that are important for the quality of the finished product.
General
6.2 The head of quality control is responsible for control of ATMP active substances,
starting materials, raw materials and other materials such as primary packaging
materials and any other material in direct contact with the product during
manufacture as well as medical devices that are used in combined ATMPs.
Further, the head of quality control is responsible to control the quality of the
ATMP throughout all stages of manufacture. In case of autologous products or
allogeneic products in a donor-matched scenario, the match between the origin
of the starting material and the recipient should be verified.
6.3 Samples should be representative of the batch of materials or products from
which they are taken. Other samples may also be taken to monitor the worst-case
part of a process (e.g. beginning or end of a process). The sampling plan used
should be appropriately justified and based on a risk management approach.
Certain types of cells (e.g. autologous cells used in ATMPs) may be available in
limited quantities and, where allowed in the CTA or MA, a modified testing and
sample retention strategy may be developed and documented. (Replaces PIC/S
GMP Guide Part I Section 6.12)
6.4 Sample containers should bear a label indicating the contents, with the batch
number, the date of sampling and the containers from which samples have been
drawn. They should be managed in a manner to minimize the risk of mix-up and
to protect the samples from adverse storage conditions. When containers are too
small, the use of a qualified bar code or other means that permit access to this
information should be considered. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section
6.13)
6.5 In line with requirements of Annex 19, a reference sample of a batch of starting
material, raw materials, packaging material and finished product should be
drawn. As a general principle, a reference sample should be of sufficient size to
permit the carrying out on at least two occasions of the full analytical controls on
the batch foreseen in the CTA or MA. In case of a continuous process, where the
ATMP active substance will immediately be turned into the ATMP drug product,
only a reference sample of the ATMP drug product needs to be drawn. However,
it is acknowledged that drawing reference samples may not always be feasible
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -91- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
due to scarcity of the materials or limited size of the batches (e.g. autologous
products, allogeneic products in a matched donor scenario, products for ultra-
rare diseases, and products for use in first-in-man clinical trials with a very small-
scale production). In these cases, alternative approaches should be justified and
authorised in the corresponding CTA/MA.
6.6 Samples of the starting materials should generally be kept for two years after the
batch release. However, it is acknowledged that the retention of samples may be
challenging due to scarcity of the materials. Due to this intrinsic limitation, it is
justified not to keep reference samples of the cells/tissues used as starting
materials in the case of autologous ATMPs and certain allogeneic ATMPs (i.e.
matched donor scenario). In other cases, where the scarcity of the materials is
also a concern, the sampling strategy may be adapted based on risk assessment
and appropriately implemented mitigation measures. For cases where the
starting material is an established cell bank system, there is no need to keep cell
bank vials specifically for the purpose of reference samples.
6.7 In line with requirements of Annex 19, a sample of a fully packaged unit (retention
sample) should be kept per batch for at least one year after the expiry date
(national requirements might differ). A retention sample is, however, not expected
in the case of autologous products or allogeneic products, where justified (e.g. in
a matched donor scenario), as the unit produced with the patient’s tissues/cells
constitutes what should be administered to the patient. When it is not possible to
keep a retention sample, photographs or copies of the label are acceptable for
inclusion in the batch records.
6.8 Shorter retention periods as mentioned in Section 6.6 and 6.7 might be justified
based on the stability and shelf life of the product. In cases of short shelf life, the
manufacturer should consider if the retention of the sample under conditions that
prolong the shelf life (such as cryopreservation) is representative for the intended
purpose. For instance, cryopreservation of fresh-cells may render the sample
inadequate for characterisation purposes but the sample may be adequate for
sterility or viral safety controls (the volume of the samples can be reduced
according to the intended purpose). When cryostorage of a sample is considered
inadequate for the intended purpose, the manufacturer should consider
alternative approaches that are scientifically justified.
On-going stability programme
6.9 The protocol for the on-going stability programme can be different from that of the
initial long term stability study as submitted in the MA dossier provided that this
is justified and documented in the protocol (e.g. the frequency of testing, or when
updating to ICH/VICH recommendations). Stability studies on the reconstituted
and thawed product are performed during product development and need not be
monitored on an on-going basis. The use of surrogate materials (i.e. material
derived from healthy volunteers) or alternative scientifically sounds approaches
are acceptable in case of autologous products (or matched donor scenario)
where the entire batch needs to be administered to the patient. (Replaces PIC/S
GMP Guide Part I Section 6.31)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -92- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Release
6.10 In general, batches of ATMPs should only be released for sale or supply to the
market after certification by an Authorised Person. The batch release
specifications are not limited to analytical results (also refer to out of specification
(OOS) results). In line with PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Sections 1.4 (xv), 2.6. and
6.34 the Authorised Person should assess the quality of each batch considering
processing records, results from environmental monitoring, monitoring of process
parameters, analytical results and all deviations from standard procedures and
protocols. Until a batch is certified, it should remain at the site of manufacture or
be shipped under quarantine to another site, which has been approved for that
purpose by the relevant Competent Authority (if applicable) and is controlled
appropriately within the manufacturer’s quality system. Generally, a finished
product that does not meet release specifications should not be administered to
a patient unless otherwise justified.
6.11 Where authorised by national law, the administration of a product that does not
meet the release specification might be performed under exceptional
circumstances (such as when there is no alternative treatment available that
would provide the same therapeutic outcome and the administration of the failed
products could be lifesaving).
6.12 In cases, referred to in point 6.11, where product does not meet release
specification, the responsibility and the decision of the patient treatment are solely
of the treating physician and are beyond the remit of this PIC/S annex. The
Authorised Person, the MAH and/or the Sponsor of the clinical trial should
consider the following in making the product available:
The treating physician should provide in writing a rationale and/or request to the
Authorised Person and MAH.
(a) Batch manufacturing records and documentation provided to the treating
physician should clearly state that the batch has failed the release
specifications and describe the parameters that have not been met.
(b) When responding to a treating physician’s request, the MAH should provide
its evaluation of the risks of product administration. However, it is solely the
physician’s decision to administer the finished product that does not meet
release specifications.
(c) The Authorised Person (or delegate) should report the supply of the product
to the relevant Competent Authorities, on behalf of the MAH in accordance
with their legal obligations.
6.13 The clinical trial Sponsor or MAH should have procedures in place that describe
steps to be taken if product does not meet release specification but may be
released to permit treatment. Individual instances that do not meet release
specifications may be addressed through lot-by-lot release programmes and
specific case-by-case, risk-based assessments, where such programs exist
within national law.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -93- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
6.14 For ATMPs with a short shelf life, where established analytical tests might not
permit batch certification prior to product administration, alternative methods of
obtaining equivalent data should be considered (e.g. rapid microbiological
methods).
Subject to approval from the Competent Authority, batch certification of short
shelf life products performed prior to completion of all product quality control is
permitted when the testing timelines would not allow for effective distribution to a
patient.
(a) A suitable control strategy must be in place, built on enhanced understanding
of the product and process performance. This must take into account the
controls and attributes of starting materials, raw materials and intermediates.
(b) The procedure for batch certification should provide an exact and detailed
description of the entire release procedure, including responsibilities of the
different personnel involved in assessment of production and analytical data.
(c) The procedure for batch certification and release of short shelf life ATMP
may be carried out in two or more stages:
i. Assessment by designated person(s) of batch processing records,
results from environmental monitoring (where available) which should
cover production conditions, all deviations from standard procedures
and protocols as well as the available analytical results for review in
preparation for the initial certification by the Authorised Person.
ii. Assessment of the final analytical tests and other information available
for final certification by the Authorised Person. A procedure should be
in place to describe the measures to be taken (including liaison with
clinical staff) where out of specification test results are obtained. Such
events should be fully investigated and the relevant corrective and
preventive actions taken to prevent recurrence.
(d) Increased reliance on process validation should be considered as supporting
data for batch release in absence of a complete analytical results panel, even
in case of investigational ATMP.
(e) A continuous assessment of the effectiveness of the pharmaceutical quality
system must be in place. This includes the records being kept in a manner,
which permits trend evaluation.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -94- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Batch release process in cases of decentralised / point of care
manufacturing
6.15 In the exceptional circumstances where approved by the Competent Authority
and in accordance with CTA or MA or other national requirements, manufacturing
of the ATMP may take place in sites close to the patient (e.g. ATMPs with short
shelf life, clinical advantage of using fresh cells as opposed to freezing the
starting materials/finished product, advantages of using automated equipment,
etc.). This includes manufacturing models where partial manufacturing occurs at
a central site and finishing occurs at a local site. It also includes manufacturing
models where there are no steps occurring at a central site and the active
substance is provided to a number of local sites where full manufacture occurs.
In such cases, steps in the manufacturing of the ATMPs may occur in multiple
sites that may be also located in treatment centres (point of care) including
hospitals. National law might require GMP-manufacturing authorisations and/ or
authorisations for the procurement and/or manufacture of blood, cells and tissues
intended to be used for ATMP manufacturing at the central site and the satellite
sites.
6.16 The batch certification and release process becomes particularly important in the
case of ATMPs manufactured under a decentralised system as manufacturing in
multiple sites increases the risk of variability for the product. In particular, through
the batch certification and release process it must be ensured that each batch
released at any of the sites has been manufactured and quality controlled in
accordance with the requirements of the CTA or MA and other relevant regulatory
requirements including compliance with GMP. The steps of the batch certification
and release process should be clearly documented in a standard operating
procedure (SOP). The following conditions need to be respected:
(a) A "responsible site", should be identified. The responsible site is responsible
for the oversight of the decentralised sites. During the product life cycle, the
responsible site:
i. must have availability of an Authorised Person;
ii. must ensure that those involved in the batch certification and release
process are adequately qualified and trained for their tasks;
iii. should perform audits to confirm compliance with the batch certification
and release process (as descripted in SOP);
iv. must ensure that there is a written contract/technical agreement
between the responsible site and the decentralised sites establishing
the responsibilities of each party, and
v. must ensure that there are written arrangements to:
 timely report quality defects, deviations or non-conformity to the
central site;
 ensure deviations are investigated to identify root cause(s) and
implement corrective and preventive measures as appropriate; and
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -95- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
 ensure deviations are approved by a delegated person (after having
assessed the impact on quality, safety and efficacy), with the
involvement of the Authorised Person as appropriate.
(b) The Authorised Person should have ultimate responsibility for the batch
certification (responsibility cannot be delegated). However, it should be
possible for the Authorised Person of the responsible site to rely on
data/information that is transmitted to the Authorised Person by qualified and
trained personnel at the decentralised sites.
When permitted by national law, the Authorised Person may delegate release
to trained and qualified personnel at the decentralised site to act under the
direction of the Authorised Person for exceptional situations (e.g. life
threatening cases or off-hours). The following conditions apply:
i. There is a detailed algorithm that determines the cases when the
product can be released at the local site without the preliminary
approval of the Authorised Person, including deviations that do not
require the intervention of the Authorised Person. If technology permits
this step can be performed by a validated computer system.
ii. The Authorised Person reviews all releases that have occurred at a
decentralised site within an appropriately justified timeframe to confirm
the adequacy of the releases including:
 determining that the local sites can continue release;
 if any product needs to be recalled or a product alert needs to be
issued (see recall section in Chapter 8);
 if any provision in the release procedure and /or technical
agreement needs modification; and
 the product has not been released without Authorised Person
authorisation when required.
CHAPTER 7 OUTSOURCED ACTIVITIES
OTHERS
7.1 Collection of starting materials and highly specialised testing in the jurisdictions
that are subject to licensing (e.g. karyotype testing, exome sequencing) can be
outsourced to non GMP licensed third party, as allowed by national law, provided:
(a) there is a rationale and a justification in the quality system;
(b) the contract giver takes responsibility to ensure that the contract acceptor
demonstrates an appropriate level of GMP commensurate to the risk to the
product and the activities performed using the principles of Annex 20; and
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -96- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
(c) that proportionate qualifications/validations as appropriate are conducted
(with reference to Annex 15 and Annex 20) to demonstrate that the activities
are not detrimental to the quality of the product manufactured.
CHAPTER 8 COMPLAINTS AND PRODUCT RECALL
PRODUCT RECALLS AND OTHER POTENTIAL RISK-REDUCING ACTIONS
8.1 If additional donor (human or animal) health information becomes available after
procurement, which affects product quality, a ‘look-back’ procedure needs to be
initiated. This involves an analysis of the risk(s) and of the need for corrective or
preventive measures.
8.2 In addition to recalls, other risk-reducing actions may be considered to manage
the risks presented by quality defects, such as the transmission of appropriate
information to healthcare professionals which may be important for:
(a) a single batch product (e.g. autologous ATMP where the entire batch has
been administered), or
(b) products where patient treatment interruption presents a higher risk than
continued use of the recalled product.
In such cases, the MAH/manufacturer needs to provide information to the treating
physician and to the Competent Authority. Quality defect notifications,
pharmacovigilance signals and other notifications should also be sent as set in
national law.
(Replaces PICS GMP Guide Part I Section 8.31)
8.3 In order to test the robustness of the recall procedure (or healthcare professional
notification) consideration should be given to performing mock recall or mock
transmission of appropriate information to healthcare professionals. Such
evaluations should extend to both within office-hour situations as well as out-of-
office hour situations.
The frequency of the mock recall (or mock transmission of appropriate
information to healthcare professionals) should be justified by the manufacturer
considering factors such as the stage of the product development and the
complexity of the supply. For authorised products, a yearly frequency is
recommended unless otherwise justified.
(Replaces PICS GMP Guide Part I Section 8.30)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -97- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
PART B: SPECIFIC GUIDANCE ON SELECTED PRODUCT TYPES
B1. ANIMAL SOURCED PRODUCTS
This guidance applies to animal materials, which includes materials from establishments
such as abattoirs. Since the supply chains can be extensive and complex, controls based
on QRM principles need to be applied, see also requirements of appropriate
pharmacopoeial monographs, including the need for specific tests at defined stages.
Documentation to demonstrate the supply chain traceability5 and clear roles of
participants in the supply chain, typically including a sufficiently detailed and current
process map, should be in place.
B 1.1 Monitoring programmes should be in place for animal disease that is of concern
to human health. Organisations should take into account reports from trustworthy
sources on national disease prevalence when compiling their assessment of risk
and mitigation factors. Such organisations include the World Organisation for
Animal Health (OIE, Office International des Epizooties). This should be
supplemented by information on health monitoring and control programme(s) at
national and local levels, the latter to include the sources (e.g. farm or feedlot)
from which the animals are drawn and the control measures in place during
transport to the abattoirs.
B 1.2 Control measures for starting and raw materials at establishments such as
abattoirs should include appropriate elements of a Quality Management System
to assure a satisfactory level of operator training, materials traceability, control
and consistency. These measures may be drawn from sources outside PIC/S
GMP but should be shown to provide equivalent levels of control. Xenogeneic
starting material should comply with other national laws.
B 1.3 Control measures for starting or raw materials should be in place, which prevent
interventions, which may affect the quality of materials, or which at least provides
evidence of such activities, during their progression through the manufacturing
and supply chain. This includes the movement of material between sites of initial
collection, partial and final purification(s), storage sites, hubs, consolidators and
brokers. Details of such arrangements should be recorded within the traceability
system and any breaches recorded, investigated and actions taken.
B 1.4 Regular audits of the starting or raw material supplier should be undertaken which
verify compliance with controls for materials at the different stages of
manufacture. Issues must be investigated to a depth appropriate to their
significance, for which full documentation should be available. Systems should
also be in place to ensure that effective corrective and preventive actions are
taken.
B 1.5 Cells, tissues and organs intended for the manufacture of xenogeneic cell based
medicinal products should be obtained only from animals that have been bred in
captivity (barrier facility) specifically for this purpose and under no circumstances
should cells, tissues and organs from wild animals or from abattoirs be used.
Tissues of founder animals similarly should not be used. The health status of the
animals should be monitored and documented.
5 See PIC/S GMP Chapter 5
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -98- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
B2. GENE THERAPY MEDICINAL PRODUCTS (GTMPs)
There are several types of gene therapy products. Synthetic GTMPs are within the scope
of the guidance in this section. For cell-based gene therapy products, some aspects of
the guidance in Section B3 may also be applicable.
B2.1 The manufacture and testing of GTMPs raises specific issues regarding the
safety and quality of the final product and safety issues for recipients and staff. A
risk based approach for operator, environment and patient safety and the
implementation of controls based on the biological hazard class should be
applied. National requirements and, if applicable, international safety measures
should be applied.
B2.2 A description of the production of viral and non-viral vectors, nucleic acids (e.g.
plasmids, linear DNA, mRNA, siRNA) and genetically modified cells should be
available in sufficient detail to ensure the traceability of the products from the
starting material (plasmids, gene of interest and regulatory sequences, cell
banks, and viral or non-viral vector stock) to the finished product.
B2.3 The following considerations apply to the ex-vivo gene transfer to recipient cells:
(a) Traceability requirements must be maintained. (refer to Section 4.3 to 4.8)
(b) There should be a clear batch definition, from cell source to final product
container(s). (refer Section 4.2)
(c) For products that utilise non-biological means to deliver the gene, their
physico-chemical properties should be documented and tested.
(d) Although the vector used for the manipulation of the cell will not be part of
the final product, all early processes (e.g. design to construction to
manufacturing of the plasmid, as well as establishment of cell banks) in the
manufacture of viral vectors are considered critical and their quality needs
to be under control. In the case that due to national requirements the
manufacture of viral vectors are not required under full GMP sufficient
quality standards (“principles of GMP”) should be applied in their
manufacture.
Manufacture of Viral Vectors and Plasmids under “principles of GMP”
B2.4 Annex 2A and elements of Part II of the PIC/S GMP Guide can be considered for
the manufacturing of viral vectors and plasmids where appropriate (refer to the
examples in light grey in Table 1).
Manufacturers of viral vectors and plasmids should have a quality management
system in place that allows them to apply sections of the guideline most relevant
to ensure the quality of the starting materials having regard to the relevant risks
for the quality, safety and efficacy of the finished product.
B2.5 The ATMP manufacturer is responsible for appropriate quality of the viral vectors
and plasmids used as starting materials. Special attention should be given to
requirements described in section 5.23 to 5.28 of this guideline.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -99- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
(a) The ATMP manufacturer should follow national requirements and apply QRM
considering the risk presented by the vector to the safety and quality of the
ATMP to justify which sections of Annex 2A and elements of Part II of the
PIC/S GMP Guide are applicable for manufacture and testing of viral vectors
and plasmids. A defined and controlled manufacturing process should be
implemented as a result.
(b) Sufficient quality standards should be applied for the manufacture of
plasmids used for the establishment of vectors or early stages of mRNA
GTMPs (refer to Table 1). The design through to construction of the nucleic
acid (plasmid) preparation by molecular biological and in silico methods is
considered under the scope of research and development and therefore not
part of the respective Annex.
(c) Relevant provisions in Annex 1 are also applicable. The manufacturer should
justify the applicability extent using QRM. In general, products that can be
sterile filtered should follow the relevant sections in the Annex 1, otherwise
aseptic manufacturing provisions should be followed.
B2.6 If the manufacturing of the vectors is outsourced, the ATMP manufacturer should
assess the risk presented by the vector to the quality and safety of the ATMP and
thereby select a suitable vector supplier that is able to comply with the GMP
standards required by national legislation.
The appropriate sections of Annex 2A and elements of Part II of the PIC/S GMP
Guide relevant for the specific product should be determined in the agreement
between the ATMP manufacturer and the vector manufacturer and cover relevant
aspects (e.g. quality management, documentation, raw materials, cell banks,
production, testing and control, storage, and other aspects of handling and
distribution, as appropriate). In addition the vector manufacturer should be part
of the ATMP manufacturer’s vendor qualification programme. The level of
supervision and further testing by the ATMP manufacturer should be
proportionate to the risks posed by the individual materials.
B3 SOMATIC HUMAN AND XENOGENEIC CELL THERAPY PRODUCTS
AND TISSUE ENGINEERED PRODUCTS AND COMBINED ATMPs
For genetically modified cell-based products that are not classified as GTMPs, some
aspects of guidance in Section B2 may be applicable.
B3.1 In the manufacture of such products involving human or xenogeneic cells
special attention should be given to traceability requirements (refer to Section
4.3 to 4.8) and definition of a batch (refer to Section 4.2).
B3.2 Authorised sources of cellular products, bio-molecules, bio-materials,
scaffolds, matrices, and other substances that are licensed medicinal
products or medical devices should be used where available.
B3.3 During the life cycle of the product where devices, including custom-made
devices, are incorporated as part of the product, an appropriate Quality
Agreement should be made between manufacturer and device suppliers to
assure consistent quality of the device.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -100- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
COMMON GLOSSARY TO ANNEX 2A AND 2B
The Glossary in the main GMP Guide applies also to Annex 2A & B. Entries in this
common glossary are only included where the terms are used in Annex 2A & B and
require further explanation. Definitions, which already exist, have been deemed
appropriate.
ATMP Active substance
The active substance of a product is defined in the relevant CTA or MA authorisation
dossier. The ATMP active substance is regarded equivalent to an API.
Adjuvant
A chemical or biological substance that enhances the immune response against an
antigen.
Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products (ATMP)
ATMP means any of the following medicinal products for human use:
(a) Gene therapy medicinal product (GTMP):
‘GTMP’ means a biological medicinal product, which has the following
characteristics:
i. It contains an active substance, which contains or consists of a
recombinant nucleic acid used in or administered to human beings with
a view to regulating, repairing, replacing, adding or deleting a genetic
sequence;
ii. Its therapeutic, prophylactic or diagnostic effect relates directly to the
recombinant nucleic acid sequence it contains, or to the product of
genetic expression of this sequence.
Normally GTMPs shall not include vaccines against infectious diseases which
would be regulated as per Annex 2B. However, the Competent Authority can
make a determination that should follow Annex 2A when this is beneficial and
appropriate (e.g. mRNA vaccines that are manufactured using the same
platform).
(b) Somatic cell therapy medicinal product:
‘Somatic cell therapy medicinal product’ means a biological medicinal product,
which has the following characteristics:
i. contains or consists of cells or tissues that have been subject to
substantial manipulation so that biological characteristics, physiological
functions or structural properties relevant for the intended clinical use
have been altered, or of cells or tissues that are not intended to be used
for the same essential function(s) in the recipient and the donor;
ii. is presented as having properties for, or is used in or administered to
human beings with a view to treating, preventing or diagnosing a
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -101- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
disease through the pharmacological, immunological or metabolic
action of its cells or tissues.
(c) Tissue engineered product:
‘Tissue engineered product’ means a product that:
i. contains or consists of engineered cells or tissues, and
ii. is presented as having properties for, or is used in or administered to
human beings with a view to regenerating, repairing or replacing a
human tissue.
A tissue-engineered product may contain cells or tissues of human or animal
origin, or both. The cells or tissues may be viable or non-viable. It may also
contain additional substances, such as cellular products, bio-molecules,
biomaterials, chemical substances, scaffolds or matrices. Products containing or
consisting exclusively of non-viable human or animal cells and/or tissues, which
do not contain any viable cells or tissues and which do not act principally by
pharmacological, immunological or metabolic action, shall be excluded from this
definition.
Cells or tissues shall be considered ‘engineered’ if they fulfil at least one of the
following conditions:
i. the cells or tissues have been subject to substantial manipulation, so
that biological characteristics, physiological functions or structural
properties relevant for the intended regeneration, repair or replacement
are achieved; or
ii. the cells or tissues are not intended to be used for the same essential
function or functions in the recipient as in the donor.
(d) Combined ATMPs:
‘Combined ATMP’ means an advanced therapy medicinal product that fulfils the
following conditions:
i. it must incorporate, as an integral part of the product, one or more
medical devices or one or more active implantable medical devices, and
ii. its cellular or tissue part must contain viable cells or tissues or its cellular
or tissue part containing non-viable cells or tissues must be liable to act
upon the human body with action that can be considered as primary to
that of the devices referred to.
(e) A product that is classified or determined to be an ATMP by the PIC/S
participating authority in its own jurisdiction according to national law.
Allergoids
Allergens, which are chemically modified to reduce IgE reactivity.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -102- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Antibody
Proteins produced by the B-lymphocytes that bind to specific antigens. Antibodies may
be divided into 2 main types based on key differences in their method of manufacture.
Monoclonal antibodies (MAb)
Homogenous antibody population obtained from a single clone of lymphocytes or
by recombinant technology and which bind to a single epitope.
Polyclonal antibodies
Derived from a range of lymphocyte clones, produced in human and animals in
response to the epitopes on most ‘non-self’ molecules
Antigens
Substances (e.g. toxins, foreign proteins, bacteria, tissue cells) capable of inducing
specific immune responses.
Area
A specific set of rooms within a building associated with the manufacturing of any one
product or multiple products that has a common air-handling unit.
Authorised Person
Person recognised by the authority as having the necessary basic scientific and technical
background and experience.
Note: For expanded clarity beyond the definition in the PIC/S GMP Guide, the Authorised
Person performs certification of batches in line with MA/CTA. After certification, the
batches of medicinal products can be released for sale or supply to the market. The
Authorised Person has the overall responsibility for release of the products.
Bioburden
The level and type (i.e. objectionable or not) of micro-organism present in raw materials,
media, biological substances, intermediates or products. Regarded as contamination
when the level and/or type exceed specifications.
Biological medicinal product
A biological medicinal product is a product, of which the active substance is a biological
substance. A biological substance is a substance that is produced by or extracted from
a biological source and that needs for its characterisation and the determination of its
quality a combination of physico-chemical-biological testing, together with the production
process and its control.
Biosafety level (BSL)
The containment conditions required to safely handle organisms of different hazards
ranging from BSL1 (lowest risk, unlikely to cause human disease) to BSL4 (highest risk,
cause severe disease, likely to spread and no effective prophylaxis or treatment
available).
Campaign manufacture
The manufacture of a series of batches of the same product in sequence in a given
period of time followed by strict adherence to accepted control measures before
transfer to another product. The products are not run at the same time but may be run
on the same equipment.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -103- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Closed system
Where an active substance or product is not exposed to the immediate room
environment during manufacture.
Contained use
An operation, in which genetically modified organisms are cultured, stored, used,
transported, destroyed or disposed of and for which barriers (physical / chemical /
biological) are used to limit their contact with the general population and the environment.
Critical Process Parameter (CPP)
A process parameter whose variability has an impact on a CQA and therefore should be
monitored or controlled to ensure the process produces the desired quality. (ICH Q8R2)
Critical Quality Attribute (CQA)
A physical, chemical, biological, or microbiological property or characteristic that should
be within an appropriate limit, range, or distribution to ensure the desired product quality.
(ICH Q8R2)
Ex-vivo
Where procedures are conducted on tissues or cells outside the living body and returned
to the living body.
Feeder cells
Cells used in co-culture to maintain pluripotent stem cells. For human embryonic stem
cell culture, typical feeder layers include mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) or human
embryonic fibroblasts that have been treated to prevent them from dividing.
Fermenter
In case of (mammalian) cell lines, the term fermenter should be understood as
bioreactor.
Gene
A sequence of DNA that codes for one (or more) protein(s).
Gene transfer
A process to transfer a gene in cells, involving an expression system contained in a
delivery system known as a vector, which can be of viral, as well as non-viral origin. After
gene transfer, genetically modified cells are also termed transduced cells.
Genetically modified organism (GMO)
An organism, with the exception of human beings, in which the genetic material has been
altered in a way that does not occur naturally by mating and/or natural recombination.
For the purpose of this annex, GMO is intended to cover mutations that are not occurring
because of a natural event but are generated by human intervention.
Hapten
A low molecular weight molecule that is not in itself antigenic unless conjugated to a
‘carrier’ molecule.
Hybridoma
An immortalised cell line that secrete desired (monoclonal) antibodies and are typically
derived by fusing B-lymphocytes with tumour cells.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -104- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
In-vivo
Procedures conducted in living organisms.
Look-back
Documented procedure to trace ATMPs active substances or products, which may be
adversely affected by the use or incorporation of animal or human materials either when
such materials fail release tests due to the presence of contaminating agent or when
conditions of concern become apparent in the source animal or human.
Master cell bank (MCB)
An aliquot of a single pool of cells, which generally has been prepared from the selected
cell clone under defined conditions, dispensed into multiple containers and stored under
defined conditions. The MCB is used to derive all working cell banks.
Master transgenic bank
As above but for transgenic plants or animals.
Master virus seed (MVS)
As above, but in relation to viruses.
Material directly in contact with the ATMP during manufacture and storage
Non exhaustive example list: Processing containers (e.g. fermenters, cell culture flasks
and plates, blood bag systems, single use equipment used in automated manufacturing
platforms, beads for separation techniques, chromatographic column material), cryo-
containers for storage and primary packaging material.
Monosepsis (axenic)
A single organism in culture, which is not contaminated with any other.
Multi-product facility
A facility that manufactures, concurrently or in campaign mode, a range of different
ATMPs active substances and products and within which equipment train either may or
may not be dedicated to specific substances or products.
Plasmid
A plasmid is a piece of DNA usually present in a bacterial cell as a circular entity
separated from the cell chromosome; it can be modified by molecular biology techniques,
purified out of the bacterial cell and used to transfer its DNA to another cell.
Primary cell lot
A pool of primary cells minimally expanded to attain a sufficient number for a limited
number of applications.
Principles of GMP:
The Annex 2A in conjunction with PIC/S GMP guidelines and annexes describes the
manufacture of ATMP active substances and ATMP drug products. However, aspects of
these guidelines are also relevant for early stages in the ATMP manufacture (e.g.
manufcatur of viral vectors, plasmids) where full GMP is not required under national
legislation. As a result, the ATMP manufacturer should make sure that all relevant GMP
aspects for the manufacturing of those materials are implemented that ensure process
control and consistency, investigation of anomalies and control of change.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -105- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Processing aids
Substance used in the manufacture of the active substance and medicinal product, which
may be present in the finished product e.g. anti-foaming agents, puffer and media
additives (salts, pH indicators), enzymes not considered under raw materials
Quality Target Product Profile (QTPP)
A prospective summary of the quality characteristics of a drug product that ideally will be
achieved to ensure the desired quality, taking into account safety and efficacy of the drug
product. (ICHQ8R2)
Raw materials
All materials that come in direct contact with the product during the manufacturing
process but are not necessarily part of the final formulation (e.g. cryoprotectants, feeder
cells, reagents, culture media, buffers, serum, enzymes, cytokines, and growth factors).
Responsible Person (RP) for blood or tissue establishment
This term is equivalent to the EU term “Responsible Person”. The RP is responsible for
the release of the starting material to the ATMP manufacturer. Blood or tissue
establishment: this term is equivalent to the EU term and for the purpose of this annex
is the facility that is authorised according to national law to perform processing (minimal
manipulation) of the starting material of human origin.
Scaffold
A support, delivery vehicle or matrix that may provide structure for or facilitate the
migration, binding or transport of cells and/or bioactive molecules.
Somatic cells
Cells, other than reproductive (germ line) cells, which make up the body of a human or
animal. These cells may be autologous (from the patient), allogeneic (from another
human being) or xenogeneic (from animals) somatic living cells, that have been
manipulated or altered ex vivo, to be administered in humans to obtain a therapeutic,
diagnostic or preventive effect.
Specified pathogen free (SPF)
Animal materials (e.g. chickens, embryos or cell cultures) used for the production or
quality control of biological medicinal products derived from groups (e.g. flocks or herds)
of animals free from specified pathogens (SPF). Such flocks or herds are defined as
animals sharing a common environment and having their own caretakers who have no
contact with non-SPF groups.
Transgenic
An organism that contains a foreign gene in its normal genetic component for the
expression of biological pharmaceutical materials.
Vector
An agent of transmission, which transmits genetic information from one cell or organism
to another, e.g. plasmids, liposomes, viruses.
Viral vector
A vector derived from a virus and modified by means of molecular biology techniques in
a way as to retain some, but not all, the parental virus genes; if the genes responsible
for virus replication capacity are deleted, the vector is made replication-incompetent.
Viral Vector replication incompetent / devoid
No ability of the vector to replicate.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -106- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Viral Vector replication limited / defective / conditional replication
A constrained ability to replicate where the intent is for the vector may be to target a
particular tissue or target cell type with a planned integration required for clinical efficacy
of the gene therapy.
Working cell bank (WCB)
A homogeneous pool of cells preferably derived from a MCB, which are distributed
uniformly into a number of containers, stored in such a way to ensure stability and
intended for use in production.
Working transgenic bank (WTB)
As above but for transgenic plants or animals.
Working virus seed (WVS)
As above but in relation to viruses.
Zoonosis (zoonotic)
Animal diseases that can be transmitted to humans.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -107- 25 August 2023