Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
ANNEX 2A
MANUFACTURE OF ADVANCED THERAPY MEDICINAL
PRODUCTS FOR HUMAN USE
SCOPE
The methods employed in the manufacture of Advanced Therapy Medicinal
Products (ATMPs) are a critical factor in shaping the appropriate regulatory
control. ATMPs can be defined therefore largely by reference to their method of
manufacture. For example, for gene therapy ATMPs, genetic modifications can
be obtained through a variety of methods (e.g. viral & non-viral vectors, mRNA,
ex vivo and in vivo genome-editing tools). The genetically modified cells can be
of human origin (autologous or allogeneic) or of animal origin (xenogeneic cells),
either primary or established cell lines. In a medicinal product, the genetically
modified cells or gene therapy products can be presented alone or combined with
medical devices.
This annex provides additional and specific guidance on the full range of ATMPs
(as defined in the glossary) and the active substances that are used in their
manufacture. This annex applies both to investigational ATMPs and market-
authorised ATMPs. It can also be applied to ATMP manufacturing in hospital
settings and for compassionate use programs, where authorised by national law.
Although one of the objectives of this present annex was to prepare a document
that would stand for several years, the field is quickly changing. It is recognised
that amendments may be necessary to accommodate technological change, to
clarify uncertainty or to specifically recognise important alternatives. Comments
are therefore invited at any stage of the life of this edition.
This annex is divided into two main parts:
1. Part A contains supplementary guidance and alternative provisions on the
manufacture of ATMPs, from control over seed lots and cell banks through
to finishing activities and testing.
2. Part B contains further guidance on selected types of ATMPs and its
substances.
APPLICATION OF THIS ANNEX
This annex, along with several other annexes of the Guide to GMP, provides
guidance, which supplements that in Part I: Basic Requirements for Medicinal
Products and in Part II: Basic Requirements for active pharmaceutical ingredients
of the PIC/S GMP Guide. This annex is not a stand-alone document and should
be applied in conjunction with PIC/S GMP guidelines and annexes. It has
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -68- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
however been written in a manner that it could enable development of a
standalone guide if integrated with PIC/S GMP Part I, Part II, and related
annexes.
Where due to the nature of the product or technical necessities, specific guidance
is provided in this annex, compliance with this annex is expected and takes
precedence over other sections in the PIC/S GMP Guide unless there are good
reasons for not doing so with documented sound scientific rationale applied using
QRM principles.
In certain cases, other national laws may be applicable to the starting materials
for ATMPs. For example:
(a) Tissues and cells used as starting materials of ATMPs may be subject to
other national legislation that cover donation, procurement, testing,
processing, preservation, storage and distribution.
(b) For blood or blood components used as starting materials for ATMPs,
national legislation may provide the technical requirements for the selection
of donors and the collection and testing of blood and blood components.
The manufacturing process for ATMPs is product-specific and different design
approaches are possible. The appropriate application of GMP should be
described, justified in the Clinical Trial Application (CTA) or Marketing
Authorisation (MA), and in accordance with national law. Consideration may be
given to defining which manufacturing process steps are required to manufacture
starting materials, ATMP active substance, or the finished ATMP. In some cases,
the manufacturing process between the ATMP active substance and the final
product can be defined as continuous.
The manufacture and control of genetically modified organisms also needs to
comply with other local, national or regional requirements. Appropriate
containment should be established and maintained in facilities where any
genetically modified organism is handled. Advice should be obtained according
to national law in order to establish and maintain the appropriate Biological Safety
Level. GMP should be adhered alongside these requirements.
Table 1 gives examples of where this annex applies. It should be noted that this
table is illustrative only and is not meant to describe the precise scope. It should
also be understood that adherence to the GMP or GMP principles for the
manufacturing steps indicated in the corresponding table is dependent on
applicable national legislation. The level of GMP requirements increases from
early to later steps in the manufacture of ATMP active substances. The inclusion
of some early steps of manufacture within the scope of this annex does not imply
that those steps will be routinely subject to inspection by the authorities.
According to national legislation more or less stringent approaches on the
application of GMP on those early stages may apply.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -69- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Table 1. Illustrative guide to manufacturing activities within the scope of Annex 2A
Example
Application of this Annex (see note1)
Products
Linear DNA
Gene therapy: In vitro cell free Formulation,
template mRNA purification
mRNA transcription filling
preparation
Gene therapy:
Plasmid Establishment of MCB, Vector manufacturing and Formulation,
in vivo viral
manufacturing WCB2 purification filling
vectors
Gene therapy:
in vivo non-
viral vectors
Plasmid Establishment of Formulation,
(naked DNA, Fermentation and purification
manufacturing bacterial bank2 filling
lipoplexes,
polyplexes,
etc.)
Gene therapy: Donation, Plasmid manufacturing
ex-vivo procurement and Ex-vivo genetic modification Formulation,
genetically testing of starting of cells filling
modified cells tissue / cells Vector manufacturing3
Donation,
Establishment of MCB, Cell isolation, culture Formulation,
Somatic cell procurement and
WCB or primary cell lot purification, combination with combination,
therapy testing of starting
or cell pool2 non-cellular components filling
tissue / cells
Donation,
Tissue Initial processing, Cell isolation, culture, Formulation,
procurement and
engineered isolation and purification, combination with combination,
testing of starting
products purification, establish non-cellular components filling
tissue / cells
MCB, WCB, primary
cell lot or cell pool2
1 Application of this annex applies to manufacturing steps illustrated in dark grey. Application of
this annex or principles of this annex apply to steps illustrated in light grey apply depending on
the requirements of national legislation.
2 Refer to points 5.32 for establishment of cell banks and seed lots.
3 In the case of gene therapy ex-vivo genetically modified cells, this guide applies to vector
manufacturing except where otherwise authorised by national law where principles of GMP
should apply.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -70- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
The following are some non-exhaustive examples in the application of GMP to the
manufacture of ATMP.
Figure 1: Example of gene therapy mRNA Figure 2: Example of in vivo viral vector gene
ATMP manufacturing therapy ATMP manufacturing
Linear DNA template ATMP Manufacturing Plasmid ATMP Manufacturing
preparation Manufacturing
Transcription Establishing MCB or
Plasmid DNA construct ↓ Plasmid DNA construct WCB
preparation Purification preparation ↓
↓ ↓ ↓ Thawing
Transfer of Plasmid Harvest Transfer of Plasmid ↓
DNA to starter colony ↓ DNA to starter colony Transfection
(e.g. E. coli) Formulation (e.g. E. coli) ↓
↓ ↓ ↓ Induction
Purification, Filling Expansion ↓
linearization and ↓ ↓ Harvest
polishing Storage Dispensing ↓
↓ ↓ ↓ Purification
Storage of linear DNA Distribution for Storage ↓
template patient access Formulation
↓
OR Sterile Filtration
↓
Plasmid DNA Filling
construct preparation ↓
↓ Storage
Polymerase Chain ↓
Reaction (PCR) Distribution for
↓ patient access
Storage of linear DNA
template
 GMP requirements  A Marketing  GMP requirements  A MAH may justify
can vary from early Authorisation Holder can vary from early these steps to be a
steps in making the (MAH) may justify steps in making the continuous process
plasmid DNA these steps to be a plasmid DNA producing both the
construct to later continuous process construct to later ATMP active
steps but should align producing both the steps but should align substance and
with Annex 2A and ATMP active with Annex 2A and medicinal product.
PIC/S GMP Guide substance and PIC/S GMP Guide  PIC/S GMP Part I and
Part II or principles of medicinal product. Part II or principles of Part II along with
these requirements as  PIC/S GMP Part I and these requirements as applicable annexes
applicable under Part II along with applicable under apply as appropriate
national legislation. applicable annexes national legislation. to the step of
 Refer to Section 5.23 apply as appropriate  Refer to Section 5.23 manufacture.
for additional to the step of for additional
information in manufacture. information in
determining the determining the
appropriate appropriate
application of GMP. application of GMP.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -71- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Figure 3: Example of autologous CAR-T therapy ATMP manufacturing
Plasmid Manufacturing Viral Vector Product ATMP Manufacturing
Manufacturing
Plasmid DNA construct Establishing MCB or WCB Donation or procurement of
preparation ↓ patient cells
↓ Thawing ↓
Transfer of Plasmid DNA to ↓ Transduction
starter colony Transfection ↓
(e.g. E. coli) ↓ Expansion
↓ Induction ↓
Expansion ↓ Harvest
↓ Harvest ↓
Dispensing ↓ Formulation
↓ Purification ↓
Storage ↓ Filling
Sterile Filtration ↓
↓ Storage
Dispensing ↓
↓ Distribution for
Storage patient access
 GMP requirements can  GMP requirements applied  The application of this
vary from early steps in to the manufacture of a guide does not include the
making the plasmid DNA viral vector should align donation or procurement of
construct to later steps but with Annex 2A and PIC/S patient cells.
should align with principles GMP Part II or principles of  A MAH may justify these
of Annex 2A and PIC/S these requirements as steps to be a continuous
GMP Guide Part II or applicable under national process producing both the
principles of these legislation. ATMP active substance
requirements as applicable  Refer to Section 5.23 for and medicinal product.
under national legislation. additional information in  PIC/S GMP Part I and
 Refer to Section 5.23 for determining the Part II along with
additional information in appropriate application of applicable annexes apply
determining the GMP. as appropriate to the step
appropriate application of of manufacture.
GMP.
PRINCIPLE
The manufacture of ATMPs involves certain specific considerations arising from
the nature of the products and the processes. The ways in which biological
medicinal products are manufactured, controlled and administered make some
particular precautions necessary.
Since materials and processing conditions used in manufacturing processes are
designed to provide conditions for the growth of specific cells and
microorganisms, this provides an opportunity for extraneous microbial
contaminants (e.g. bacteria, fungi) to grow. In addition, some products may be
limited in their ability to withstand a wide range of purification techniques,
particularly those designed to inactivate or remove adventitious viral
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -72- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
contaminants. The design of the processes, equipment, facilities, utilities, the
conditions of preparation and addition of buffers and reagents, sampling and
training of the operators are key considerations to minimise such contamination
events (i.e. engineering and technical controls). In addition, manufacturing
processes need to be well designed and controlled so as not to add further
variability to the product.
Product specifications such as those in pharmacopoeial monographs, CTA, and
MA will dictate whether and to what manufacturing stage substances and
materials can have a defined level of bioburden or need to be sterile. Similarly,
manufacturing must be consistent with other specifications set out in the CTA or
MA (e.g. number of generations (doublings, passages) between the seed lot or
cell bank).
For biological materials that cannot be sterilized (e.g. by filtration), processing
must be conducted aseptically to minimise the introduction of contaminants.
Where they exist, other guidance documents should be consulted on the
validation of specific manufacturing methods (e.g. virus removal or inactivation).
The application of appropriate environmental controls and monitoring and,
wherever feasible, in-situ cleaning and sterilisation systems together with the use
of closed systems and sterile disposable product-contact equipment can
significantly reduce the risk of accidental contamination and cross-contamination.
ATMPs require a combination of unique biological methods and standard
physico-chemical assays for their Quality Control (QC). For many cell-based
products, there is variability introduced through the starting materials that cannot
be overcome by the manufacturing process or In-Process Controls (IPCs).
Adequate control of the starting and raw materials, well defined characterisation
of the ATMP active substance and ATMP drug product release testing form the
crucial part of the QC. Controls should take into consideration the intrinsic
variability of the biological material needed for ATMP manufacturing. A robust
manufacturing process is therefore crucial and in-process controls take on a
particular importance in the manufacture of biological active substances and
medicinal products.
PART A: GENERAL GUIDANCE
Part A provides alternative or supplementary provisions to respective sections in
Part I, II and annexes of the PIC/S GMP Guide, where necessary. Where this
annex provides specific guidance for the manufacture of ATMPs (including
modification, replacement or redundancy of other sections), this will be clearly
indicated. In the absence of specific guidance for ATMPs, compliance with other
sections in the PIC/S GMP Guide is expected.
Note: Where the term Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) is used, unless
otherwise specified, it should be intended to signify the “Sponsor” for
investigational ATMP that is used according to a CTA or equivalent.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -73- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
SUPPLIMENTARY PROVISIONS TO PIC/S GMP GUIDE PART I
CHAPTER 1 PHARMACEUTICAL QUALITY SYSTEM
Pharmaceutical Quality System
1.1 ATMPs are not sold or supplied before an Authorised Person has certified that
each production batch has been produced and controlled in accordance with the
requirements of the CTA, MA and any other regulations relevant to the
production, control and release of medicinal products as applicable. Special
provisions apply for the supply of products that have a two-step release process
(described in Section 6.14) or such that do not meet release specifications where
there is no alternative treatment available (described in Sections 6.11 to 6.13).
(Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 1.4, xv)
Quality Risk Management
1.2 GMP applies to the lifecycle stages from the manufacture of investigational
ATMP, technology transfer, and commercial manufacturing through to product
discontinuation. The biological processes may display inherent variability, so that
the range and nature of by-products may be variable. As a result, Quality Risk
Management (QRM) principles as detailed in Annex 20 are particularly important
for this class of medicinal products and should be used to develop their control
strategy across all stages of development and manufacturing steps to minimise
variability and to reduce the opportunity for contamination and
cross-contamination. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 1.2)
CHAPTER 2 PERSONNEL
2.1 The health status of personnel should be taken into consideration for product
safety. Personnel (including those concerned with cleaning, maintenance or
quality control) employed in areas where ATMP active substances and products
are manufactured and tested should receive training, and periodic retraining,
specific to the products manufactured and to the duties assigned to them,
including any specific safety measures to protect product, personnel and the
environment.
2.2 Any changes in the health status of personnel, which could adversely affect the
quality of the product, should prevent work in the production area. Health
monitoring of staff should be commensurate with the risk; medical advice should
be sought for personnel involved with hazardous organisms. General
consideration should be given to Occupational Health & Safety (OH&S) for
personnel involved with hazardous substances as required by national law.
2.3 Every person entering the manufacturing areas should wear clean protective
garments appropriate to the operations to be carried out.
Where required to minimise the opportunity for cross-contamination, restrictions
on the movement of all personnel (including QC, maintenance and cleaning
personnel) should be controlled based on QRM principles.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -74- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
In general, personnel should not pass from areas of exposure to live
micro-organisms, genetically modified organisms, toxins or animals to areas
where other products, inactivated products or different organisms are handled. If
such route is unavoidable, a Contamination Control Strategy (CCS) based on
QRM principles should be applied (refer to Section 3.4 CCS). (Replaces PIC/S
GMP Guide Part I Section 2.18)
CHAPTER 3 PREMISES AND EQUIPMENT
PREMISES
Production Areas
3.1 Cross-contamination should be prevented for all products by appropriate design
and operation of manufacturing facilities. The measures to prevent cross-
contamination should be commensurate with the risks to product quality. QRM
principles should be used to assess and control the risks.
Depending on the level of risk presented by some ATMPs and the materials
involved in their production (for example, viruses), it may be necessary to
dedicate premises and equipment for manufacturing and/or packaging operations
to control the risk. Segregated production areas should be used for the
manufacture of ATMPs presenting a risk that cannot be adequately controlled by
operational and/or technical measures. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I
Section 3.6)
3.2 Concurrent production of two or more different ATMPs/batches in the same area
might be permitted due to adequate operational and/or technical control where
justified under QRM principles applied across the entire sequence of
manufacturing steps. For example:
(a) The use of more than one closed isolator (or other closed systems) in the
same room at the same time is acceptable, provided that appropriate
mitigation measures are taken to avoid cross-contamination or mix-ups of
materials.
(b) When more than one isolator is used to process different viral vectors within
the same room there should be 100% air exhaustion from the room and the
facility (i.e. no recirculation). In addition, in case of concurrent production of
viral vectors, it is necessary to provide for closed, separate and unidirectional
waste handling.
(c) The possibility of using more than one biosafety cabinet (BSC) in the same
room is only acceptable if effective technical and organisational measures
are implemented to separate the activities. The simultaneous use of more
than one BSC entails additional risks and, therefore, it should be
demonstrated that the measures implemented are effective to avoid risks to
the quality of the product and any mix-ups. The rationale should be justified
based on QRM principles.
(d) The use of multiple closed systems in the same area is permitted, in the case
that their close state can be demonstrated. (refer to point 3.13.)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -75- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
3.3 The measures and procedures necessary for containment (i.e. for environment
and operator safety) should not conflict with those for product quality.
3.4 Special precautions should be taken in the case of manufacturing activities
involving infectious viral vectors (e.g. oncolytic viruses, replication competent
vectors) that should be segregated based on a documented CCS and QRM
principles. The manufacturer should justify the level of segregation required
based on the CCS and through QRM principles. The outcome of the QRM
process should determine the necessity for and extent to which the premises and
equipment should be dedicated to a particular product. In some cases, dedicated
facilities, dedicated areas or dedicated equipment may be required in accordance
with the national law. Simultaneous incubation and/or storage of replication
competent vectors/products, or infected materials/products, with other
materials/products is not acceptable.
3.5 Air handling units should be designed, constructed and maintained to minimise
the risk of cross-contamination between different manufacturing areas and may
need to be specific for an area. Consideration, based on QRM principles, should
be given to the use of single pass air systems.
3.6 If materials (such as culture media and buffers) have to be measured or weighed
during the production process, small stocks may be kept in the production area
for a specified duration based on defined criteria (e.g. duration of manufacture of
the batch or of the campaign). (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 3.13)
3.7 Positive pressure areas should be used to process sterile products, but negative
pressure in specific areas at the point of exposure of pathogens is acceptable for
containment reasons. Where negative pressure areas or BSCs are used for
aseptic processing of materials with particular risks (e.g. pathogens), they should
be surrounded by a positive pressure clean zone of appropriate Grade. These
pressure cascades should be clearly defined and continuously monitored with
appropriate alarm settings as defined by Annex 1. The design of such areas
should be such that measures put in place to prevent release of material into the
surrounding environment should not compromise sterility assurance level (SAL)
of the product and vice versa.
3.8 Air vent filters that are directly linked to the sterility of the product (e.g. to maintain
the integrity of a closed system) should be hydrophobic, monitored during use
(e.g. pressure differential monitoring if appropriate) and validated for their
scheduled life span with integrity testing at appropriate intervals based on
appropriate QRM principles. If pressure monitoring or integrity testing is
technically not feasible for the filter system, vendor supplied information may be
considered for approval. However, this has to be taken into account in the CCS
as an additional risk factor especially for short shelf life ATMPs, where
microbiological quality tests are not available at the time of batch release prior to
medical product administration.
3.9 Drainage systems must be designed so that effluents can be effectively
neutralised or decontaminated to minimise the risk of cross-contamination. They
must comply with national law to minimize the risk of contamination of the external
environment according to the risk associated with the biohazardous nature of
waste materials. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 3.11)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -76- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
3.10 The degree of environmental control of particulate and microbial contamination
of the production premises should be adapted to the product and the production
step, bearing in mind the potential level of contamination of the starting materials
and the risks to the product. The microbiological environmental monitoring
programme should be supplemented by the inclusion of methods to detect the
presence of specific microorganisms (e.g. host organism, yeasts, moulds,
anaerobes, etc.) where indicated by the QRM principles.
3.11 Where processes are not closed and there is exposure of the product to the
immediate room environment without a subsequent microbial inactivation
process, (e.g. during additions of supplements, media, buffers, gasses,
manipulations) appropriate environmental conditions should be applied. For
aseptic manipulations parameters in line with Annex 1 (i.e. Grade A with Grade
B background) should be applied. The environmental monitoring program should
include testing and monitoring of non-viable contamination, viable contamination
and air pressure differentials. The monitoring locations should be determined
having regards to the QRM principles. The number of samples, volume, and
frequency of monitoring, alert and action limits should be appropriate taking into
account the QRM principles. Sampling methods should not pose a risk of
contamination to the manufacturing operations. Where appropriate control is
required in the process, temperature and relative humidity should be monitored.
All environmental monitoring results should be trended.
3.12 Only in exceptional circumstances when an appropriate manufacturing
environment is not available, a less stringent environment than that specified in
Section 3.11 above may be acceptable for processes that are not closed where
approved by the Competent Authority and in accordance with CTA or MA or other
national requirements. However, this option should be considered exceptional
and applicable only if the product is intended to treat a life-threatening condition
where no alternative therapeutic options exist. The environment must be
specified and justified to provide patient benefit that outweighs the significant risk
created by manufacturing under less stringent environments. If the Competent
Authority grants an approval, the manufacturer must pursue establishing the
appropriate environment as improvements in the technology occur.
3.13 For closed systems, a lower classified area than Grade A in background Grade B
might be acceptable based on the outcome of a QRM assessment. The
appropriate level of air classification and monitoring should be determined having
regard to the specific risks, considering the nature of the product, the
manufacturing process and the equipment used. QRM should be used to
determine whether the technology used supports reduced monitoring, in
particular where monitoring can be a source of contamination. This is in addition
to:
(a) The use of technologies as e.g. processing inside single use sterile
disposable kits, or processing using closed, automated manufacturing
platform or incubation in closed flasks, bags or fermenters in Grade C
may be acceptable if adequate control measures are implemented to
avoid the risk of microbial contamination and cross-contamination (e.g.
appropriate control of materials, personnel flows and cleanliness).
Particular attention should be paid if the materials are subsequently
moved to a clean area of higher Grade.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -77- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
(b) If the closed system can be shown to remain integral throughout the
entire usage, a background of Grade D might be acceptable.
Requirements of Annex 1 regarding the provision of closed system should be
considered.
3.14 In exceptional circumstances, it is permissible to perform a manufacturing step in
premises that are not under direct control of the ATMP manufacturer or MAH
(including for example placing equipment used to perform manufacturing steps in
hospital wards or theatre) where approved by the Competent Authority and in
accordance with CTA or MA or other national requirements. In such cases, it
should be demonstrated that the process maintains its validated status in
accordance to principles and guidelines in Annex 15, Annex 20 and in this annex.
These arrangements should be subject to approval by the Competent Authority.
The responsibilities of each parties should be defined in written technical
agreements.
EQUIPMENT
3.15 Production equipment should not present any hazard to the products. The parts
of the production equipment that come into contact with the product must not be
reactive, additive or absorptive to such an extent that it will affect the quality of
the product and thus present any hazard.
In addition, if single use systems (i.e. disposable systems) are used, the
manufacturer should take into account and verify the impact on the product from
extractable, leachable, insoluble particulate and insoluble matter derived from
such systems. Annex 1 regarding provisions for single use systems should be
considered. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 3.39)
3.16 Where required to minimise the risk of cross-contamination, restrictions on the
movement of equipment should be applied. In general, equipment should not be
moved from high-risk areas to other areas, or between high-risk areas (e.g.
equipment used for the handling of cells from infected donors or the handling of
oncolytic viruses). Where the relocation of equipment is unavoidable, after
reviewing engineering and/ or technical modifications, the risk should be
assessed in line with QRM principles, mitigated and monitored to ensure an
effective cross-contamination control strategy (refer to Section 3.4 CCS). The
qualification status of the equipment moved should also be considered.
3.17 The design of equipment used during handling of live organisms and cells,
including those for sampling, should be considered to prevent any contamination
during processing.
3.18 Primary containment4 should be designed and periodically tested to ensure the
prevention of escape of biological agents into the immediate working
environment.
4 See Main GMP Glossary on ‘Containment’.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -78- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
3.19 Electronic systems used to support manufacturing must be qualified in
accordance with Annex 11 and 15. Any analytical testing performed on materials
not used in manufacturing but that support bioinformatics informing the
manufacturing process (e.g. patient gene sequencing) should be validated. Such
analytical equipment is expected to be qualified prior to use.
CHAPTER 4 DOCUMENTATION
Specifications
4.1 Specifications for ATMP starting and raw materials may need additional
documentation on the source, origin, distribution chain, method of manufacture,
and controls applied, to assure an appropriate level of control and oversight
including their microbiological quality.
4.2 Some products may require specific definition of what materials constitute a
batch. For autologous and donor-matched situations, the manufactured product
should be viewed as a batch.
Traceability
4.3 Where human cells or tissues are used, full traceability is required from starting
and raw materials, including all substances coming into contact with the cells or
tissues through to confirmation of the receipt of the products at the point of use
whilst maintaining the privacy of individuals and confidentiality of health-related
information, according to national legislation.
4.4 For starting materials of human origin, the identification of the supplier and the
anatomical environment from which the cells/tissues/virus originates (or, as
appropriate, the identification of the cell-line, master cell bank, seed lot) should
also be described.
4.5 A system that enables the bidirectional tracking of cells/tissues contained in
ATMPs from the point of donation, through manufacturing, to the delivery of the
finished product to the recipient should be created. This system can be manual
or automated. It should be used throughout the manufacturing lifecycle to include
clinical trial and commercial batches.
4.6 Traceability records should be kept as an auditable document and unequivocally
linked to the relevant batch record. The storage system should ensure that
traceability data allow for easy access, in case of an adverse reaction from the
patient.
4.7 Traceability records for cellular and tissue-based products and for any
personalized ATMP must be retained 30 years after the expiry date of the product
unless otherwise specified in the MA/CTA or national law. Particular care should
be taken to maintain the traceability of products for special use cases, such as
donor-matched cells. National requirements applied to blood components in
regard to traceability requirements and notification of serious adverse reactions
and events apply to blood components when they are used as starting or raw
materials in the manufacturing process of medicinal products. Human cells
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -79- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
including haematopoietic cells must comply with the principles laid down in
national law concerning traceability.
4.8 When xenogeneic cells are used as starting materials for ATMPs, information
permitting the identification of the donor animal should be kept for 30 years unless
otherwise specified in the MA/CTA or national legislation.
CHAPTER 5 PRODUCTION
General
5.1 ATMPs must comply with the applicable national requirements on minimising the
risk of transmitting animal spongiform encephalopathy agents via human and
veterinary medicinal products.
Viral safety for gene therapy ATMPs should be ensured by having systems in
place that ensure the quality of starting (including cell banks and viral seed
stocks) and raw materials through the production process.
5.2 The conditions for sample collection, additions and transfers involving replication
competent vectors or materials from infected donors should prevent the release
of viral/infected material.
5.3 At every stage of processing, materials and products should be protected from
microbial and any other contamination. Appropriate contamination control and
monitoring strategies should be implemented (refer to Section 3.4 CCS).
Particular consideration should be given to the risk of cross-contamination
between cell preparations from different donors and, where applicable, from
donors having different positive serological markers. (Replaces PIC/S GMP
Guide Part I Section 5.10)
5.4 The use of antimicrobials may be necessary to reduce bioburden associated with
the procurement of living tissues and cells. However, the use of antimicrobials
does not replace the requirement for aseptic manufacturing. When antimicrobials
are used, their use should be recorded; they should be removed as soon as
possible, unless the presence thereof in the finished product is specifically
foreseen in the CTA or MA (e.g. antibiotics that are part of the matrix of the
finished product). Additionally, it is important to ensure that antimicrobials do not
interfere with any product microbial contamination testing or sterility testing, and
that they are not present in the finished product (unless specifically justified in the
CTA or MA).
5.5 Labels applied to containers, equipment or premises should be clear, well defined
and in the manufacturer’s agreed format.
Care should be taken in the preparation, printing, storage and application of
labels, including any specific text for patient-specific or autologous product. For
products containing cells derived from human cells or tissue, donor’s labels
should contain all relevant information that is needed to provide full traceability.
In the case of autologous products, the unique patient identifier and the statement
“for autologous use only” should be indicated on the outer packaging or, where
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -80- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
there is no outer packaging, on the immediate packaging or as otherwise
specified in national law.
Alternative approaches/measures are permitted as long as the risk of erroneous
administration of the product is adequately mitigated. For investigational ATMPs
that are blinded, the requirement to state “autologous use” can be substituted by
a barcode or an alternative equivalent mechanism that ensures blinding while
maintaining patient safety. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.13)
5.6 When setting up a programme for primary and secondary packaging operations,
particular attention should be given to minimising the risk of cross-contamination,
mix-ups or substitutions. Sterility and/or low bioburden requirements should be
adhered to and segregation strategies should be applied. (Replaces PIC/S GMP
Guide Part I Section 5.49)
5.7 If closed systems are used for the production of ATMPs, checks should be carried
out to ensure that all pieces of the equipment are connected in a correct manner
to assure the closed state. Special attention should be given to apply these tests
to automated systems. If feasible and based on QRM principles, for example
considering testing carried out by vendors, the integrity of single use systems
should be verified at adequate frequency prior to use and potentially post use,
possibly automatically. The integrity of reused equipment should be verified
before use after cleaning and sterilisation.
5.8 A system is no longer considered closed when materials are added or withdrawn
without aseptic techniques (e.g. without use of sterile connectors or filters
aseptically connected).
5.9 Where chromatography equipment is used, a suitable control strategy for
matrices, the housings and associated equipment (adapted to the risks) should
be implemented when used in campaign manufacture and in multi-product
environments. The re-use of the same matrix at different stages of processing is
discouraged due to risk of carryover contamination. Any such re-usage should be
supported by appropriate validation data. Acceptance criteria, operating
conditions, regeneration methods, life span, and sanitization or sterilisation
methods of chromatography columns should be defined.
5.10 Careful attention should be paid to specific requirements at any cryopreservation
stages, e.g. the rate of temperature change during freezing or thawing. The type
of storage chamber, placement and retrieval process should minimise the risk of
cross-contamination, maintain the quality of the products and facilitate their
accurate retrieval. Documented procedures should be in place for the secure
handling and storage of products with positive serological markers.
5.11 The suitability of selected packaging material should be considered. The
adhesiveness, durability and legibility of printed text of labels used for containers
that are stored at ultra-low temperatures (- 60 °C or lower) should be verified.
Additionally, apply a holistic approach to minimize the risk to container closure
integrity (CCI) that can occur during storage at ultra-low temperatures. Evidence‐
based data should be generated to support the selection of the appropriate
primary packaging components and qualification of the container/closure sealing
process.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -81- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
Prevention of Cross-contamination in Production
5.12 An evidence-based QRM process should be used to assess and control the
cross-contamination risks presented by the products manufactured. Factors to
take into account include:
(a) vectors used and the risk of occurrence of replication competent virus
(including different level of risk derived from the use of replication limited,
replication defective, conditional replication and replication incompetent
vectors),
(b) facility/equipment design and use,
(c) personnel and material flow,
(d) microbiological and other adventitious agent controls,
(e) characteristics of the starting materials/active substance and raw materials,
(f) process characteristics,
(g) clean room conditions,
(h) cleaning processes, and
(i) analytical capabilities relative to the relevant limits established from the
evaluation of the products.
The outcome of the QRM process should be the basis for determining the process
workflow and necessity for and extent to which premises and equipment should
be dedicated or single use systems should be used for a particular product. This
may include dedicating specific product contact parts or dedication of the entire
manufacturing facility. It may be acceptable to confine manufacturing activities to
a segregated, self-contained production area within a multiproduct facility, where
justified. Results should be reviewed jointly with the CCS.
(Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.20)
5.13 The methods used for sterilisation, disinfection, virus removal or inactivation
should be validated. In cases where a virus inactivation or removal process is
performed during manufacture, measures to avoid the risk of recontamination
should be taken. (refer to Section 5.19(a))
5.14 An emergency plan for dealing with accidental release of viable organisms should
be in place. This should address methods and procedures for containment,
protection of operators, cleaning, decontamination and safe return to use.
Accidental spillages, especially of live organisms, must be dealt with quickly and
safely. Decontamination measures should be available for each organism or
groups of related organisms in line with the QRM process. Decontamination
measures should be validated for effectiveness.
5.15 If obviously contaminated, such as by spills or aerosols, or if a potential
hazardous organism is involved, production and control materials, including
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -82- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
paperwork, must be adequately disinfected, or the information transferred out by
other means. An assessment of the impact on the immediate products and any
others in the affected area should also be made.
5.16 The risks of cross-contamination should be assessed having regard to the
characteristics of the product (e.g. biological characteristics of the starting
materials, possibility to withstand purification techniques) and manufacturing
process (e.g. the use of processes that provide extraneous microbial
contaminants the opportunity to grow). For ATMPs that cannot be sterilised, any
open processing (e.g. filling) must be conducted aseptically to minimise the
introduction of contaminants.
5.17 In all manufacturing steps that may lead to unwanted formation of aerosols (e.g.
centrifugation, working under vacuum, homogenisation, and sonication)
appropriate mitigation measures should be implemented to avoid cross-
contamination. Special precautions should be taken when working with infectious
materials.
5.18 Measures to prevent cross-contamination appropriate to the risks identified
should be put in place. Measures that can be considered to prevent cross-
contamination include, among others:
(a) segregated premises,
(b) dedicating the entire manufacturing facility or a self-contained production
area on a campaign basis (separation in time) followed by a cleaning process
of validated effectiveness,
(c) adequate cleaning procedures:
i. the cleaning procedure (technique, number of sanitation steps, etc.)
should be adapted to the specific characteristics of the product and
of the manufacturing process;
ii. a risk-assessment should be used to determine the cleaning and
decontamination procedures that are necessary, including the
frequency thereof;
iii. as a minimum, there should be appropriate cleaning and
decontamination between each batch; and
iv. all cleaning and decontamination procedures should be validated.
(d) use of “closed systems” for processing and for material or product transfer
between individual processing equipment,
(e) use of air locks and pressure cascade to confine potential airborne
contaminant within a specified area,
(f) utilisation of single use systems,
(g) other suitable organisational measures, such as the:
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -83- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
i. dedication of certain parts of equipment (e.g. filters) to a given type
of product with a specific risk profile;
ii. keeping specific protective clothing inside areas where products with
high-risk of contamination are processed;
iii. implementing adequate measures to handling waste, contaminated
rinsing water and soiled gowning; and
iv. imposing restrictions on the movement of personnel.
(Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.21)
Validation
5.19 During process validation potential limited availability of quantities of tissue/cells
has to be taken into account. A strategy on gaining maximum process knowledge
has to be implemented.
Validation studies should be conducted in accordance with defined procedures.
Results and conclusions should be recorded, in particular:
(a) ATMPs manufactured for exploratory, early phase clinical trials (phase I and
phase I/II), are expected to be validated proportionately with the knowledge
and the risk associated with the respective phase. All aseptic and sterilisation
processes as well as virus inactivation or removal for investigational and
authorised ATMPs are expected to be validated. The effectiveness of
disinfection methods should be proven. For all phases, the principles as
outlined in Annex 13 should be applied.
(b) For all aseptic processes, aseptic process simulations should be performed
as part of initial validation and repeated thereafter every six months in line
with Annex 1. In the case of infrequent production (i.e. if the interval between
the production of two batches is more than six months but less than a year),
it is acceptable that the process simulation test is done prior to manufacturing
of the next batch. This is provided that, the results of the process simulation
test are available prior to the starting of production. Any deviation from this
approach needs to be thoroughly justified by QRM principles considering all
aspects of product nature, product quality and patient safety.
(c) If the ATMP is not produced on a routine basis (i.e. over a year), the aseptic
process simulation should be conducted at least in triplicate prior to the start
of manufacturing, involving all relevant operators. QRM principles should be
applied in accordance with Annex 1. Any deviation from this approach needs
to be thoroughly justified by QRM principles considering all aspects of product
nature, product quality and patient safety.
(d) The use of surrogate material during process validation may be acceptable
when there is shortage of the starting materials (e.g. autologous ATMPs,
allogeneic in a matched-donor scenario, allogeneic where there is no
expansion of cells to MCB). The representativeness of surrogate starting
material should be evaluated, including – for example – donor age, use of
materials from healthy donors, anatomical source (e.g. femur vs. iliac crest)
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -84- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
or other different characteristics (e.g. use of representative cell-types or use
of cells at a higher passage number than that foreseen in the product
specifications).
(e) Where possible, consideration should be given to complementing the use of
surrogate materials with samples from the actual starting materials for key
aspects of the manufacturing process. For instance, in the case of an ATMP
based on modification of autologous cells to treat a genetic disorder, process
validation using the autologous cells (affected by the condition) may be
limited to those parts of the process that focus on the genetic modification
itself. Other aspects could be validated using a representative surrogate cell
type.
(Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.23)
Control of different types of materials including ATMP Active Substances
5.20 For the approval and maintenance of suppliers of materials, the following is
required:
ATMP Active substances
The supply chain traceability should be established. Associated risks, from active
substance starting materials to the finished medicinal product, should be formally
assessed and periodically verified. Appropriate measures should be put in place
to reduce risks to the quality of the active substance.
The supply chain and traceability records for each active substance should be
available and be retained by the manufacturer of the ATMP.
Raw materials and process aids
Prior to setting up the manufacturing process and whenever a change of the
respective material is implemented, a QRM process should assess the risk of
contamination from the relevant materials as well as their influence on the entire
manufacturing process and the resulting product. Appropriate measures should
be put in place to reduce risks to the quality of the materials.
Material directly in contact with the ATMP during manufacture and storage
All materials that come in direct contact with the ATMP should be of appropriate
quality. The risk of microbiological contamination should be assessed especially
for single use systems.
(Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.29)
5.21 Only materials that have been released by the Quality Unit and that are within
their expiration or retest date should be used. Where the results of necessary
tests are not available, it may be permissible to process materials before the
results of the tests are available, the risk of using a potentially failed material and
its potential impact on other batches should be clearly described and assessed
under the principles of QRM. In such cases, release of a finished product is
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -85- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
conditional on satisfactory results of these tests. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide
Part I Section 5.34)
5.22 A regular qualification of the vendors (e.g. manufacturers and distributors) of all
materials to confirm that they comply with the relevant GMP requirements should
be performed. Whether an on-site audit needs to be performed at a
manufacturer’s or distributor’s premises should be defined based on QRM
principles. Generally, audits need to be performed at vendors of all materials
defined as critical for the manufacturing process according to its product risk
profile (PRP). Refer to provisions detailed in Chapter 7 as modified by this annex.
5.23 Application of QRM principles to the total supply chain is a critical part of the
process to understand the risks to material quality. The principles of quality by
design (QbD) as described in ICH Q8 Guideline on Pharmaceutical Development
could be applied:
(a) The MAH should define what constitutes ATMP active substances, starting
materials, raw materials and other materials such as single use systems,
primary packaging materials and any other materials in direct contact with the
product during manufacture by means of Product Risk Profiles (PRP). The
PRP should be used to justify the levels of control that apply to individual
materials.
(b) Establish the Quality Target Product Profile (QTPP) and define the Critical
Quality Attributes (CQA) and the Critical Process Parameters (CPP) for the
ATMP to establish PRP appropriately.
(c) For each material used, identify the risks presented to the quality, safety and
function from its source through to its incorporation in the finished product
dosage form. Areas for consideration should include, but are not limited to:
i. transmissible spongiform encephalopathy;
ii. potential for viral contamination;
iii. potential for microbiological or endotoxin/pyrogen contamination;
iv. potential, in general, for any impurity originating from the raw
materials, or generated as part of the process and carried over;
v. sterility assurance for materials claimed to be sterile;
vi. potential for any impurities carried over from other processes, in
absence of dedicated equipment and/or facilities;
vii. environmental control and storage/transportation conditions
including cold chain management; if appropriate and
viii. stability.
(d) With respect to the use and function of each material, consider the following:
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -86- 25 August 2023
Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
i. pharmaceutical form and use of the medicinal product containing the
material;
ii. function of the material in the formulation, and for gene therapy
products the impact on the gene expression of that material;
iii. degree of which the function of the final product is dependent from
the material assessed and how likely it is to be controlled further into
the manufacturing process (i.e. if the gene sequence is wrong how
easily can this be detected and corrected or if the product is
contaminated how likely can this be detected or corrected later in the
manufacturing process);
iv. time of preparation of the material in respect to the time of
administration of the final product;
v. quantity of material with particular reference to the implication of
small final product batch sizes (e.g. 5-50 mg);