Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
ANNEX 2B
MANUFACTURE OF BIOLOGICAL MEDICINAL
SUBSTANCES AND PRODUCTS FOR HUMAN USE
SCOPE
The methods employed in the manufacture of biological active substances and
biological medicinal products for human use (‘biological active substances and
medicinal products’) are a critical factor in shaping the appropriate regulatory
control. Biological active substances and medicinal products can be defined
therefore largely by reference to their method of manufacture. This annex
provides guidance on the full range of active substances and medicinal products
defined as biological with the exception of Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products
(“ATMPs”). The ATMPs are not covered by the present guideline. Manufacturers
of ATMPs should refer to PIC/S Annnex 2A Manufacture of Advanced Therapy
Medicinal Products for Human Use.
This annex is divided into two main parts:
a) Part A contains supplementary guidance on the manufacture of biological
active substances and medicinal products, from control over seed lots and
cell banks through to finishing activities and testing.
b) Part B contains further guidance on selected types of biological active
substances and medicinal products.
This annex, along with several other annexes of the PIC/S Guide to GMP,
provides guidance which supplements that in Part I and in Part II of the Guide.
There are two aspects to the scope of this annex:
a) Stage of manufacture - for biological active substances to the point
immediately prior to their being rendered sterile, the primary guidance
source is Part II. Guidance for the subsequent manufacturing steps of
biological products are covered in Part I.
b) Type of product - this annex provides guidance on the full range of
medicinal products defined as biological with the exception of ATMPs.
These two aspects are shown in Table 1; it should be noted that this table is
illustrative only and is not meant to describe the precise scope. It should also be
understood that in line with the corresponding table in Part II of the Guide, the
level of GMP increases in detail from early to later steps in the manufacture of
biological active substances but GMP principles should always be adhered to.
The inclusion of some early steps of manufacture within the scope of this Annex
does not imply that those steps will be routinely subject to inspection by the
authorities.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -108- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
Antibiotics are not defined as biological medicinal products, however where
biological stages of manufacture occur, guidance in this Annex may be used.
Guidance for medicinal products derived from fractionated human blood or
plasma is covered in Annex 14 and for non-transgenic plant products in Annex 7.
In certain cases, other legislation may be applicable to the starting materials for
biologicals. For example,
(a) Tissue and cells used as starting materials for medicinal products,
donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and
distribution of human tissues and cells of tissue and cells may be covered
by national legislation. Such tissues and cells may provide the active
substances for some biological medicinal product within the scope of this
annex at which point GMP and other medicinal product legislation
requirements apply.
(b) Blood or blood components used as starting materials for medicinal
products, national legislation may provide the technical requirements for
the selection of donors, collection, testing, processing, storage, and
distribution of human blood and blood components1.
Additionally, the manufacture and control of genetically modified organisms
needs to comply with local and national requirements. Appropriate containment
should be established and maintained in facilities where any genetically modified
micro-organism is handled2. Advice should be obtained according to national
legislation in order to establish and maintain the appropriate Biological Safety
Level. There should be no conflicts with GMP requirements.
Table 1. Illustrative guide to manufacturing activities within the scope of Annex 2B
Type and
Example
source of Application of this guide to manufacturing steps shown in grey
product
material
1. Animal or Heparins, insulin, Collection of plant, Cutting, mixing, and Isolation and Formulation,
plant sources: enzymes, organ, animal / or initial purification filling
non-transgenic proteins, allergen material or fluid3 processing
extract,
immunosera
2. Virus or Viral or bacterial Establishment & Cell culture and/or Inactivation when Formulation,
bacteria / vaccines; maintenance of fermentation applicable, isolation filling
fermentation / enzymes, proteins MCB4, WCB, and purification
cell culture MVS, WVS
3. Biotechnology Recombinant Establishment & Cell culture and /or Isolation, Formulation,
fermentation/ cell products, MAb, maintenance of fermentation purification, filling
culture allergens, MCB and WCB, modification
vaccines MSL, WSL
1 In the EEA, this is Directive 2002/98/EC and its Commission Directives.
2 In the EEA, this is Directive 2009/41/EC on contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms.
3 See section B1 for the extent to which GMP principles apply.
4 See section on ‘Seed lot and cell bank system’ for the extent to which GMP applies.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -109- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
4. Animal Recombinant Master and Collection, cutting, Isolation, purification Formulation,
sources: proteins working transgenic mixing, and/or initial and modification filling
transgenic bank processing
5. Plant sources: Recombinant Master and Growing, Initial extraction, Formulation,
transgenic proteins, working transgenic harvesting5 isolation, filling
vaccines, bank purification,
allergens modification
Urine derived Collection of fluid6 Mixing, and/or Isolation and Formulation,
6. Human
enzymes, initial processing purification filling
sources
hormones
7. Human Products from Donation, Initial processing, Cell isolation, Formulation,
sources cells and tissues, procurement and isolation and culture, purification, combination,
not classified as testing of starting purification. combination with filling
ATMPs tissue / cells7 non-cellular
components
Increasing GMP requirements
See Glossary for explanation of acronyms.
PRINCIPLE
The manufacture of biological active substances and medicinal products involves
certain specific considerations arising from the nature of the products and the
processes. The ways in which biological medicinal products are manufactured,
controlled and administered make some particular precautions necessary.
Unlike conventional medicinal products, which are manufactured using chemical
and physical techniques capable of a high degree of consistency, the
manufacture of biological active substances and medicinal products involves
biological processes and materials, such as cultivation of cells or extraction from
living organisms. These biological processes may display inherent variability, so
that the range and nature of by-products may be variable. As a result, quality risk
management (QRM) principles are particularly important for this class of
materials and should be used to develop the control strategy across all stages of
manufacture so as to minimise variability and to reduce the opportunity for
contamination and cross-contamination.
Since materials and processing conditions used in cultivation processes are
designed to provide conditions for the growth of specific cells and
microorganisms, this provides extraneous microbial contaminants the opportunity
5 In the EEA: HMPC guideline on Good Agricultural and Collection Practice - EMEA/HMPC/246816/2005
may be applied to growing, harvesting and initial processing in open fields.
6 For principles of GMP apply, see explanatory text in ‘Scope’.
7 In the EEA, human tissues and cells must comply with Directive 2004/23/EC and implementing Directives
at these stages.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -110- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
to grow. In addition, some products may be limited in their ability to withstand a
wide range of purification techniques particularly those designed to inactivate or
remove adventitious viral contaminants. The design of the processes, equipment,
facilities, utilities, the conditions of preparation and addition of buffers and
reagents, sampling and training of the operators are key considerations to
minimise such contamination events.
Specifications related to products (such as those in Pharmacopoeial
monographs, Clinical Trial Authorisation (CTA), and Marketing Authorisation
(MA)) will dictate whether and to what stage substances and materials can have
a defined level of bioburden or need to be sterile. Similarly, manufacturing must
be consistent with other specifications set out in the CTA or MA (e.g. number of
generations (doublings, passages) between the seed lot or cell bank).
For biological materials that cannot be sterilized (e.g. by filtration), processing
must be conducted aseptically to minimise the introduction of contaminants.
Where they exist, other guidance documents should be consulted on the
validation of specific manufacturing methods, e.g. virus removal or inactivation.
The application of appropriate environmental controls and monitoring and,
wherever feasible, in-situ cleaning and sterilisation systems together with the use
of closed systems can significantly reduce the risk of accidental contamination
and cross-contamination.
Control usually involves biological analytical techniques, which typically have a
greater variability than physico-chemical determinations. A robust manufacturing
process is therefore crucial and in-process controls take on a particular
importance in the manufacture of biological active substances and medicinal
products.
Biological medicinal products which incorporate human tissues or cells must
comply with national requirements for the coding, processing, preservation,
storage and distribution of human tissues and cells.8 Collection and testing of this
material must be done in accordance with an appropriate quality system and in
accordance with applicable national requirements9 . Furthermore, national
requirements10 on traceability apply from the donor (while maintaining donor
confidentiality) through stages applicable at the Tissue Establishment and then
continued under medicines legislation through to the institution where the product
is used.
Biological active substances and medicinal products must comply with the
applicable national guidance on minimising the risk of transmitting animal
spongiform encephalopathy agents via human and veterinary medicinal
products.
8 In the EEA, these are Directive 2004/23/EC and Directive 2006/17/EC.
9 In the EEA, this is the Commission Directive 2006/86/EC.
10 In the EEA, this is Directive 2006/86/EC.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -111- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
PART A: GENERAL GUIDANCE
PERSONNEL
1. Personnel (including those concerned with cleaning, maintenance or quality
control) employed in areas where biological active substances and products are
manufactured and tested should receive training, and periodic retraining, specific
to the products manufactured and to their work, including any specific security
measures to protect product, personnel and the environment.
2. The health status of personnel should be taken into consideration for product
safety. Where necessary, personnel engaged in production, maintenance, testing
and animal care (and inspections) should be vaccinated with appropriate specific
vaccines and have regular health checks.
3. Any changes in the health status of personnel, which could adversely affect the
quality of the product, should preclude work in the production area and
appropriate records kept. Production of BCG vaccine and tuberculin products
should be restricted to staff who are carefully monitored by regular checks of
immunological status or chest X-ray. Health monitoring of staff should be
commensurate with the risk, medical advice should be sought for personnel
involved with hazardous organisms.
4. Where required to minimise the opportunity for cross-contamination, restrictions
on the movement of all personnel (including quality control (QC), maintenance
and cleaning staff) should be controlled on the basis of QRM principles. In
general, personnel should not pass from areas where exposure to live
micro-organisms, genetically modified organisms, toxins or animals to areas
where other products, inactivated products or different organisms are handled. If
such passage is unavoidable, the contamination control measures should be
based on QRM principles.
PREMISES AND EQUIPMENT
5. As part of the control strategy, the degree of environmental control of particulate
and microbial contamination of the production premises should be adapted to the
active substance, intermediate or finished product and the production step,
bearing in mind the potential level of contamination of the starting materials and
the risks to the product. The environmental monitoring programme should be
supplemented by the inclusion of methods to detect the presence of specific
microorganisms (i.e. host organism, yeasts, moulds, anaerobes, etc) where
indicated by the QRM process.
6. Manufacturing and storage facilities, processes and environmental classifications
should be designed to prevent the extraneous contamination of products.
Prevention of contamination is more appropriate than detection and removal,
although contamination is likely to become evident during processes such as
fermentation and cell culture. Where processes are not closed and there is
therefore exposure of the product to the immediate room environment (e.g. during
additions of supplements, media, buffers, gasses,) control measures should be
put in place, including engineering and environmental controls on the basis of
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -112- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
QRM principles. These QRM principles should take into account the principles
and guidance from the appropriate sections of Annex 111 when selecting
environmental classification cascades and associated controls.
7. Dedicated production areas should be used for the handling of live cells.
Dedicated production area should be used for the manufacture of pathogenic
organisms (i.e. Biosafety level 3 or 4).
8. Manufacture in a multi-product facility may be acceptable where the following, or
equivalent (as appropriate to the product types involved) considerations and
measures are part of an effective control strategy to prevent cross-contamination:
(a) Knowledge of key characteristics of all cells, organisms and any
adventitious agents (e.g. pathogenicity, detectability, persistence,
susceptibility to inactivation) within the same facility.
(b) Where production is characterised by multiple small batches from different
starting materials, factors such as the health status of donors and the risk
of total loss of product should be taken into account when considering the
acceptance of concurrent working during development of the control
strategy.
(c) Live organisms and spores are prevented from entering non-related areas
or equipment by addressing all potential routes of cross-contamination and
utilizing single use components and engineering measures such as closed
systems.
(d) Control measures to remove the organisms and spores before the
subsequent manufacture of other products, these control measures should
also take the heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) system into
account. Cleaning and decontamination for the organisms and spores
should be validated.
(e) Environmental monitoring, specific for the micro-organism being
manufactured, where the micro-organisms are capable of persistence in
the manufacturing environment and where methods are available, is
conducted in adjacent areas during manufacture and after completion of
cleaning and decontamination. Attention should also be given to risks
arising with use of certain monitoring equipment (e.g. airborne particle
monitoring) in areas handling live and/or spore forming organisms.
(f) Products, equipment, ancillary equipment (e.g. for calibration and
validation) and disposable items are only moved within and removed from
such areas in a manner that prevents contamination of other areas, other
products and different product stages (e.g. prevent contamination of
inactivated or toxoided products with non-inactivated products).
(g) Campaign based manufacturing.
11 Although the title of Annex 1 refers to the manufacture of sterile medicinal products it is not the intention
to force the manufacture of sterile product at a stage when a low bioburden is appropriate and authorised.
Its use is because it is the PIC/S GMP source of guidance on all of the classified manufacturing areas
including the lower grades D and C.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -113- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
9. For finishing (secondary) operations12, the need for dedicated facilities will
depend on consideration of the above together with additional considerations
such as the specific needs of the biological medicinal product and on the
characteristics of other products, including any non-biological products, in the
same facility. Other control measures for finishing operations may include the
need for specific addition sequences, mixing speeds, time and temperature
controls, limits on exposure to light and containment and cleaning procedures in
the event of spillages.
10. The measures and procedures necessary for containment (i.e. for environment
and operator safety) should not conflict with those for product quality.
11. Air handling units should be designed, constructed and maintained to minimise
the risk of cross-contamination between different manufacturing areas and may
need to be specific for an area. Consideration, based on QRM principles, should
be given to the use of single pass air systems.
12. Positive pressure areas should be used to process sterile products but negative
pressure in specific areas at the point of exposure of pathogens is acceptable for
containment reasons. Where negative pressure areas or safety cabinets are used
for aseptic processing of materials with particular risks (e.g. pathogens), they
should be surrounded by a positive pressure clean zone of appropriate grade.
These pressure cascades should be clearly defined and continuously monitored
with appropriate alarm settings.
13. Equipment used during handling of live organisms and cells, including those for
sampling, should be designed to prevent any contamination during processing.
14. Primary containment13 should be designed and periodically tested to ensure the
prevention of escape of biological agents into the immediate working
environment.
15. The use of 'clean in place' and ‘steam in place’ (‘sterilisation in place’) systems
should be used where possible. Valves on fermentation vessels should be
completely steam sterilisable.
16. Air vent filters should be hydrophobic and validated for their scheduled life span
with integrity testing at appropriate intervals based on appropriate QRM
principles.
17. Drainage systems must be designed so that effluents can be effectively
neutralised or decontaminated to minimise the risk of cross-contamination. Local
regulation must be complied with to minimise the risk of contamination of the
external environment according to the risk associated with the biohazardous
nature of waste materials.
18. Due to the variability of biological products or manufacturing processes,
relevant/critical raw materials (such as culture media and buffers) have to be
measured or weighed during the production process. In these cases, small stocks
12 Formulation, filling and packaging
13 See main GMP Glossary on ‘Containment’.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -114- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
of these raw materials may be kept in the production area for a specified duration
based on defined criteria such as for the duration of manufacture of the batch or
of the campaign.
ANIMALS
19. A wide range of animal species are used in the manufacture of a number of
biological medicinal products. These can be divided into 2 broad types of
sources:
(a) Live groups, herds, flocks: examples include polio vaccine (monkeys),
immunosera to snake venoms and tetanus (horses, sheep and goats),
allergens (cats), rabies vaccine (rabbits, mice and hamsters), transgenic
products (goats, cattle).
(b) Animal materials derived post-mortem and from establishments such as
abattoirs: examples include, abattoir sources for enzymes, anticoagulants
and hormones (sheep and pigs).
In addition, animals may also be used in quality control either in generic assays,
e.g. pyrogenicity, or specific potency assays, e.g. pertussis vaccine (mice),
pyrogenicity (rabbits), BCG vaccine (guinea-pigs).
20. In addition to compliance with TSE regulations, other adventitious agents that are
of concern (zoonotic diseases, diseases of source animals) should be monitored
by an ongoing health programme and recorded. Specialist advice should be
obtained in establishing such programmes. Instances of ill-health occurring in the
source/donor animals should be investigated with respect to their suitability and
the suitability of in-contact animals for continued use (in manufacture, as sources
of starting and raw materials, in quality control and safety testing), the decisions
must be documented. A look-back procedure should be in place which informs
the decision making process on the continued suitability of the biological active
substanceor medicinal productin which the animal sourced starting or raw
materials have been used or incorporated. This decision-making process may
include the re-testing of retained samples from previous collections from the
same donor animal (where applicable) to establish the last negative donation.
The withdrawal period of therapeutic agents used to treat source/donor animals
must be documented and used to determine the removal of those animals from
the programme for defined periods.
21. Particular care should be taken to prevent and monitor infections in the source /
donor animals. Measures should include the sourcing, facilities, husbandry,
biosecurity procedures, testing regimes, control of bedding and feed materials.
This is of special relevance to specified pathogen free animals where
pharmacopoeial monograph requirements must be met. Housing and health
monitoring should be defined for other categories of animals (e.g. healthy flocks
or herds).
22. For products manufactured from transgenic animals, traceability should be
maintained in the creation of such animals from the source animals.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -115- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
23. Note should be taken of national requirements on the protection of animals used
for scientific purposes14. Housing for animals used in production and control of
biological active substances and medicinal products should be separated from
production and control areas.
24. For different animal species, key criteria should be defined, monitored, and
recorded. These may include age, weight and health status of the animals.
25. Animals, biological agents, and tests carried out should be the subject of an
identification system to prevent any risk of confusion and to control all identified
hazards.
DOCUMENTATION
26. Starting and raw materials may need additional documentation on the source,
origin, distribution chain, method of manufacture, and controls applied, to assure
an appropriate level of control including their microbiological quality.
27. Some product types may require specific definition of what materials constitutes
a batch, particularly cells.
28. Where human cell or tissue donors are used, full traceability is required from
starting and raw materials, including all substances coming into contact with the
cells or tissues through to confirmation of the receipt of the products at the point
of use whilst maintaining the privacy of individuals and confidentiality of health
related information15. Traceability records must be retained for 30 years after the
expiry date of the medicinal product. Particular care should be taken to maintain
the traceability of products for special use cases, such as donor-matched cells.
National requirements16 in regards to traceability requirements and notification of
serious adverse reactions and events apply to blood components when they are
used as starting or raw materials in the manufacturing process of medicinal
products.
PRODUCTION
29. Given the variability inherent in many biological active substances and medicinal
products, steps to increase process robustness thereby reducing process
variability and enhancing reproducibility at the different stages of the product
lifecycle such as process design should be reassessed during Product Quality
Reviews.
30. Since cultivation conditions, media and reagents are designed to promote the
growth of cells or microbial organisms, typically in an axenic state, particular
attention should be paid in the control strategy to ensure there are robust steps
that prevent or minimise the occurrence of unwanted bioburden and associated
metabolites and endotoxins. For medicinal products from cells and tissues where
14 In the EEA, this is Directive 2010/63/EC.
15 In the EEA, see Article 15 of Regulation 1394/ 2007.
16 In the EEA, these are Directives 2002/98/EC and 2005/61/EC.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -116- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
production batches are frequently small the risk of cross-contamination between
cell preparations from different donors with various health status should be
controlled under defined procedures and requirements.
STARTING AND RAW MATERIALS
31. The source, origin and suitability of biological starting and raw materials (e.g.
cryoprotectants, feeder cells, reagents, culture media, buffers, serum, enzymes,
cytokines, growth factors) should be clearly defined. Where the necessary tests
take a long time, it may be permissible to process starting materials before the
results of the tests are available, the risk of using a potentially failed material and
its potential impact on other batches should be clearly understood and assessed
under the principles of QRM. In such cases, release of a finished product is
conditional on satisfactory results of these tests. The identification of all starting
materials should be in compliance with the requirements appropriate to its stage
of manufacture. For biological medicinal products further guidance can be found
in Part I and Annex 8 and for biological active substances in Part II.
32. The risk of contamination of starting and raw materials during their passage along
the supply chain must be assessed, with particular emphasis on TSE. Materials
that come into direct contact with manufacturing equipment or the product (such
as media used in media fill experiments and lubricants that may contact the
product) must also be taken into account.
33. Given that the risks from the introduction of contamination and the consequences
to the finished product is the same irrespective of the stage of manufacture,
establishment of a control strategy to protect the product and the preparation of
solutions, buffers and other additions should be based on the principles and
guidance contained in the appropriate sections of Annex 1. The controls required
for the quality of starting and raw materials and on the aseptic manufacturing
process, assume greater importance particularly for products, in respect of which
final sterilisation is not possible. Where a CTA or MA provides for an allowable
type and level of bioburden, for example at active substance stage, the control
strategy should address the means by which this is maintained within the
specified limits.
34. Where sterilisation of starting and raw materials is required, it should be carried
out where possible by heat. Where necessary, other appropriate methods may
also be used for inactivation of biological materials (e.g. irradiation and filtration).
35. Reduction in bioburden associated with procurement of living tissues and cells
may require the use of other measures such as antibiotics at early manufacturing
stages. This should be avoided, but where it is necessary their use should be
justified, they should be removed from the manufacturing process at the stage
specified in the CTA or MA.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -117- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
36. The donation, procurement and testing of human tissues and cells used as
starting materials for biological medicinal products should be in accordance with
national law requirements. 17 Traceability for human tissues and cells used as
starting materials for biological medicinal products should be maintained from the
donor to the batch of a finished medicinal product. Appropriate arrangements
should be made between the manufacturer and the supplier of tissues and cells
regarding the transfer of health donor information that may become available
after the supply of the starting material and which may have an impact on the
quality or safety of the medicinal product manufactured therefrom.
(a) Their procurement, donation and testing is regulated in some countries18.
Such supply sites must hold appropriate approvals from the national
competent authority(ies) which should be verified as part of starting
material supplier management.
(b) Where such human cells or tissues are imported, they must meet
equivalent national standards of quality and safety19. The traceability and
serious adverse reaction and serious adverse event notification
requirements may be set out in national legislation20.
(c) There may be some instances where processing of cells and tissues used
as starting materials for biological medicinal products will be conducted at
tissue establishments21.
(d) Tissue and cells are released by the Responsible Person (RP) in the tissue
establishment before shipment to the medicinal product manufacturer, after
which normal medicinal product starting material controls apply. The test
results of all tissues / cells supplied by the tissue establishment should be
available to the manufacturer of the medicinal product. Such information
must be used to make appropriate material segregation and storage
decisions. In cases where manufacturing must be initiated prior to receiving
test results from the tissue establishment, tissue and cells may be shipped
to the medicinal product manufacturer provided controls are in place to
prevent cross-contamination with tissue and cells that have been released
by the RP in the tissue establishment.
(e) The transport of human tissues and cells to the manufacturing site must be
controlled by a written agreement between the responsible parties. The
manufacturing sites should have documentary evidence of adherence to
the specified storage and transport conditions.
(f) Continuation of traceability requirements started at tissue establishments
through to the recipient(s), and vice versa, including materials in contact
with the cells or tissues, should be maintained.
(g) A technical agreement should be in place between the responsible parties
(e.g. manufacturers, tissue establishment, Sponsors, MA Holder) which
defines the tasks of each party, including the RP and Authorised Person.
17 In the EEA, this is Directive 2004/23/EC or for blood-derived cells, compliance with Directive 2002/98
regarding donation, procurement and testing.
18 In the EEA, this is Directive 2004/23/EC and its Commission directives.
19 In the EEA, they must be equivalent to those laid down in Directive 2004/23/EC.
20 In the EEA, this is Directive 2006/86/EC.
21 In the EEA, such processing steps, are under the scope of 2004/23/EC and the Responsible Person
(RP).
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -118- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
37. (…)22
38. Where human or animal cells are used in the manufacturing process as feeder
cells, appropriate controls over the sourcing, testing, transport and storage
should be in place23, including control of compliance with national requirements
for human cells.
SEED LOT AND CELL BANK SYSTEM
39. In order to prevent the unwanted drift of properties which might ensue from
repeated subcultures or multiple generations, the production of biological
medicinal substances and products obtained by microbial culture, cell culture or
propagation in embryos and animals should be based on a system of master and
working virus seed lots and/or cell banks.
40. The number of generations (doublings, passages) between the seed lot or cell
bank, the biological active substance and the finished product should be
consistent with specifications in the CTA or MA.
41. As part of product lifecycle management, establishment of seed lots and cell
banks, including master and working generations, should be performed under
appropriate GMP conditions. This should include an appropriately controlled
environment to protect the seed lot and the cell bank and the personnel handling
it. During the establishment of the seed lot and cell bank, no other living or
infectious material (e.g. virus, cell lines or cell strains) should be handled
simultaneously in the same area or by the same persons. For all stages prior to
the establishment of the master seed or cell bank generation, principles of GMP
may be applied. For all pre-master bank stages, documentation should be
available to support traceability. All issues related to components used during the
development with potential impact on product safety (e.g. reagents of biological
origin) from initial sourcing and genetic development should be documented. For
vaccines the requirements of pharmacopoeial monographs will apply24.
42. Following the establishment of master and working cell banks and master and
working seed lots, quarantine and release procedures should be followed. This
should include adequate characterization and testing for contaminants. Their
on-going suitability for use should be further demonstrated by the consistency of
the characteristics and quality of the successive batches of product. Evidence of
the stability and recovery of the seeds and banks should be documented and
records should be kept in a manner permitting trend evaluation.
43. Seed lots and cell banks should be stored and used in such a way as to minimize
the risks of contamination (e.g. stored in the vapour phase of liquid nitrogen in
sealed containers) or alteration. Ensuring compliance with measures for the
storage of different seeds and/or cells in the same area or equipment should
22 This line has been intentionally left blank to harmonise with the formatting structure of the EU GMP
Guide.
23 In the EEA, this includes compliance with Directive 2004/23 EC for human cells.
24 In the EEA, this is Ph Eur monograph 2005;153 “Vaccines for human use”.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -119- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
prevent mix-up and take into account the infectious nature of the materials to
prevent cross contamination.
44. (…)25
45. Storage containers should be sealed, clearly labelled and kept at an appropriate
temperature. A stock inventory must be kept. The storage temperature should be
recorded continuously and, where used, the liquid nitrogen level monitored.
Deviation from set limits and corrective and preventive action taken should be
recorded.
46. It is desirable to split stocks and to store the split stocks at different locations so
as to minimize the risks of total loss. The controls at such locations should provide
the assurances outlined in the preceding paragraphs.
47. The storage and handling conditions for stocks should be managed according to
the same procedures and parameters. Once containers are removed from the
seed lot / cell bank management system, the containers should not be returned
to stock.
OPERATING PRINCIPLES
48. Change management should, on a periodic basis, take into account the effects,
including cumulative effects of changes (e.g. to the process) on the quality, safety
and efficacy of the finished product.
49. Critical operational (process) parameters, or other input parameters which affect
product quality, need to be identified, validated, documented and be shown to be
maintained within requirements.
50. A control strategy for the entry of articles and materials into production areas
should be based on QRM principles. For aseptic processes, heat stable articles
and materials entering a clean area or clean/contained area should preferably do
so through a double-ended autoclave or oven. Heat labile articles and materials
should enter through an air lock with interlocked doors where they are subject to
effective surface sanitisation procedures. Sterilisation of articles and materials
elsewhere is acceptable provided that they are multiple wrappings, as
appropriate to the number of stages of entry to the clean area, and enter through
an airlock with the appropriate surface sanitisation precautions.
51. The growth promoting properties of culture media should be demonstrated to be
suitable for its intended use. If possible, media should be sterilized in situ. In-line
sterilizing filters for routine addition of gases, media, acids or alkalis, anti-foaming
agents etc. to fermenters should be used where possible.
52. Addition of materials or cultures to fermenters and other vessels and sampling
should be carried out under carefully controlled conditions to prevent
25 This line has been intentionally left blank to harmonise with the formatting structure of the EU GMP
Guide.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -120- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
contamination. Care should be taken to ensure that vessels are correctly
connected when addition or sampling takes place.
53. Continuous monitoring of some production processes (e.g. fermentation) may be
necessary; such data should form part of the batch record. Where continuous
culture is used, special consideration should be given to the quality control
requirements arising from this type of production method.
54. Centrifugation and blending of products can lead to aerosol formation and
containment of such activities to minimise cross-contamination is necessary.
55. Accidental spillages, especially of live organisms, must be dealt with quickly and
safely. Qualified decontamination measures should be available for each
organism or groups of related organisms. Where different strains of single
bacteria species or very similar viruses are involved, the decontamination
process may be validated with one representative strain, unless there is reason
to believe that they may vary significantly in their resistance to the agent(s)
involved.
56. If obviously contaminated, such as by spills or aerosols, or if a potential
hazardous organism is involved, production and control materials, including
paperwork, must be adequately disinfected, or the information transferred out by
other means.
57. In cases where a virus inactivation or removal process is performed during
manufacture, measures should be taken to avoid the risk of recontamination of
treated products by non-treated products.
58. For products that are inactivated by the addition of a reagent (e.g.
micro-organisms in the course of vaccine manufacture) the process should
ensure the complete inactivation of live organism. In addition to the thorough
mixing of culture and inactivant, consideration should be given to contact of all
product-contact surfaces exposed to live culture and, where required, the transfer
to a second vessel.
59. A wide variety of equipment is used for chromatography. QRM principles should
be used to devise the control strategy on matrices, the housings and associated
equipment when used in campaign manufacture and in multi-product
environments. The re-use of the same matrix at different stages of processing is
discouraged. Acceptance criteria, operating conditions, regeneration methods,
life span and sanitization or sterilisation methods of columns should be defined.
60. Where irradiated equipment and materials are used, Annex 12 should be
consulted for further guidance.
61. There should be a system to assure the integrity and closure of containers after
filling where the final products or intermediates represent a special risk and
procedures to deal with any leaks or spillages. Filling and packaging operations
need to have procedures in place to maintain the product within any specified
limits, e.g. time and/or temperature.
62. Activities in handling vials containing live biological agents, must be performed
in such a way to prevent the contamination of other products or egress of the live
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -121- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
agents into the work environment or the external environment. The viability of
such organisms and their biological classification should take into consideration
as part of the management of such risks.
63. Care should be taken in the preparation, printing, storage and application of
labels, including any specific text for patient-specific product of the contents on
the immediate and outer packaging.
In the case of autologous products, the unique patient identifier and the statement
“for autologous use only” should be indicated on the outer packaging or, where
there is no outer packaging, on the immediate packaging.
64. The compatibility of labels with ultra-low storage temperatures, where such
temperatures are used, should be verified.
65. Where donor (human or animal health) information becomes available after
procurement, which affects product quality, it should be taken into account in
recall procedures.
QUALITY CONTROL
66. In-process controls have a greater importance in ensuring the consistency of the
quality of biological active substance and medicinal products than for
conventional products. In-process control testing should be performed at
appropriate stages of production to control those conditions that are important for
the quality of the finished product.
67. Where intermediates can be stored for extended periods of time (days, weeks or
longer), consideration should be given to the inclusion of finished product batches
made from materials held for their maximum in-process periods in the on-going
stability programme.
68. (…) 26
69. For cellular products, sterility tests should be conducted on antibiotic-free cultures
of cells or cell banks to provide evidence for absence of bacterial and fungal
contamination and to be able to detection fastidious organisms where
appropriate.
70. For biological medicinal products with a short shelf life, which for the purposes
of the annex is taken to mean a period that does not permit release when sterility
testing results are provided after 14 days or less, and which need batch
certification before completion of all end product quality control tests (e.g. sterility
tests) a suitable control strategy must be in place. Such controls need to be built
on enhanced understanding of product and process performance and take into
account the controls and attributes of starting and raw materials. The exact and
detailed description of the entire release procedure, including the responsibilities
of the different personnel involved in assessment of production and analytical
26 This line has been intentionally left blank to harmonise with the formatting structure of the EU GMP
Guide.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -122- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
data is essential. A continuous assessment of the effectiveness of the quality
assurance system must be in place including records kept in a manner which
permit trend evaluation.
Where end product tests are not available due to their short shelf life, alternative
methods of obtaining equivalent data to permit batch certification should be
considered (e.g. rapid microbiological methods). The procedure for batch
certification and release may be carried out in two or more stages:
(a) Assessment by designated person(s) of batch processing records, results
from environmental monitoring (where available) which should cover
production conditions, all deviations from normal procedures and the
available analytical results for review in preparation for the initial
certification by the Responsible Person.
(b) Assessment of the final analytical tests and other information available for
final certification by the Authorised Person. A procedure should be in place
to describe the measures to be taken (including liaison with clinical staff)
where out of specification test results are obtained. Such events should be
fully investigated and the relevant corrective and preventive actions taken
to prevent recurrence documented.
PART B: SPECIFIC GUIDANCE ON SELECTED PRODUCT
TYPES
B1. ANIMAL SOURCED PRODUCTS27
This guidance applies to animal materials which includes materials from
establishments such as abattoirs. Since the supply chains can be extensive and
complex, controls based on QRM principles need to be applied, see also
requirements of appropriate pharmacopoeial monographs, including the need for
specific tests at defined stages. Documentation to demonstrate the supply chain
traceability28 and clear roles of participants in the supply chain, typically including
a sufficiently detailed and current process map, should be in place.
1. Monitoring programmes should be in place for animal disease that are of concern
to human health. Organisations should take into account reports from trustworthy
sources on national disease prevalence when compiling their assessment of risk
and mitigation factors. Such organisations include the World Organisation for
Animal Health (OIE, Office International des Epizooties29). This should be
supplemented by information on health monitoring and control programme(s) at
national and local levels, the latter to include the sources (e.g. farm or feedlot)
from which the animals are drawn and the control measures in place during
transport to the abattoirs.
2. Where abattoirs are used to source animal tissues, they should be shown to
operate to stringent standards. Account should be taken of reports from national
27 In the EEA, see also PhEur monograph requirements, 0333
28 See PIC/S GMP Chapter 5.
29 http://www.oie.int/eng/en_index.htm
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -123- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
regulatory organisations30 which verify compliance with the requirements of food
safety and quality, veterinary and plant health legislation.
3. Control measures for starting or raw materials at establishments such as
abattoirs should include appropriate elements of a Quality Management System
to assure a satisfactory level of operator training, materials traceability, control
and consistency. These measures may be drawn from sources outside PIC/S
GMP but should be shown to provide equivalent levels of control.
4. Control measures for starting or raw materials should be in place which prevent
interventions which may affect the quality of materials, or which at least provides
evidence of such activities, during their progression through the manufacturing
and supply chain. This includes the movement of material between sites of initial
collection, partial and final purification(s), storage sites, hubs, consolidators and
brokers. Details of such arrangements should be recorded within the traceability
system and any breaches recorded, investigated and actions taken.
5. Regular audits of the starting or raw material supplier should be undertaken which
verify compliance with controls for materials at the different stages of
manufacture. Issues must be investigated to a depth appropriate to their
significance, for which full documentation should be available. Systems should
also be in place to ensure that effective corrective and preventive actions are
taken.
B2. ALLERGEN PRODUCTS
Materials may be manufactured by extraction from natural sources or
manufactured by recombinant DNA technology.
1. Source materials should be described in sufficient detail to ensure consistency in
their supply, e.g. common and scientific name, origin, nature, contaminant limits,
method of collection. Those derived from animals should be from healthy
sources. Appropriate biosecurity controls should be in place for colonies (e.g.
mites, animals) used for the extraction of allergens. Allergen products should be
stored under defined conditions to minimise deterioration.
2. The production process steps including pre-treatment, extraction, filtration,
dialysis, concentration or freeze-drying steps should be described in detail and
validated.
3. The modification processes to manufacture modified allergen extracts (e.g.
allergoids, conjugates) should be described. Intermediates in the manufacturing
process should be identified and controlled.
4. Allergen extract mixtures should be prepared from individual extracts from single
source materials. Each individual extract should be considered as one active
substance.
30 In the EEA, this is the Food and Veterinary Office http://ec.europa.eu/food/fvo/index_en.htm.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -124- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
B.3 ANIMAL IMMUNOSERA PRODUCTS
1. Particular care should be exercised on the control of antigens of biological origin
to assure their quality, consistency and freedom from adventitious agents. The
preparation of materials used to immunise the source animals (e.g. antigens,
hapten carriers, adjuvants, stabilising agents), the storage of such material
immediately prior to immunisation should be in accordance with documented
procedures.
2. The immunisation, test bleed and harvest bleed schedules should conform to
those approved in the CTA or MA.
3. The manufacturing conditions for the preparation of antibody sub-fragments (e.g.
Fab or F(ab’) ) and any further modifications must be in accordance with
2
validated and approved parameters. Where such enzymes are made up of
several components, their consistency should be assured.
B.4 VACCINES
1. Where eggs are used, the health status of all source flocks used in the production
of eggs (whether specified pathogen free or healthy flocks) should be assured.
2. The integrity of containers used to store intermediate products and the hold times
must be validated.
3. Vessels containing inactivated products should not be opened or sampled in
areas containing live biological agents.
4. The sequence of addition of active ingredients, adjuvants and excipients during
the formulation of an intermediate or final product must be in compliance with
specifications.
5. Where organisms with a higher biological safety level (e.g. pandemic vaccine
strains) are to be used in manufacture or testing, appropriate containment
arrangements must be in place. The approval of such arrangements should be
obtained from the appropriate national authority(ies) and the approval documents
be available for verification.
B.5 RECOMBINANT PRODUCTS
1. Process condition during cell growth, protein expression and purification must be
maintained within validated parameters to assure a consistent product with a
defined range of impurities that is within the capability of the process to reduce
to acceptable levels. The type of cell used in production may require increased
measures to be taken to assure freedom from viruses. For production involving
multiple harvest, the period of continuous cultivation should be within specified
limits.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -125- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
2. The purification processes to remove unwanted host cell proteins, nucleic acids,
carbohydrates, viruses and other impurities should be within defined validated
limits.
B6. MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY PRODUCTS
1. Monoclonal antibodies may be manufactured from murine hybridomas, human
hybridomas or by recombinant DNA technology. Control measures appropriate
to the different source cells (including feeder cells if used) and materials used to
establish the hybridoma / cell line should be in place to assure the safety and
quality of the product. It should be verified that these are within approved limits.
Freedom from viruses should be given particular emphasis. It should be noted
that data originating from products generated by the same manufacturing
technology platform may be acceptable to demonstrate suitability.
2. Criteria to be monitored at the end of a production cycle and for early termination
of production cycles should be verified that these are within approved limits.
3. The manufacturing conditions for the preparation of antibody sub-fragment (e.g.
Fab, F(ab’) scFv) and any further modifications (e.g. radio labelling, conjugation,
2,
chemical linking) must be in accordance with validated parameters.
B7. TRANSGENIC ANIMAL PRODUCTS
Consistency of starting material from a transgenic source is likely to be more
problematic than is normally the case for non-transgenic biotechnology sources.
Consequently, there is an increased requirement to demonstrate batch-to-batch
consistency of product in all respects.
1. A range of species may be used to produce biological medicinal products, which
may be expressed into body fluids (e.g. milk) for collection and purification.
Animals should be clearly and uniquely identified and backup arrangements
should be put in place in the event of loss of the primary marker.
2. The arrangements for housing and care of the animals should be defined such
that they minimise the exposure of the animals to pathogenic and zoonotic
agents. Appropriate measures to protect the external environment should be
established. A health-monitoring programme should be established and all
results documented, any incident should be investigated and its impact on the
continuation of the animal and on previous batches of product should be
determined. Care should be taken to ensure that any therapeutic products used
to treat the animals do not contaminate the product.
3. The genealogy of the founder animals through to production animals must be
documented. Since a transgenic line will be derived from a single genetic founder
animal, materials from different transgenic lines should not be mixed.
4. The conditions under which the product is harvested should be in accordance
with CTA or MA conditions. The harvest schedule and conditions under which
animals may be removed from production should be performed according to
approved procedures and acceptance limits.
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -126- 25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
B8. TRANSGENIC PLANT PRODUCTS
Consistency of starting material from a transgenic source is likely to be more
problematic than is normally the case for non-transgenic biotechnology sources.
Consequently, there is an increased requirement to demonstrate batch-to-batch
consistency of product in all respects.
1. Additional measures, over and above those given in Part A, may be required to
prevent contamination of master and working transgenic banks by extraneous
plant materials and relevant adventitious agents. The stability of the gene within
defined generation numbers should be monitored.
2. Plants should be clearly and uniquely identified, the presence of key plant
features, including health status, across the crop should be verified at defined
intervals through the cultivation period to assure consistency of yield between
crops.
3. Security arrangements for the protection of crops should be defined, wherever
possible, such that they minimise the exposure to contamination by
microbiological agents and cross-contamination with non-related plants.
Measures should be in place to prevent materials such as pesticides and
fertilisers from contaminating the product. A monitoring programme should be
established and all results documented, any incident should be investigated and
its impact on the continuation of the crop in the production programme should be
determined.
4. Conditions under which plants may be removed from production should be
defined. Acceptance limits should be set for materials (e.g. host proteins) that
may interfere with the purification process. It should be verified that the results
are within approved limits.
5. Environmental conditions (temperature, rain), which may affect the quality
attributes and yield of the recombinant protein from time of planting, through
cultivation to harvest and interim storage of harvested materials should be
documented. The principles in documents such as ‘Guideline on Good
Agricultural and Collection Practice for Starting Materials of Herbal Origin’31
should be taken into account when drawing up such criteria.
GLOSSARY
See Annex 2A
31 EMA, WHO or equivalent
PE 009-17 (Annexes) -127- 25 August 2023