--- PDF p31 (print p24) ---
24
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
The characterization of extractables and leachables presents an important component in drug prod-
uct development. Extractables are compounds that are forced out of a respective material or compo-
nent under laboratory experimental conditions (i.e., high extraction power of the solvent, increased 
extraction temperature, but shorter exposure time than during normal use). Leachables are those 
compounds that actually migrate from the respective material or component (e.g., the pharmaceuti-
cal C/C system) into the drug product formulation during its intended storage and use conditions. 
Typically, leachables represent a subset of the amount of extractables (3). The following questions are 
essential to consider in the course of characterization:
• Which compounds can migrate out of the C/C materials (extractables)?
• Which compounds and how much of each compound do in fact migrate into the drug product 
solution (leachables)?
• What is the impact of these compounds on patient safety?
• Do any of these compounds have a direct critical impact on the quality of the drug product?
Resolution of these questions requires knowledge of materials science, the component manufactur-
ing process, analytical chemistry, and drug product manufacturing processes. The quantity and fre-
quency of dosing are critical factors required for a thorough, expert review of the quality and safety 
implications, and requires a toxicologist to provide input into the evaluation.
This section describes considerations for evaluating extractables and leachables that may migrate 
from a PFS. Although this section may provide useful information to the pharmaceutical manufac-
turer, this technical report is not a regulatory guidance document, and manufacturers should be pre-
pared to justify their evaluation approach to regulatory reviewers/inspectors.
5.1	 Production of Syringe Barrels
The choice of the glass raw material is the first driver for controlling potential leachables in drug 
products. The pharmaceutical industry uses Borosilicate Type 1 glass tubes as raw material for manu-
facturing syringe barrels. Type 1 glass has the highest hydrolytic resistance and chemical stability of 
available glass formulations, and therefore limits migration of glass component raw materials into 
the drug product. Glass quality for hydrolytic resistance must meet the testing requirements in the 
relevant pharmacopeias (e.g., European Pharmacopoeia, USP, or Japanese Pharmacopoeia).
Delamination (the scaling off of very thin, visible-to-subvisible glass flakes) of glass surfaces contact-
ing the product has been reported for some products packaged in glass vials, whereas delamination 
has not been reported in glass syringes so far. However, this possibility cannot be fully excluded during 
the storage of certain formulations. USP <1660> Evaluation of the Inner Surface Durability of Glass 
Containers addresses delamination and contributing factors in more detail (49).
The syringe barrel manufacturing process consists of four main steps, each of which can generate or 
introduce compounds that may later become extractables and/or leachables. Descriptions of each 
step are included in the relevant sections of this report. However, in this section, only a summary of 
the steps is included to describe the possible sources of extractable and leachable substances.
5.0  Extractables and Leachables Evaluation
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p32 (print p25) ---
25
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.1.1	 Cutting Step (Horizontal Forming)
In the first step of the syringe barrel manufacturing process, glass tubing is cut to the appropriate size. 
The cut tubing pieces are then washed to remove glass particles and transferred to a forming machine. 
During this step, the glass does not undergo any treatment that could affect its physicochemical stabil-
ity. This step has little impact on the generation of extractable or leachable substances.
5.1.2	 Forming Step (Horizontal/Vertical Forming)
In the second step, the syringe tip and flange are sequentially formed by local heating of the glass cut/
tube. Annealing and forming steps can locally modify the surface composition of the glass, and con-
sequently, influence the leachable chemical profile. Some manufacturers may use tooling lubricants 
during the manufacturing process, which could subsequently be viewed as a process leachable.
Tungsten pins are commonly used to form the tip channel. Tungsten residuals have received attention due 
to some cases of product incompatibility reported in the literature (50). Such sensitivity must be evaluated 
through testing and compatibility studies (e.g., spiking studies as appropriate). Residual tungsten levels may 
be controlled or minimized during the formation step by use of process parameters and washing, and pos-
sibly eliminated through use of substitute pin materials if a drug has significant sensitivity to tungsten. In 
addition to sensitivity to tungsten, some drugs may possibly exhibit sensitivity to other metals. Therefore, if 
pins made out of substitute metals—such as iridium or platinum—are employed, then give consideration 
to employing the same control or minimization processes as those used for tungsten to reduce possible 
interactions between the drug and pin residues on the inner surface of the syringe. It is known that in areas 
where formation occurs (such as the tip area), a higher concentration of pin-derived compounds may occur 
than in the areas that are not in direct contact with heat (i.e., hot flames) (51). Once formed, the syringe 
barrel passes through an annealing oven to release stress in the glass; then the needle is affixed. 
5.1.3	 Needle Assembly Step
In the third step, the glass barrel and needle are assembled. Some manufacturing operations conduct 
this step in line with the formation process. The needle is mechanically placed into the tip to a pre-
defined depth; then adhesive is added and polymerized by ultraviolet (UV) light exposure.
The adhesive used to bond the needle into the glass syringe is a possible source of extractables and leach-
ables, such as photoinitiator byproducts, residual monomers, and adhesion promoters (52, 53). After 
needle assembly, the syringes are packed into trays or other support/containers for further processing.
5.1.4	 Washing, Siliconization, Needle-Shield Positioning, and Packaging
The syringe supplier, pharmaceutical company, or contract fillers for bulk syringes perform the final 
step of the syringe barrel manufacturing process, which includes washing, siliconization, and steriliza-
tion. In this step, the bulk syringes are packaged into trays and cartoned. After the supplier completes 
the washing, siliconization, needle-shield positioning, and sterilization processes, the syringes are des-
ignated as ready-for-filling. Refer to Section 10.0 for a full description of the washing, siliconization, 
and needle shield positioning steps.
Whether processed by the supplier or the pharmaceutical company, the syringes are washed in a 
controlled environment with hot WFI. After the syringes are dried and lubricated with medical-grade 
silicone oil, the needle shield is assembled. The washing process significantly reduces residual levels 
of process impurities.
Silicone oil is not formally considered to be extractable or leachable, but it is known to emulsify or 
migrate as very small droplets into liquid drug formulations. It is possible to analytically assess silicone 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p33 (print p26) ---
26
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
oil migration using particulate counting systems that can discriminate silicone oil droplets from other 
particulate impurities (e.g., microflow imaging), or quantified (e.g., atomic absorption spectroscopy). 
Compatibility of the drug molecule and the formulation with the siliconized syringe should be evalu-
ated as part of long-term compatibility testing.
After siliconization, the syringe barrels are nested (tip downward) and visually inspected. The nest 
is placed into a tub and packaged prior to sterilization. Refer to Section 11.8 for additional details 
related to secondary packaging in the packaging process.
5.2	 Ethylene Oxide and Gamma Irradiation Sterilization and 
Decontamination Processes
As described in Section 13.0, several sterile barrier systems in one or two bag(s) are used in the final pack-
aging of the washed and siliconized syringes (e.g., cardboard or plastic cases), depending on the customer 
requirements. These packages are placed on a pallet and undergo a sterilization cycle or a suitable alterna-
tive process. The needle shield elastomer formulations are designed to allow sufficient gas penetration to 
achieve gas sterilization (e.g., ethylene oxide), especially at the material interfaces. The drawback of this 
property is the retention via absorption of ethylene oxide (EO) and its potential desorption over time. 
Ethylene oxide and ethylene chlorohydrin residuals must comply with ISO 10993-7, Biological Evaluation 
of Medical Devices, and with the limits of 1 µg/mL residual EO and 50 µg/mL ethylene chlorohydrin 
per container established in EMA CPMP/QWP 159/01 by the European Agency for the Evaluation of 
Medicinal Products (Note: for guidance on limitations of EO in medical products) (54–56). These are acceptance 
criteria for the batch release of empty syringes. Given that process residuals—such as EO—may impact 
the drug product quality, it is likely that product-specific limits will need to be evaluated.
Clean, lubricated plunger stoppers packaged in nests or in bulk are frequently sterilized by gamma 
irradiation in plastic bags at validated doses. Moist heat may also be used for sterilization depending 
upon the requirements of the pharmaceutical company. Suppliers can use various packaging configu-
rations for plunger stoppers, including systems designed to connect to isolators.
The sterilization process may affect extractables and leachables (e.g., depletion of volatile compounds 
by autoclaving, generation of new compounds by radiolysis during irradiation). Therefore, the meth-
od used to sterilize the component for evaluation is important and should represent the intended 
conditions of use.
5.3	 Sources of Extractable and Leachable Substances
Possible extractables and leachables from a 1 mL long ready-to-fill syringe are chemicals introduced 
by various components and processes, including:
• glass tubing composition
• glass converting process
• injection needle
• adhesive used for needle bonding
• elastomeric components
• labeling inks or adhesives
• residual ethylene oxide
• other process residuals
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p34 (print p27) ---
27
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The primary sources of packaging component extractables and leachables for 1 mL long staked needle 
PFSs are glass and elastomeric components (plunger stopper and needle shield).
Sections 8.0 and 11.0 respectively, provide thorough discussions of user requirements for needle 
shield and plunger stopper selection. In this section, discussion is limited to the characteristics that 
may affect extractable and leachable substances.
5.3.1	 Elastomeric Components
The majority of elastomeric components are made from rubber materials that are composed of sev-
eral different ingredients and are subjected to chemical cross-linking (curing) in a process that takes 
place at an elevated temperature (thermoset rubber). The primary ingredients in pharmaceutical 
rubber are the elastomer (high-molecular-weight polymer), filler (inorganic mineral-based material), 
pigment (inorganic or organic), and curing system for cross-linking. Other frequently used ingredi-
ents are antioxidants, plasticizers, waxes, and accelerators that help accelerate the curing reaction. All 
of these ingredients may already contain additives or generate impurities during the curing reaction. 
Examples of potential extractables are polymer stabilizers, antioxidants and their degradation prod-
ucts, low-molecular-weight fractions of elastomers and plasticizers, metal ions, accelerators, and side 
products generated during the curing reaction.
Some thermoplastic rubber formulations used in manufacturing needle shields do not require a cur-
ing step; thus, extractables related to curing are avoided. However, the extractables not related to cur-
ing remain. Plunger stopper formulations typically use a bromobutyl or chlorobutyl polymer as the 
elastomer. Plunger stoppers typically have a higher level of chemical cleanliness than needle-shield 
formulations. This is because needle-shield formulations typically made of polyisoprene or styrene-
butadiene rubber have more complicated curing systems. The design of these systems (polyisoprene 
or styrene-butadiene rubber) enhances permeability when used with EO or moist heat sterilization. 
Another design parameter to investigate is whether using polymeric coatings that act as barriers be-
tween the plunger stopper and the drug product solution can further reduce the levels of potential 
leachables from the plunger stopper.
Suppliers of elastomeric components can provide packages of extractables information ranging from 
potential extractables lists to qualitative and quantitative determinations of extractables after extrac-
tion with model solvents under model conditions. Leachables can undergo hydrolysis or other reac-
tions (thereby forming secondary leachables), or can react with the drug substance. Extractables data 
packages may contain physicochemical information only or may be complemented by toxicological 
data on extractables, all of which should be reviewed by internal experts. The extractable informa-
tion provided by the supplier may supplement the pharmaceutical company’s evaluation but cannot 
replace drug compatibility studies for which the pharmaceutical company remains responsible.
5.3.2	 Glass Components
Extractables related to glass are primarily metallic ions from mineral materials in the glass raw mate-
rials. The glass typically used for syringes consists mainly of silicon oxide, aluminum oxide, and bo-
ron oxide as network-forming components (e.g., borosilicate glasses) spiked with network-modifying 
components, such as sodium or potassium oxides. High concentrations of leachable glass compo-
nents, such as sodium or potassium, may cause the pH in unbuffered solution formulations to shift, 
and thus become critical and affect the quality and stability of the drug product, and/or the stability 
of the glass surface. Some glass also contains calcium, barium, magnesium, titanium, iron, or cerium 
to provide certain characteristics, such as color, strength, or formability (melting temperature). Poten-
tial contaminators during glass production or forming are refining agents, such as arsenic oxide, anti-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p35 (print p28) ---
28
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
mony oxide, alkali halides, and alkaline earth halides. During syringe formation, tungsten contamina-
tion may occur when using tungsten pins to form the syringe cone (see Sections 5.1.2 and 14.6.2.1). 
Trace elements may also be present as contaminants from the added compounds listed above.
Within siliconized syringes, silicone may be present as polydimethylsiloxanes (polymeric organosili-
con). Silicone and tungsten species have the potential to interact with protein-based active pharma-
ceutical ingredients, and therefore need to be assessed (50). 
5.4	 Extraction Conditions and Sample Preparation
An important step for the evaluation of potential leachable substances is the choice of adequate ex-
traction techniques and conditions. The current practice is to generate separate extraction profiles 
on each PFS device component (e.g., rubber stopper, syringe barrel, needle shield, and staked needle 
adhesive), and the assembled PFS device system. The extractables profiles of each PFS device compo-
nent help to identify issues related to individual components and the source of the extractables. An 
alternative approach involves extraction on the assembled syringe system. By exposing solvents only 
to the product contact surfaces of the PFS device, this technique provides a truly accurate extraction 
profile representative of the PFS device system.
A risk-based approach should be used to ensure detection of all critical substances that might migrate 
into a pharmaceutical formulation from the packaging material. Various extraction strategies may be 
used to force the migration of substances out of the packaging material, including different solvents, 
sample preparation, accelerated temperatures, and time. The most commonly accepted practices in-
clude a series of studies: the controlled extraction study, simulated extraction study, and leachable 
study. These studies are useful for defining the set of target leachables needed to develop the appropri-
ate quantitative analytical methods.
Before being tested, components must be prepared (washed, siliconized, and/or sterilized) in a man-
ner representative of expected usage. In addition, the extraction time should be optimized at least 
once for each basic material, such as for the elastomeric rubber or adhesive. USP <381> Elastomeric 
Closures for Injections (21) details such evaluation parameters. Tables 5.4-1 and 5.4-2 outline consid-
erations for proper extractables study design. Complete information on how to conduct these studies 
is available in other guidances and publications (21,22,49–52). 
Table 5.4-1	 Extraction study types
Study Type
Controlled extraction
Simulated Extraction
Leachables
Extraction  
medium
Model solvents, including 
organic solvents and/or 
aqueous/organic mixtures
Solvent is representative of 
the intended formulation
Intended drug product or 
a buffer without the active 
component
Temperature/ 
Storage time
Exaggerated high 
temperatures
Similar to accelerated 
stability study 
Typical stability study 
values
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p36 (print p29) ---
29
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.4-2	 Potential extraction study considerations
Materials to 
Evaluate
Syringe glass
Silicone
Needle 
Needle adhesive
Plunger stopper and needle shield elastomers
Extraction 
Techniques
Reflux Soxhlet extraction
Ultrasonication
Maceration (soaking)
Parameters to 
Modify
Time
Temperature
Solvent composition: 
• pH
• Polarity
• Ionic strength
• Surfactant concentration 
• Aqueous/organic solvent mixture ratio 
5.5	
Analytical Methodology
To compile a complete list of all extractables of the PFS components—and thus of potential leach-
ables in drug or placebo solutions—a wide spectrum of different analytical techniques is recommend-
ed. A combination of two or more of the techniques outlined in Table 5.5-1 may be considered to 
acquire adequate qualitative and quantitative extraction profiles. The selection and evaluation of the 
particular method or combination of techniques should be based upon the specific application and 
materials used in the PFS manufacture and processing. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p37 (print p30) ---
30
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Table 5.5-1	 Analytical techniques for extractables and leachables evaluation
Technique
Target analyte(s)
Features
Notes
GC 
(Gas chromatography)
Complex mixtures of 
volatile or semivolatile 
organic compounds 
Can identify and quantify 
single components 
Can analyze volatile 
organic compounds using 
headspace-GC/MS on neat 
sample material 
Absolute confirmation of 
an analyte possible via 
spectrum and retention 
time comparisons 
Easily confirmed with 
standard compound if 
commercially available
HPLC-MS
(High performance 
liquid 
chromatography-Mass 
spectroscopy)
Nonvolatile (and some 
semivolatile) organic 
compounds
Qualitative and 
quantitative determination
UV/Vis detection is 
advisable and available 
in most commercial 
instruments
Commercial MS databases 
are not readily available
Ion chromatography
Anionic and cationic 
compounds
Can quantify sulfates, 
nitrates, or acetate/
formates
Can analyze compounds 
in aqueous extracts and 
solutions
ICP-MS 
(Inductively coupled 
plasma-Mass 
spectroscopy)
Elements, trace metals
Allows multi-elemental (60 
to 80 elements) analysis 
with semiquantitation in 
less than a minute
Can analyze elements with 
low sensitivity or spectral 
disturbance 
ICP-OES 
(Inductively 
coupled plasma-
Optical emission 
spectrometry)
Elements, trace metals
Can be used in addition 
to ICP-MS to detect most 
cations
May also be performed on 
aqueous extracts
Subject to multiple 
spectral interferences
AAS 
(Atomic absorption 
spectroscopy)
Inorganic and organic-
bound silicon 
Sensitive 
Can differentiate inorganic 
and organic silicon 
depending on sample 
preparation
Elements with low sensitivity 
or spectral disturbance can 
be analyzed
Can analyze several 
elements, but only 
sequentially
Affected by chemical and 
physical matrix interference
FTIR  
(Fourier transform 
infrared spectroscopy)
Polymers and some 
additives
Can be performed directly 
on the neat material 
using attenuated total 
reflectance-infrared 
spectroscopy
Qualitative and 
quantitative determination 
of silicone in hexane 
or toluene extracts is 
possible (51,52)
Identification of elastomeric 
material by pyrolysis and 
infrared spectroscopy is an 
option (57)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p38 (print p31) ---
31
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.6	 Data Evaluation
For extractables studies, a semiquantitative evaluation of substances compared to suitable internal 
reference substances or relative response factors is considered appropriate. Even so, for each analyti-
cal technique, method suitability tests should be conducted during the analysis using a suitable mix 
of test substances (e.g., stabilizers, antioxidants, filling materials, and element standards). Even for 
screening studies, an analysis of appropriate spiking samples is recommended to confirm method 
performance in the given sample matrix. 
For evaluation of leachable substances, (e.g., long-term exposure studies), methods should be devel-
oped and validated according to suitable guidelines or compendia, such as ICH Q2 (R1) (58). The 
current recommendation is to pay particular attention to product and method interference, especially 
during leachable determinations. 
Additional leachable substances may also be identified that were not detected during extractables stud-
ies. This may be due to an interaction of leached substances with components of the pharmaceutical 
matrix (e.g., oxidation/reduction processes, degradation, or formation of drug-extractable complex-
es). The structure elucidation of such interaction products can sometimes be difficult. Since the com-
pound structure of these substances is sometimes difficult to identify, a threshold approach (Section 
5.7) should be considered to balance resource requirements in a risk-based approach to compound 
identification. The use of mass spectrometry (MS) instrumentation with high resolution, different 
ionization techniques (e.g., chemical or electrospray ionization), or capability to perform multiple 
MS experiments is sometimes helpful for identification challenges. For example, signals with low mo-
lecular masses are often connected to oxidation of polymer additives, such as antioxidants [e.g., BHT 
or Tris (2,4-di-tert-butylphenyl) phosphite]. In some cases, adequate analytical reference materials for 
substances like these are not commercially available. If reference materials are unavailable, then con-
sider using a component with a similar structure (e.g., original antioxidant) or additional breakdown 
products to quantify the leachable substances. If it is not possible to identify the compound, then it 
is suggested to report MS spectra or other important facts, such as UV/visible spectrometry data (if 
available). In addition, it is possible to report the chemical substance class of an unknown signal to the 
extent possible through MS interpretation. A classification of extracted compounds can be proposed 
based on the level of knowledge collected from the analytical work; compounds can be classified as 
unknown, tentative, or confirmed structures.
Once leachable substances are identified and quantified, the impact of the leachable substance(s) on 
the drug molecule must be evaluated. This can be done on an overall basis through long-term stabil-
ity studies using the PFS components as they are intended to be used. Furthermore, it is possible for 
leachable substances to interact with the drug molecules in such a way as to cause the drug molecules 
to oxidize, aggregate, or even form drug-leachable adducts, all of which have the potential to cause 
an immunogenic response (59). 
5.7	 Threshold Evaluation
In 2006, the Product Quality Research Institute (PQRI) working group developed the threshold con-
cept for safety considerations of extractables and leachable compounds for the primary packaging 
of orally inhaled and nasal drug products (60, 61). Subsequently, a new PQRI working group, the 
Parenteral and Ophthalmic Drug Products (PODP) Leachables and Extractables Working Group was 
formed to extrapolate these conclusions to the packaging/delivery systems of parenteral and oph-
thalmic drug product applications. Although the PQRI-PODP toxicology team’s recommendations 
have not yet been finalized, the group’s intermediate recommendations were published in the PDA 
Journal of  Pharmaceutical Science and Technology (62).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p39 (print p32) ---
32
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
The potential approach for the threshold evaluation of the extractables and leachable evaluation for 
a PFS system (Appendix IV) is based on the preliminary conclusions of the PQRI-PODP team (62). 
However, the following should not be construed as an endorsement by regulatory agencies, and each 
manufacturer must apply a sound scientific approach (including expertise from a toxicologist) to eval-
uate leachables in their products to ensure appropriate thresholds are established prior to seeking 
regulatory approval.
There are two different levels in which to use the threshold approach to evaluate the safety qualifica-
tion of pharmaceutical containers and closures (61). First, a threshold evaluation of the analytical re-
sults of a controlled extraction study will facilitate the safety qualification of the constituent parts of 
the C/C system. Extractables studies on different parts of a PFS often result in long lists of impurities 
present in a material used in the manufacture of a packaging component. The identification status 
of a compound can range from confirmed identity with a high level of confidence to only tentative 
identification and some remaining unknowns. Applying the threshold approach to the results of a 
controlled extraction study also helps determine the subsequent steps to take in the leachable study 
(e.g., target leachables to study, additional identification efforts to make, and concentration ranges to 
consider when performing quantitative leachable studies).
Second, applying the threshold approach to the results of a leachable study could substantially reduce 
the level of effort in the leachable risk evaluation; leachable compounds present at less than their 
respective thresholds may not require any further individual safety assessment. Only the leachable 
compounds present at a concentration level that is higher than their respective threshold may need to 
be considered for further chemical and risk assessment.
For compounds that have been identified, the PQRI-PODP has defined in its preliminary conclusions 
three different classes of compounds with three different associated threshold levels outlined in Ap-
pendix IV (62). These three classes of compounds can be converted into analytical evaluation thresh-
olds (AETs) that allow direct assessment of analytical results in relation to their respective toxicologi-
cal thresholds. The AET is the threshold at or above which a particular extractable and/or leachable 
should be identified, quantified, and reported for further toxicological assessment (63).
5.8	 Conclusion
Extractable and leachable substances in the C/C system must be evaluated to provide an acceptable 
level of safety to the patient. This can be determined once the leachable substances have been identi-
fied and quantified, the safety of the compounds has been established, and the impact on drug prod-
uct quality and safety has been evaluated (via regular stability studies). If it is determined that lower 
levels of leachable substances are required, then the drug company may ask its vendor for another 
component or work with the vendor to develop a process that has decreased levels of the undesir-
able leachable substance. It must be noted, however, that a change in a component or manufacturing 
process will necessitate additional assessments to ensure that the desired outcome (i.e., decreased 
quantities of leachable substances or of a particular substance) has been achieved. When materials or 
processes are changed, it is necessary to ensure that no additional, unintended leachable substances 
have been introduced because of that change.
Leachables testing should be conducted along with drug product stability testing. Periodic review 
of the extractables/leachables package is suggested due to changes in manufacturing processes and 
analytical technology. The continued process validation concept may be integrated into this approach 
and aligned with applicable regulatory guidance.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p40 (print p33) ---
33
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The goal of this section was to provide a description of how the extractables and leachables profile 
can be established for a PFS, plunger stopper, needle shield, and assembled PFS syringe device. This 
effort is required for a drug company to demonstrate the appropriate controls and knowledge of 
the C/C system expected by regulatory agencies. Even after the initial evaluation of the extractable 
and leachable substances profile has been completed, the drug company must maintain a system of 
change controls with the component vendor and drug product manufacturing site to ensure that all 
changes to the manufacturing and/or processing steps are evaluated for their potential to affect the 
extractable and leachable substances.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
