77
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
13.0  Manufacturing Requirements
13.1	Component Packaging from the Component Manufacturer
This section discusses the following principle steps of processing of prefilled syringes: preparation 
of syringes, filling, and secondary packaging (labeling, blistering, cartoning) for both presterilized 
syringes and bulk.
13.1.1 Packaging of Presterilized Syringe Systems
To ensure the isolation of the product, the assembled syringe is placed into a nest to prevent con-
tamination from the external environment. The nest is then placed into a tub that serves as primary 
packaging. The tub is sealed with a Tyvek® sheet before being placed into a single or double steribag, 
which is also sealed using the system shown in Table 13.1.1-1. 
Table 13.1.1-1	
Packaging methods 
Primary Packaging system
Material
Steribag Packaging
Tyvek® lid
Tyvek® sheet
Syringe
Nest
Tub
13.1.1.1 Nest
Nest supports are made of rigid plastic material with slots that can vary in number and diameter. The 
design of the supports ensures the syringes remain at a proper distance from one another and reduces 
the risk of breakage during subsequent manipulations and transfers.
Nests with 100 or 160 syringes (i.e., slots) are common for 1 mL long syringes. These nests can be 
made of polystyrene, polypropylene, or another material. The design minimizes deflection or warp-
ing of the tub and nest during filling. Warping leads to variations in plunger stopper position between 
the middle and edges of the nests.
Double steribag
Single steribag
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
78
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
13.1.1.2 Tub
The tub, which is a container of a plastic rigid material, maintains the nest in the correct position. It 
is usually white to permit the detection of the printing on the side of the tub by automatic camera 
systems. ISO 11040-7 describes common dimensions for tubs (103).
13.1.1.3 Tyvek® sheet and Tyvek® lid
A Tyvek® lid is coated and heat-sealed on top of the tub to isolate the product from the external 
environment before and after sterilization to obtain a sterile barrier. Single or double Tyvek® sheets 
consist of one (single) or two sealed foils (double) to ensure sufficient protection of the glass barrels 
during depackaging operations.
The Tyvek® lid is suitable for the sterilization methods described under Section 13.2. For further pro-
cessing, the correct position of the sealing, the strength of the sealing (which might be influenced by 
the type of glue used to seal the lid), and any imprinting on the lid must be considered. The sterile bar-
rier system consists of the tub sealed by the Tyvek® lid. The protective bag (single or double steribag) 
covers the sterile barrier system and its contents, preventing particle contamination and damage. Sec-
tion 13.1 discusses different methods of tub openings.
13.1.1.4 Steribag
Enclosing the tub into a steribag that is welded shut creates another barrier against possible environ-
mental contamination and facilitates the movement operations of the primary packaging of assem-
bled syringes. Again, consideration must be given to the size and position of the seals on the steribag 
for automated bag opening prior to filling.
The steribag is composed of a porous plastic portion (Tyvek®) for the penetration of the sterilization 
agent and a nonporous plastic-portion low-density polyethylene or high-density polyethylene (LD-PE 
or HD-PE). The configuration of the steribag, header bag, and reel bag depends on the dimension of 
the porous portion.
Reel bag
Header bag
Figure 13.1.1.4-1	Steribag Components
Steribags are available in different dimensions for packaging. The selection of the steribag depends on 
the depackaging equipment. Depending on the depackaging process, single or double bagging might 
be more suitable. These options must be identified when sterilization validation occurs.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
79
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
13.1.1.5 External Box
To facilitate the movement of the primary packaging and avoid creating a barrier to the sterilization agent, 
the tub is ideally packaged in a plastic box that can be sterilized (see Figure 13.1.1.5-1 for an example).
Figure 13.1.1.5-1	Packaging configuration
13.1.2 Presterilized Component Sterilization
The packed and palletized units described above undergo a sterilization process. If the sterilization 
process uses EO, then an aeration phase is needed to eliminate the chemical residues created dur-
ing the process. Validation of the sterilization process demonstrates the quality of the process, the 
removal of EO residues, as well as the sterility and endotoxin levels (55). A qualified subcontractor 
versed in using EO can develop these processes.
If validated in accordance with ISO 17665-1, Sterilization of Health Care Products – Moist Heat – Part 
1: Requirements for the Development, Validation and Routine Control of a Sterilization Process for 
Medical Devices, ISO 11137, Sterilization of Health Care Products – Radiation – Part 2: Establishing 
the Sterilization Dose, and ISO 14937, Sterilization of Health Care Products – General Requirements 
for Characterization of a Sterilizing Agent and the Development, Validation and Routine Control of 
a Sterilization Process for Medical Devices, then other sterilization methods can also be considered 
(86,104,105). These methods can include gamma sterilization (not suitable for glass syringes due to 
discoloration [turns clear glass amber]), steam sterilization, and electron beam sterilization.
13.1.3	 Bulk Syringes
A supplier can deliver prefillable syringes to the pharmaceutical company in the “not washed and not 
sterilized” form (i.e., as bulk syringes). The pharmaceutical company performs the processing steps, 
such as washing, siliconization, assembly of the needle shield, and sterilization. After the glass barrel 
formation and needle assembly steps, the bulk syringes are placed into a plastic rondo tray, then into 
a plastic or cardboard box.
13.1.4	 Rondo Trays: Materials, Dimensions, and Designs
Bulk syringes are packed in plastic (polystyrene and polyethylene terephthalate) rondo trays. The 
pharmaceutical company and the supplier agree to the material, dimensions, configuration, and num-
ber of syringes per rondo tray. A certain number of rondo trays are stacked in a specific orientation 
(Figure 13.1.4-1) and wrapped with a plastic bag for protection.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
80
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Figure 13.1.4-1	 Rondo Tray
13.1.4.1 Secondary Packing of Rondo Trays
The filled rondo trays are packed in plastic (corrugated polypropylene boxes) or cardboard boxes 
to avoid damage during transport. For the biotechnology applications that are the subject of this 
technical report, corrugated polypropylene boxes are considered state-of-the-art. The supplier and 
pharmaceutical company agree to the material, dimensions, and configuration (see Figure 13.1.4.1-1 
for an example).
Figure 13.1.4.1-1	
Packaging orientation illustration
13.2	Machinability
13.2.1		Filling of Presterilized Syringes (Tub-Nest Configuration)
Introduction of syringe components (syringes and plunger stoppers) into the filling line can be ac-
complished with presterilized (ready to be filled) syringes. There are different ways to introduce sy-
ringes into the clean room, and the level of automation varies from line-to-line and site-to-site.
13.2.2		Electron Beam Tunnel
After being unwrapped, outside surface decontamination occurs by introducing the naked tubs into 
an electron beam tunnel. The dose for sterilization is often set at 25 kilogray (kGy), which for most 
applications is more than needed given the very low bioburden on the outside surface of the tubs. An 
exhaust system removes the ozone generated by the electron beam. Using this method of outside de-
contamination requires demonstrating that the tub/nest configuration is compatible with remaining 
impurities or process contaminants. The tunnel unloads directly into the filling area.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
81
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
13.2.3		Hydrogen Peroxide Pass-through Locks
Hydrogen peroxide is a sterilizing agent suitable for externally decontaminating the tubs before intro-
duction into the filling area. However, the hydrogen peroxide must not ingress into the tubs as this 
could have negative effects on the product.
13.2.4		Low-Pressure Plasma
The low-pressure plasma (LPP) unit is a process that decontaminates the outside surface of the sy-
ringe tub after removal of the protective bag and before entering the filling line. However, the process 
only removes low levels of incidental bioburden that may contact the tub during bag removal and 
transfer to the LPP unit. Because these operations are accomplished under laminar flow units produc-
ing Grade A quality air, any incidental contamination is low. The purpose of the LPP unit is to protect 
the environment within the filling line, not to sterilize the components.
The decontamination mechanism is UV light produced by generation of the plasma under low pres-
sure. Plasma is a partly ionized gas. Using LPP to generate the UV light allows the plasma to be 
generated around the object, thereby directly contacting the surface of the object and eliminating 
any shadow areas. Measurement of cycle parameters and UV light output (by spectrometer) enables 
automatic confirmation of a satisfactory cycle. 
UV light is also a sterilization method for surface decontamination. Neither the UV light nor the 
plasma can penetrate the object undergoing sterilization. When using the UV light as a decontamina-
tion method, the target microbiological reduction is log 4 (as opposed to log 6 for use as a sterilization 
method) (99).
13.2.5		Alcohol Wipe Disinfection Followed by Automatic Bag  
Opening and Transfer
In less automated processes, the bag with the tub is sprayed or wiped with alcohol before introducing 
it into higher classified areas. The disinfectant is commonly isopropanol, n-propanol, ethanol, or mix-
tures thereof. For a double-bagged tub, removal of the first bag might occur after being sprayed as it 
moves from a controlled but unclassified area to a Grade C area. The second bag can then be removed 
as it moves from a Grade C to a Grade A area. Ideally, a debagging unit should provide the automa-
tion needed for this critical introduction. In some recent cases, an automated spray tunnel replaces the 
manual spray. Table 13.2.5-1 outlines a possible process for completing these tasks.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
