--- PDF p54 (print p47) ---
47
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The focus of this section is on visual imperfections in unfilled glass syringes with staked needles and 
other components (i.e., needle shields, plunger stoppers, and plunger rods). Dimensional nonconfor-
mities, printing imperfections, and defects in packaging are out of scope for this section. Visual inspec-
tion to detect imperfections on filled glass syringes is described in Section 13.4.
Cosmetic imperfections in PFS components may increase the defect rate detected in the final visual 
inspection of the filled containers, so each component contributes to the overall cosmetic result of 
the filled syringe at the end. Imperfections not detected during the final inspection (i.e., imperfections 
with a direct impact on container integrity or drug integrity and delivery) may lead to severe issues in 
the market, including risk to the patient during use.
Each part of the process outlined in Figure 9.0-1 can create specific defects, but all processes can have 
a common list of identified and classified defects.
Figure 9.0-1	PFS Assembly Steps
The PFS system can be divided into two subassembly parts:
• Primary components in contact with the drug (glass barrel, plunger stopper, and tip closure)
• Secondary components (plunger rod, backstop, and safety system in the combination product) inter-
acting with the primary components and providing complete functionality to the healthcare provider
The defect evaluation list should be available and comprehensible to all stakeholders (manufacturers 
and suppliers). Different approaches to classify various imperfections exist, and companies should 
have the capability and applicable methods in place for inspection. Table 9.0-1 presents a cosmetic 
defect tracking model for classification and identification through applicable standards or guidelines. 
An overview of visual inspection and evaluation is presented in Section 9.3.
Table 9.0-1	 Available Guidance and standards for PFS components
Visual inspection
Material
Guidance/  
Reference
Comments
Supplier
Incoming 
Inspection
In-Process 
Control
Final 
Control
Glass tube
Not Available
Defect evaluation list agreed on by glass 
tube producers and glass converters
•
•
•
•
Bulk Syringes
PDA Technical 
Report No. 43
Defect evaluation list agreed on by glass 
converters and pharmaceutical company
•
•
•
•
Ready-to-use 
Syringes
PDA Technical 
Report No. 43
Defect evaluation list agreed on by glass 
converters and pharmaceutical company
•
•
•
•
Rubber  
component
Not Available
Adaptation required due to the specific 
criticality of pharmaceutical use
•
•
•
Plastic  
component 
Not Available
Applicability of industrial standard 
•
•
9.0  Cosmetic Imperfections
Filling/plunger 
insertion
Glass tubing 
inspection
Glass barrel 
formation
Needle 
assembly
Needle shield 
assembly
Final treatment 
for sterile 
containers
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p55 (print p48) ---
48
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
A final visual inspection should be included in the process to ensure adequate quality output at the 
completion of syringe manufacturing. Any defective syringes found will result in a nonconformance 
requiring root-cause investigations of the unexpected event. The results of the root-cause investiga-
tion can be ultimately used to allow use of a given syringe showing an individual defect for delivery 
of end-user medication.
As noted above, imperfections not detected during the final inspection may lead to severe issues in the 
market linked to risk to the patient during use. To minimize this risk, pharmaceutical companies and pro-
ducers of PFSs should implement agreed-on processes and methods to minimize cosmetic imperfections.
9.1	 Defect Identification
To ensure defective syringes with cosmetic imperfections relevant to the quality of the drug product 
are identified and addressed, imperfections need to be classified and robust processes implemented 
to ensure that such syringes are not used for patient medication. To accomplish this, PDA Technical 
Report No. 43: Identification and Classification of  Nonconformities in Molded and Tubular Glass Containers 
for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing provides basic guidelines on the definition of the imperfections (33). 
Currently, there is no pharmaceutical guidance concerning elastomeric parts defects or plastic com-
ponents. However, some basics can be found in rubber technology standards (21).
The supplier of the PFS components and the pharmaceutical company should determine specifica-
tions that reflect agreement on the acceptance levels for individual cosmetic imperfections. To reach 
agreement on acceptance levels, the PFS supplier and the pharmaceutical company should define and 
agree on the limit samples that may be required.
Pharmaceutical companies and suppliers of PFSs should align their methods for identification of cos-
metic imperfections. Visual inspections can be performed manually or by automatic camera systems.
9.2	 Defect Classification
Currently, the defect evaluation list may not be supported by pharmaceutical standards or require-
ments. However, the industrial production references can be a source of defect definition and help 
define a common language for suppliers and users. Figure 9.2-1 illustrates some defects that may oc-
cur during syringe production.
Figure 9.2-1	
Sample needle defects
Bent needle
Hook needle
Glue deposition profile
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p56 (print p49) ---
49
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Based on PDA Technical Report No. 43, each nonconformance is judged using the criteria of critical, 
major A, major B, minor, and not applicable (N/A). The following list provides the definition for each 
category of nonconformance:
• Critical: Likely to result in personal injury or potential hazard to the patient; assigned to any non-
conformity that compromises the integrity of the container and could lead to microbiological con-
tamination of a sterile product
• Major A: Leads to serious impairments, such as a malfunction that makes the packaging unusable
• Major B: Leads to impairments of a lesser degree, such as reduced efficiency in production
• Minor: Does not affect product quality or process capability
• N/A: Of minimum size, and therefore acceptable
• Limit sample: Actual physical unit that shows the nonconformance and represents the maximum 
degree of acceptability
N/A could be applied to nonconformities that may arise out of a glass manufacturer’s process-related 
or a non-process-related error that is not sampled or estimated statistically, and therefore should not 
be assigned an AQL.
Nonconformities could be reviewed and classified (with a rationale) using an ICH Q9 quality risk 
management approach for risk assessment. Verification of nonconformity classifications may warrant 
additional testing to establish their rationale.
9.3	 Visual Inspection of Unfilled Syringes
9.3.1	 Manual Visual Inspection
Two methods for performing a manual visual inspection are inspection by means of the naked eye or 
through use of magnifying optical systems. In both cases, the ability to identify the defect correctly is 
influenced by the qualifications and experience of the personnel performing the manual inspection. 
Personnel must be periodically trained to meet the constantly increasing demands of productivity and 
product quality.
Additionally, a suitable support capable of rotating the syringes in order to view all sides provides a 
suitable method to inspect the syringes without creating additional defects. This can be managed by 
avoiding direct contact with the sample by means of manipulation using a suitable device or by direct 
use of the support in which the sample is contained (e.g., rondo tray or nest).
The apparatus usually includes a suitable white light source, and the illuminated field permits inspec-
tion of the entire surface of the syringe. The use of a dark panel and the ability to vary the intensity of 
light enable detection of some defects that would be difficult to identify if illuminated by white light 
only. Other detection devices include magnifying systems, such as lenses or magnifying opticalmicro-
scopes. Operators should promptly classify and record the fault when identified.
9.3.2	 Automated Visual Inspection
The rapid development of modern manufacturing processes has led to an increase in automation and 
production rates, and fostered the development and adoption of increasingly sophisticated detection 
systems. These systems reduce human error during visual inspection. Automated inspection systems 
are able to identify and recognize syringe defects normally identified through manual inspection by an 
operator. A new detection system should undergo a thorough analysis first to determine under what 
situations the system fails to detect the various types of defects.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p57 (print p50) ---
50
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
The most commonly used automated detection system is equipped with high-intensity focused lights 
designed to highlight a specific area of the container and is supported by software. The software uses 
image algorithms to identify defects without contacting the samples, which reduces the inspection 
work required of operators. Multiple areas of inspection (lateral surface, bottom, and front surface) 
allow the acquisition of different images in different areas of a syringe, permitting easier identification 
of specific types of defects (Figure 9.3.2-1).
Figure 9.3.2-1	
Example of automated visual inspection of an empty glass barrel
Configurable detection criteria levels for each inspection area permit optimal identification of defects 
on the barrel and the needle in relation to the requirements agreed by the supplier and pharmaceuti-
cal company. The automatic camera system should record all statistical parameters for later use in 
specific reports, certificates for internal use, or to share with the customer.
Scan of the shoulder
Cone Inspection
Scan of the flange
Scan of the body
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
