92
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
• Plunger stopper discoloration — Some plunger stoppers may become significantly discolored 
when they come in contact with the product. This may lead to a loss of the visual aesthetics of the 
product. An evaluation of the interaction between buffer components, excipients, and surfactants 
on the plunger stopper is needed. Some plunger stoppers may preferentially adsorb certain excipi-
ents or surfactants, and some excipients and buffer salts may also promote greater water adsorption 
into the plunger stopper and result in greater dimensional distortion. This can potentially lead to 
plunger stopper discoloration over time and changes in the functionality of the syringe.
14.3.3	Needle Shield Permeability 
Drying of the product in the needle may lead to needle clogging, increasing discomfort for the pa-
tient trying to inject the drug product through a clogged needle. Some products may have a greater 
propensity to become dry. For example, high-concentration formulations may become dry or form 
a gel more quickly than low-concentration formulations because high-concentration formulations 
are closer to their solubility limit and very little solvent is available for evaporation. In addition, drug 
product formulations may contain excipients that can precipitate, crystallize, or form a clog if solvent 
evaporation occurs. 
Needle-shield permeability may be a factor (in addition to needle-shield incompatibility) in product 
clogging in the needle. Moisture loss through the needle shield could lead to evaporation of the sol-
vent from the product on the needle tip leading to drying and clogging of the needle. The impact of 
relative humidity (5% to 70% relative humidity), and accelerated and stress temperatures (25oC and 
40oC) on the rate of needle clogging in filled syringes should be considered when evaluating the over-
all risk of needle clogging. Product suppliers may perform moisture transmission studies through the 
needle shield to evaluate and compare needle shields.
Injection instructions should call for removal of the needle shield just prior to injection. Needle-shield 
removal usually leads to the release of a few drops of drug product due to initial vacuum generation 
followed by positive pressure in the syringes. In cases in which the drug is not injected immediately 
by the patient after needle-shield removal, there may be a risk that the drug product will dry out on 
the needle tip leading to clogging of the needle. This risk is higher in drug products that have a high 
concentration of proteins because these have a greater propensity to become dry. This phenomenon 
can lead to greater discomfort for the patient because more force to dislodge the clog (or partial clog) 
in the needle may be required. 
For the above-mentioned reasons, it is necessary to characterize the clogging rate of the product as a 
function of environmental conditions and its impact for the delivery of appropriate patient instruc-
tions and training.
14.4	Needle Passage Shear
Protein therapeutics may experience multiple sources of shear stress during manufacturing processes, 
such as mixing, filtration, and filling. Manufacturing processes should consider the shear generated 
by fluid flow through the needle as it could yield sufficient torque to perturb, partially unfold, or even 
denature protein drug products (114,116).
14.4.1 Experimental Design
Theoretical calculation is necessary to evaluate shear as the product passes through the filling and injec-
tion needles unless clinical study data has already demonstrated product efficacy with the chosen prod-
uct design. The diameter and length of the needle, the flow rate (filling speed and injection speed), and 
the physical properties of the product (viscosity) can all affect the calculated shear. Therefore, a study 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
93
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
designed with a design space around the calculated shear to evaluate protein impact is recommended. 
The design space allows for some flexibility to optimize filling parameters in the future.
Several studies have shown that the loss of protein activity is proportional to the exposure time and 
shear rate (114,117). However, other studies have found no evidence that shear significantly destabi-
lizes proteins, but rather, show accelerated destabilization due to the turnover of interfacial interac-
tions (100).
The experimental design should also isolate the air-liquid interface from the stress due to shear. The 
stability study should include recommended and accelerated storage to evaluate the critical quality 
attributes through stability-indicating assays; these attributes include pH, concentration, aggregation, 
clipping, charge profile, potency, oxidation, and visible and subvisible particle formation.
14.5	Compatibility with Process Intermediates and Additives
A typical evaluation includes the effects of extractables and silicone—individually and in combina-
tion. As mentioned in Section 5, product suppliers should evaluate silicone oil compatibility for prod-
uct impact with different levels and distributions of silicone oil in the product contact area. An ad-
ditional study to consider is testing whether material surfaces (such as the surfaces of the container 
and particulate matter in the formulation) can interact with the drug product in terms of extractables 
and leachables. 
14.6	Types of Silicone
Commonly used silicone types for siliconization include silicone fluids, silicone emulsion, and silicone 
dispersion. Silicone fluids are identified in major international and national pharmacopeias. Table 
14.6-1 provides the classification of silicone fluids based on their kinematic viscosities (in cSt or mm2 
per second at 25°C).
Table 14.6-1	Types of Silicone
Pharmacopeia
Classification
Viscosity Range at 25°C (cSt)
USP
Dimethicone
20 – 30,000
European Pharmacopeia 
Dimethicone
20 – 1,300
European Pharmacopeia
Silicone oil used as 
a lubricant
1,000 – 30,000
Japanese Pharmacopeia
General
2 – 5,000
14.6.1	 Silicone Compliance with Monographs
To verify the compatibility with healthcare application, Table 14.6.1-1 shows common characteristics 
tested as called for in pharmacopeia monographs. The silicone oil supplier typically tests these char-
acteristics to meet compendial requirements for medical use.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
94
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Table 14.6.1-1	
Typical Silicone Oils Tests
Tests to Perform
Identification (infrared absorbance)
Viscosity at 2°C
Colorimetric (violet test)
Reaction of silicates
Acidity (potassium hydroxide titration)
Mineral oils
Phenylated compounds
Refractive index (at 20°C)
Heavy metals
Volatile matter or loss on heating
14.6.2	 Effects of Extractables on Products (spiking controls)
14.6.2.1 Tungsten
Interactions between tungsten and some therapeutic proteins have been previously documented (49). 
Tungsten salts and tungsten oxides—as well as metallic tungsten particles—can remain in the syringe 
after the formation process. Thus, there is a need to assess the sensitivity of the drug product to 
tungsten. To determine the effects of (spiked) tungsten pin extracts, manufacturers should evaluate 
the stability of the drug product. The scope of the characterization can be dependent on the level of 
sensitivity observed.
14.7	Process-related Compatibility and Stability 
The drug product manufacturing process can involve equipment that might affect the stability of the 
protein. Some of the key process steps for PFS manufacturing to evaluate include surface decontami-
nation of syringe tubs, isolator technology for aseptic filling, automated visual inspection for defects, 
labeling, and packaging. A risk evaluation during manufacturing through relevant product impact 
studies is also needed, but is not covered in detail in this technical report.
14.8	 Shock, Vibration, and Shipping Study
Agitating samples after filling should provide a preliminary understanding of how shipping and han-
dling may affect the contact surface area at the silicone/air/solution interface and the corresponding 
factor under evaluation.
For biopharmaceutical products, it is important to demonstrate the stability of the protein product 
in both static and dynamic conditions. A common method of filling and stoppering a PFS involves 
placing the plunger stopper into the syringe barrel using an insertion tube or vacuum. This results in a 
headspace (air or inert gas) between the top of the plunger stopper and the meniscus of the drug solu-
tion. Proteins have the potential to aggregate in the presence of air-liquid interfaces. Thus, it is critical 
to evaluate the stability of the product under dynamic conditions (agitation) that are comparable or 
worse than the stress applied in a pharmaceutical supply chain.
The effect of agitation on the stability of the product should be evaluated as part of formulation 
development (67).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
95
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Following selection of the final formulation composition, the manufacturer or supplier should per-
form a representative shipping study, either by actual transport or applying shipping conditions as 
recommended by ASTM, D4169-14, Standard Practice for Performance Testing of Shipping Contain-
ers and Systems (6). Simulation should include filling the drug solution into the PFS with the desired 
fill volume and plunger stopper position, then shipping the syringes under worst-case representative 
conditions (117). Worst-case conditions vary from product-to-product but should include those for fill 
volume, plunger stopper placement, temperature, excipient levels, pressure, and mode of transporta-
tion (ground and air). Incorporate shipping simulation if validation can show that it is representative 
of the shipping routes and generates stresses higher than stresses generated by real transport (6,8,117).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
