--- PDF p41 (print p34) ---
34
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
The dimensions of a 1 mL long syringe are defined in ISO 11040-4, Prefilled Syringes, but may be modi-
fied as necessary by the manufacturer or customer (64). Variations in dimensions are not uncommon 
since most syringes are used for “platform” purposes and originally designed for a specific use. Differ-
ent areas of the syringe, including the finger flange, barrel, shoulder, and cone are defined, but can be 
changed due to handling requirements for use and overall customer requirements. The syringe can be 
used by manual application or device application (using autoinjectors, safety devices, or other devices).
In most cases, the barrel dimensions are as defined in ISO 11040-4. Changes are not common in these 
dimensions because most suppliers of glass tubes use this dimension of tubing only for their product. 
The dimension with the greatest influence is the inner diameter. This parameter affects the filling 
height, dose accuracy, graduation or dose markings, and dead or hold-up volumes.
ISO 11040-4 can be used as a guideline to define the dimensions; the design of the finger flange and 
the diameter of the bore inside the cone (related to the use of the specified needle type) should be 
aligned between customer and manufacturer.
6.1	 Flange Geometry
Flange dimensions and tolerances should be defined in the technical portion of the product specifica-
tion. Flange dimensions and tolerances can influence the main design parameters, including handling, 
combination with devices, and strength of the flange. ISO 11040-4 describes two types of flanges (cut 
and round finger flanges) that can be used as guidelines.
ISO 11040-4 provides descriptions for Dimensions and Tolerances, but these may differ according to 
customer requirements. Dimensions should be verified according to product specifications by inspec-
tion controls during manufacturing.
6.1.1	 Finger Flange Thickness
ISO 11040-4 describes a flange thickness of 1.9 mm with a tolerance of ± 0.5 mm. Different dimen-
sions may be used based on the definitions and application requirements of the customer and in-
tended use of the syringe. Flange thicknesses in use range between 1.65 mm and 2.2 mm; the most 
common tolerance is ± 0.25 mm. These should be provided as part of the product specification.
6.2	 Flange Strength
The process to define the flange strength, which is dependent on the final use of the syringe, should 
align with the customer and manufacturer requirements. The required flange strength depends on 
the mechanical load that the syringes are subjected to during the filling and packaging process. Flange 
breakage can result in problems, such as equipment downtime, glass particle contamination of the 
equipment, and additional cleaning steps during the filling and packaging process. 
Additionally, it is necessary to consider the application and use requirements of the syringe (manual 
versus autoinjector application) when determining the appropriate design to use.
For autoinjectors, shoulder-oriented (in which finger flange strength is less important) and finger 
flange-oriented systems (in which finger flange strength is more important) are often used. For either-
configuration, detailed tests are commonly performed to investigate the range of force required for 
the assembly and application phase (time of use of the syringe). 
6.0  Glass Barrel Requirements
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p42 (print p35) ---
35
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Round (noncut) finger flanges have a high degree of planarity and symmetry of form. However, 
the cutting process can negatively affect the finger flange. To control for this possibility, the techni-
cal drawings must specify the tolerances of form, orientation, location, and run-out, in addition to 
dimensional tolerances.
The measurements and use of devices should be representative of the real impact of the insertion or 
assembly process (64).
It is not uncommon to experience differences in test results due to the occurrence of flange cracks, 
shoulder cracks, and burst syringe bodies—possibly in combination—rather than on an individual 
structural basis. Therefore, only specifically trained individuals should conduct an evaluation of the 
breakage (e.g., to determine its origin).
6.3	 Barrel Geometry
ISO 11040-4 defines the glass barrel geometry and describes the inner diameter, outer diameter, wall 
thickness, inner length, and total length with dimensions and tolerances. Glass with tighter tolerances 
is available for all dimensions and may be used if required for dose accuracy or small injection volumes.
Both dimensions (cylindrical length and total length to the top of the barrel-glass) must be verified 
during manufacturing because both influence other parameters and the functionality of the syringe 
when implemented into a device. The customer and manufacturer agree on precise dimensions based 
upon capabilities and intended uses.
6.4	 Syringe Shoulder Design: Impact on Hold-up Volume
Shoulder design is not described in ISO 11040-4 and is generally based on manufacturers’ procedures. 
Shoulder and cone formation often involve different steps. The shoulder forming operation is only an 
outside forming step; the inside shape of the shoulder area is not established by a forming tool. There-
fore, variations in tolerances and shapes are accounted for in production processes at the converting 
sites. The effect on hold-up volume should be evaluated and measured in accordance with the existing 
guidelines and international standards, such as Chapter 2.9.17 of European Pharmacopeia (EP) (65).
An adequate overfill can compensate for the hold-up volume of the syringe system. However, product 
viscosity and the needle itself affect this volume, and the hold-up volume should be verified during 
design qualification. ISO documents do not provide cone dimensions; however, all manufacturers use 
the same base for the cone design. Some variation in certain dimensions is possible.
The cone bore design depends on the type of needle used and the specific manufacturing and needle 
assembly process. The outside dimensions are the same in all cone bores (64). Dimensions and toler-
ances for the shoulder can vary by customer need (Figure 6.4-1).
Figure 6.4-1	 Glass Syringe Cone with Needle Inserted 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p43 (print p36) ---
36
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
6.5	 Additional Considerations
Depending on the product’s presentation and fill/finish process, other attributes to consider include 
barrel compression strength related to the labeling processes, cone tip strength during manual use, 
and flange compression testing for specific add-on assembly processes. These considerations must 
align between the producer and the customer based on the application requirements (e.g., manual 
versus autoinjector application).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
