--- PDF p19 (print p12) ---
12
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Human factors engineering (HFE) considers a product’s design, intended uses, users, and use envi-
ronments, which can affect the safe and effective use of a product (34,35). The intent of HFE is to 
improve the quality of a product’s user interface design to eliminate or minimize errors during use.
This section describes best practices related to the application of HFE and use-related risk manage-
ment to the development of PFSs, including: 
• key principles of HFE as they apply to PFSs (intended to supplement and not to replace the current 
health authority guidance and approaches described within recognized consensus standards)
• key considerations in understanding the use of PFSs
• typical areas of usability issues (known issues) to consider in the development of PFSs
4.1	 Current Standards and Guidance
Regulatory bodies may request evidence of acceptable human factors summative/validation testing 
results and supporting processes during premarket application or submission reviews. The failure of 
manufacturers to apply a compliant and adequate HFE process can lead to serious consequences, 
including product approval delays/nonapprovals, negative audit and inspection findings, clinical and 
market complaints, and ultimately an unsafe, ineffective, and unsuccessful product. Available HFE 
standards and guidances include those listed in Table 4.1-1.
4.0  PFS Human Factors Engineering
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p20 (print p13) ---
13
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.1-1	 Human Factors Engineering-related Standards and Guidances
Standard/Guidance ID
Title
ANSI/AAMI/IEC/EN 62366-1:2015
Medical devices – Application of usability engineering to medical devices
AAMI/ANSI HE75:2009
Human Factors Engineering – Design of Medical Devices
ISO 14971:2007/(R) 2012
Medical Devices – Application of risk management to medical devices
IEC 60601-1-6:2010
Medical electrical equipment – Part 1-6: General requirements for basic 
safety and essential performance – Collateral standard: Usability
IEC 60601-1-8 Edition 2.1 2012-11
Medical electrical equipment – Part 1-8: General requirements for basic 
safety and essential performance – Collateral Standard: General require-
ments, tests and guidance for alarm systems in medical electrical equip-
ment and medical electrical systems
IEC 60601-1-11:2010
Medical electrical equipment – Part 1-11: General requirements for basic 
safety and essential performance – Collateral Standard: Requirements 
for medical electrical equipment and medical electrical systems used in 
the home healthcare environment
FDA/CDRH document # 1497
Medical Device Use – Safety: Incorporating Human Factors Engineering 
into Risk Management (2000): http://www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/de-
viceregulationandguidance/guidancedocuments/ucm094460.htm
FDA/CDRH document # 1128
Guidance on Medical Device Patient Labeling (2001): http://www.fda.
gov/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidancedocuments/
ucm070782.htm 
FDA/CDRH document # 1757
Applying Human Factors and Usability Engineering to Optimize Medical 
Devices (2011, draft*): http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceReg-
ulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm259748.htm 
FDA/CDRH document # 1750
Design Considerations for Devices Intended for Home Use (2014): http://
www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidanced-
ocuments/ucm331675.htm 
FDA/CDRH docket # HFA-305
Safety Considerations for Product Design to Minimize Medication Errors 
(2012 draft*): http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulato-
ryInformation/Guidances/ucm331808.htm
21 CFR 820.30, Subparts A-D
Human Factors Implications of the New GMP Rule Overall Requirements 
of the New Quality System Regulation http://www.fda.gov/medicalde-
vices/deviceregulationandguidance/humanfactors/ucm119215.htm
EMA/606103/2014 
EMA Guidance – April 2015, Good practice guide on risk minimization and 
prevention of medication errors. Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Com-
mittee (PRAC). (http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_li-
brary/Regulatory_and_procedural_guideline/2015/04/WC500185538.pdf)
Note:	The FDA draft guidance documents referenced above marked with * are not intended for implementation until 
finalized and are subject to change. The final versions will represent FDA’s final position on those areas.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p21 (print p14) ---
14
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
4.2	 Human Factors Evaluation
The application of HFE throughout the product development process can optimize product design 
and minimize use-related failures and difficulties. The need to perform a human factors summative/
validation study and include human factors data in premarket submissions can be determined based 
on whether there are potential use errors that could cause harm. For PFSs, there are known use errors 
that can result in delayed therapy (overdosing, underdosing, needle-stick injuries) and cause harm, 
such as reduced efficacy, infection, etc. A human factors summative/validation study can demon-
strate that representative users can use the device under simulated use conditions without producing 
patterns of failures that could result in negative clinical impact to patients or injury to device users 
(refer to Section 4.8). 
4.3	 Device-Use Characterization
The HFE process begins with characterizing device use. This includes consideration of user popula-
tions, use environment, and intended use scenarios as discussed below. 
4.3.1	 User Populations
Common users of PFSs are healthcare providers, lay caregivers, and patients. User groups often have 
unique characteristics that are capable of affecting the user’s ability to learn and use the product safely 
and effectively. The generally accepted term for a distinct group of users with unique characteristics 
in HFE is “user population.” 
Within each user population, individual user characteristics may vary. Key areas of differences be-
tween users or user populations include knowledge, skills, abilities, experience, cognitive functioning, 
perceptual acuity, and manual dexterity. Furthermore, user attitudes, emotions, and expectations may 
also affect the use of the device. Other factors that typically describe variations between user popula-
tions and user groups include gender, age, disease-related impairments, previous device experience 
and literacy, and education levels. 
The design of the device should be evaluated with individual users who are representative of the in-
tended users. This approach helps ensure that designs are optimized to support the needs of intended 
users to the extent possible.
Key considerations for users of injection devices in a home-use environment include the following:
• Injection-related anxiety/phobia: anxieties and phobias can make the task of self-injection/inject-
ing another individual difficult and may cause users to withdraw the needle before the injection is 
complete.
• Disease-related impairments: the same disease that the injection is intended to treat can impair 
the ability of users to inject the product by reducing hand and finger strength, impairing sensory 
abilities, and reducing manual coordination and dexterity.
• Negative transfer of learning between different products: users with prior experience with injec-
tion devices that operate in a specific way may incorrectly use a device that operates differently due 
to the assumption that the devices operate in the same way.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p22 (print p15) ---
15
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.3.2	 Use Environment
The use environment can affect the user’s ability to use a device safely and effectively. Specific consid-
erations for HFE may include the following:
• lighting (e.g., ambient, direct, and reflective light) that might affect the user’s ability to see the sy-
ringe components, markings, and accessories
• thermal factors (e.g., air temperature, humidity, heat, moisture, and air flow) that might affect how 
well the user can grip, hold, and inject the syringe
• auditory factors (e.g., background noise and alarms) that might cause distractions and an inability 
to hear feedback from the syringe (if present)
• workload (e.g., distraction and interruptions) that may cause difficulty, especially for users with 
cognitive, sensory, and/or manual dexterity impairment
4.3.3	 Intended Use Scenarios
Intended use scenarios describe how the user is expected to use the device. A device may also have 
multiple reasonably foreseeable use scenarios that may differ by user group. For example, a healthcare 
provider may be required to select the appropriate product for a patient; the same healthcare provider 
may need to visually identify and select a PFS among PFSs containing different drug strengths or dif-
ferent drugs. Alternatively, it may be necessary for the patient to possess the ability to self-administer 
the drug in the selected PFS.
Use scenarios are determined in part by the intended use of the product, and may include such fac-
tors as dosing regimen (e.g., variable dosing or fix dosing), dose frequency (e.g., once a day or once a 
month), type of medication (e.g., emergency versus routine), extent of training (e.g., naïve or experi-
enced user), and/or clinical supervision prior to or during use. Foreseeable scenarios involving misuse 
or use error (including stress, performing the tasks within a specific time limit, or the need to wear 
gloves when using the PFS) should be identified and considered part of the application of human fac-
tors’ techniques during design of the user interface.
4.4	 Defining User Needs
After characterization of device use and prior to initiation of the design process, manufacturers should 
investigate and define end-user needs. End-user needs can be documented as user requirements, and 
as such, validated (i.e., are testable).
Multiple sources exist for defining user needs, such as the following:
• user group-specific needs (Section 4.3.1)
• use environment (Section 4.3.2)
• intended use (Section 4.3.3)
• potential hazardous situations that may arise (Section 4.6.1)
• reviews of relevant published material (Section 4.6.1.1)
• empirical research conducted by interviews or observations of potential users (Section 4.6.1.2)
• known use-related problems with the same or similar products
• health authority guidance(s) and consensus standards (Section 4.1)
User requirements may be further refined as new information is evaluated during device development.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
