--- PDF p13 (print p6) ---
6
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
3.0  Prefilled Syringe Development and Licensing
This section discusses considerations for planning the development of the PFS and eventual market-
ing approval. 
A developer of a PFS must define its purpose, evaluate the supplier, and adhere to regula-
tory and marketing requirements. For example, in the United States, a finished PFS is con-
sidered a combination product and regulated by the Center for Drug Evaluation and Re-
search (CDER), the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), or the Center for 
Device and Radiological Health (CDRH) of the U.S. FDA, depending on its primary/principal mode 
of action (PMOA). Based on the same principle of PMOA, products in the European Union (EU) that 
incorporate or administer a drug may be regulated as either medical devices or medicinal products as, 
the term combination product per se does not exist yet in EU regulations. A container/closure (C/C) 
system, such as a PFS used in the packaging of a medicinal product for human use, is approved as part 
of the medicinal product application.
3.1	 High-Level Overview of Key System Functions
In order to have a comprehensive understanding of the PFS up to the end of its shelf life, it is neces-
sary to consider the ability of the PFS to provide an integral C/C system and to consider the interac-
tion of the related subsystems. These considerations should support the goal of treating the patient, 
obtaining market approval for a drug, and producing and supplying the drug delivery system. These 
three goals holistically comprise the key system functions of the PFS life cycle. 
3.1.1	 Key System Function: Treating the Patient
The ultimate purpose of the PFS subsystem is to contain the drug and administer the expected dose 
within the expected timeframe to the patient. Administration of the drug delivery system is achieved 
through various avenues, such as the following:
• self-administration with a plunger rod PFS or with additional device accessories
• healthcare provider administration with or without safety systems
Subsequently, to ensure proper administration of the drug, it is necessary to address multiple factors 
when treating the patient. Factors include the following:
• drug dose volume, viscosity, and temperature
• duration of injection
• targeted tissue and route of administration
• injection technique (pinch, angle, or region)
3.1.2	 Key System Function: Enabling Market Approval
The license holder must generate a comprehensive data package to ensure the suitability of the PFS 
for the intended use as prescribed by various regulatory authorities, such as the FDA and European 
Medicines Agency, and in accordance with applicable guidance documents to receive regulatory ap-
proval for the drug product (5).
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p14 (print p7) ---
7
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.1.3	 	Key System Function: Enabling Production and Distribution of the 
Delivery System
To produce and distribute the combined drug and delivery system, the system should be:
• compatible with the filling and inspection process, including the plunging process (e.g., Ventube™ 
or vacuum)
• compatible with the assembly process (plunger rod insertion, labeling, and secondary packaging)
• suitable for delivery to end users, including factors such as cold chain requirements, transport con-
ditions (shock, vibration, and pressure), and protection provided by the secondary and tertiary 
packaging (6–8) 
Table 3.1.3-1 below provides a high-level view of the interactions between subsystem components or 
stakeholders in relation to key system functions. 
Table 3.1.3-1		
Overview of interactions between key system functions & components in the PFS life cycle
Contributors and Stakeholders
Drug
PFS 
subsystem
Fill/Finish 
manufacturing 
equipment
Ancillary 
devices
Distribution
Patient
Key System Functions
Treating the Patient
Allows the transfer of the expected dose 
within the expected time frame in the 
targeted tissue
•
•
•
•
Contains drug 
•
•
•
Obtaining approval for drug
Adequately protect the dosage form
•
•
•
•
•
Composed of materials that are considered 
safe
•
•
•
Producing and delivering the drug delivery system
Be compatible with the filling and inspection 
process
•
•
•
Be compatible with the assembly process
•
•
•
Be suitable for delivery to end user
•
•
•
Notes on Contributors and Stakeholders
1.	 “Drug” refers to the medicine delivered in the PFS.
2.	 The PFS subsystem includes a packaged glass barrel with an attached needle that is protected with a needle shield and 
a plunger stopper.
3.	 “Manufacturing equipment” refers to the different machines used to process the subsystem to produce a full drug 
delivery system. The tasks of this equipment might include filling, stoppering, inspecting, or preparing secondary 
packaging for a product.
4.	 Ancillary devices include autoinjectors, safety devices, plunger rods, backstops, and other assistive devices to help the 
user inject the product.
5.	 “Distribution” refers to the outbound distribution channel from the license holder to the patient.
6.	 The patient is the person who ultimately receives the treatment.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p15 (print p8) ---
8
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
3.2	 Regulatory Considerations
The following sections provide considerations for manufacturer, supplier, instructions for healthcare 
provider, regulatory submission/eCTD content format, standards, and technical references applica-
ble to the PFS.
3.2.1	 Manufacturer Considerations
A drug product manufacturer must follow the marketing requirements in the country where the 
product is marketed. In the United States, a PFS is considered to be a combination product as defined 
by 21 CFR 3.2(e). These combination products are assigned to the lead center based on the PMOA 
(9,10). Both CDER and CBER provide guidance on PFS drugs and biologics.
Drug manufacturers must comply with cGMPs to ensure that the PFS product is safe and efficacious. 
Each constituent part of the PFS product is subject to its applicable cGMP requirements. The device 
constituent is subject to the quality system regulations for devices as described in 21 CFR 820, whereas 
the drug or biological product constituent is subject to the regulations under 21 CFR 211 (11,12). For 
biological products, the regulations described in 21 CFR 610 also apply (13). The cGMP requirements 
for combination products are codified under the final rule in 21 CFR 4, which provides guidelines on 
how to achieve compliance under one operating principle with additional provisions under another 
(14). These include, 1) demonstration of compliance with all cGMP regulations applicable to each 
of the constituent parts included in the combination product, or 2) demonstration of compliance 
with either the drug cGMP or the quality system regulations for devices, and with provisions that are 
not shared by both regulations. If the PFS product complies with the drug regulations, then it must 
also demonstrate compliance with requirements for management responsibility, design controls, pur-
chasing controls, and corrective and preventative actions in the quality system regulations. Similarly, 
regulations pertaining to testing and approval of C/C, expiry, stability, and reserve samples must be 
followed for drug/biologic product when the quality system regulations are followed. Once again, the 
requirements in 21 CFR 610 are applicable to biological products.
Products that incorporate a drug or administer a drug may be regulated in the European Union as 
either medical devices or medicinal products, depending on the principal intended function of the 
product and the method by which this function is achieved. PFSs are categorized as devices for admin-
istering a medicinal product when the device and the medicinal product form a single integral prod-
uct designed for exclusive use in the given combination, and the device is not reusable or refillable. 
These products are covered by the regulations for medicinal products, such as Directive 2001/83/
EC (15). However, relevant essential requirements in Annex 1 of Medical Devices Directive (MDD) 
93/42/EEC apply to the safety and performance-related features of the device. Guidelines related to 
drug delivery products regulated as medicinal products, such as PFSs, are provided in medical devices 
guidance document MEDDEV 2.1/3, Revision 3 (16,17). 
Following standards like ISO 13485, Medical Devices – Quality Management Systems – Requirements 
for Regulatory Purposes, and ISO 14971, Medical Devices –Application of Risk Management to Medi-
cal Devices (18,19) will allow companies to demonstrate compliance with Annex 1 of the MDD.
3.2.2	 Supplier Considerations for Filing
Suppliers of PFS components can include information related to the manufacturing of the syringe, 
needle, and accessory components in the drug master file (DMF) for applications submitted to the 
FDA in the United States. The manufacturer’s supplier agreement should define the roles and re-
sponsibilities of each party. In other countries, such information may be submitted in the marketing 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p16 (print p9) ---
9
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
application dossier to the health authorities. Additionally, filing requirements for different regulatory 
agency jurisdictions may vary, and applicants should be aware of the proper procedures for the in-
tended market.
Elements to be included in the DMF include an overall description of the C/C system, packaging 
component diagram, dimensional specifications, and information on the manufacturing and process-
ing facility (washing, siliconization, sterilization, and environmental controls), component suppliers 
[of glass barrels, ceramic paint, plunger stoppers, needles, silicone, needle adhesive, needle shields, 
plunger rods, flange extenders, or backstops], suitability (protection from light, compatibility, and 
sterility), and component safety (description of component qualification). The quality controls imple-
mented during syringe barrel manufacture, lubrication, needle assembly, sterilization, and transport 
are essential for assessment of the information supplied in the DMF. In addition, the inspection of 
incoming materials or components, in-process inspection, and final release procedures provide vital 
information on the quality of the components. The DMF should include information on the stability 
of syringe components without any product, and a list of regulatory requirements fulfilled for the 
components and revalidation plan. The DMF and the supply agreement should also include a mecha-
nism for communication of quality issues and customer notification.
Elastomeric closure components for PFS systems (e.g., tip caps and plunger stoppers) must meet cur-
rent U.S. and European regulatory requirements for compendial compliance. Component suppliers 
should ensure that adequate information is provided to the health authorities for proper review of 
sponsors’ drug applications, including elastomer formulation ingredients and appropriate certifica-
tions (e.g., BSE/TSE, dry natural rubber latex, and animal-derived raw materials), compendial testing 
results for physicochemical properties, and biological reactivity assessment (21–23). In the United 
States, suppliers typically elect to compile this information in a Type III DMF.
In some instances, post-processing of elastomeric components (e.g., washing or sterilization) may be 
performed by a third party, such as the component supplier. In such cases, adequate supporting data 
should be made available to enable proper agency review of these processes. This information can be 
contained within a Type V DMF in the United States and should include supporting information on 
process validation, process controls, testing, and packaging qualification (for sterilization processes).
As DMF owners, suppliers can provide sponsors with letters of authorization to applicable DMFs for 
use in sponsor applications. Per 21 CFR 314.420(c), suppliers in the United States are required to notify 
their letter of authorization holders when significant changes are made to the DMFs. Suppliers should 
also provide further support to sponsor applications by responding to agency questions regarding in-
formation in their DMFs in the United States. Refer to 21 CFR 4 for further guidance on compliance 
with design control expectations.
3.2.3	 Healthcare Provider Instruction for use of PFSs
The license holder must provide healthcare providers with instructions for use and disposal of PFSs. 
Needlestick injuries have the potential to expose PSF users, such as healthcare providers, to blood-
borne pathogens. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines describe the requirements and practices in the United 
States to prevent such injuries (24,25). The disposal requirements for PFSs may vary between coun-
tries, and suggested storage conditions for the PFSs should be followed.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p17 (print p10) ---
10
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
3.2.4	 Regulatory Submission Content for PFS Combination Products
In the United States, the marketing application for PFS combination products could be a new drug ap-
plication (NDA), or a biologic license application (BLA), depending on whether the product is defined 
as a drug or biologic. Proprietary information about the device can be submitted in a master file and 
in letters of authorization to the master file provided in the application. Important considerations for 
evaluating human factors affecting the use of the PFSs include the intended patient population for the 
proposed indication and the condition of use, and whether the PFS is self-administered or administered 
by a healthcare provider. (Note: Product-specific submission requirements are not discussed here. Only 
elements that are important in the context of a combination product are presented in this section.)
The application should contain a description of the dosage form, composition, primary C/C system, 
and any ancillary component/plunger rod information that may be attached during packaging and la-
beling. The manufacturing and processing facility information should be included. The description of 
all primary packaging components (syringe barrel with staked needle, adhesive used to bond the needle 
to the glass tip of the barrel, needle shield, and plunger stopper) should include drawings, specifications, 
quality details, and supplier information. A description of the manufacturing process, including lubrica-
tion of the primary packaging components and material/components inspection, in-process controls, 
and release operations should be included in the supplier’s DMF. In addition, if syringe markings and fill 
lines are present, additional details on the validation of the marking process are required; these details 
may be included in the application or by reference to the supplier’s DMF. A summary containing details 
of the sterilization method and validation of the sterilization process providing a sterility assurance level 
of 10-6 should be included. The integrity and compatibility of the C/C system should be evaluated. The 
potential for leachables and particulates due to interaction of the syringe components with the product 
should be assessed, the impact of shipping on the C/C system should also be assessed.
PFSs have the potential to introduce new impurities or components, such as adhesive, tungsten, and 
silicone, which can impact product quality. The impact of such components should be carefully as-
sessed. Syringe barrels and plunger stoppers are typically siliconized for use in PFS applications. A thor-
ough assessment of the impact of component variability on product quality and stability is performed, 
but the approach is very company specific depending on the manufacturing techniques, component 
selection, and drug solution formulation. In any case, stability data to demonstrate that the commercial 
C/C system does not affect product stability is required. The effects of moisture and light are often 
addressed as part of stability testing. Temperature is a general concern given that most protein drugs 
are quite labile. Moisture is a concern for lyophilized dosage forms in syringes (or vials). The secondary 
packing description should clearly explain how the syringe is protected during transport.
The final finished product after filling and assembling should be tested for performance. Testing of the 
PFS includes testing of delivered (extractable) volume, break-loose and glide forces, and CCI. In ad-
dition, a range of physicochemical and microbiological parameters should be tested. Draft guidance 
was issued by the FDA in January 2013 on the type of marketing submission that may be required for 
post-approval changes to a combination product in the United States as defined in 21 CFR 3.2(e) (26).
In Europe, the marketing application could be a medicinal product application. The marketing ap-
plication dossier includes information related to the PFS.
At the time of this writing, the FDA and European Commission have not published guidance on the 
electronic version of the common technical document (CTD) for devices that are part of a combination 
product. A template for ICH CTD Module 3 is attached (refer to Appendix I) as a guide for providing in-
formation about a drug delivery device that is part of a combination product in a BLA/NDA. An example 
of a completed CTD Module 3 of a combination product application is provided in Appendix II.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p18 (print p11) ---
11
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.2.5	 Standards and Technical References Applicable to PFS
A C/C system (constituent parts of a combination product), such as a PFS used in the packaging of a 
human drug or biologic, is approved as part of the drug application. A successful licensure application 
requires multiple tests and studies according to various industrial and compendial standards to dem-
onstrate the suitability of the selected C/C system, which can be validated for its intended use based 
on the target product profile. Suitability is defined in the United States to cover four aspects: protec-
tion, safety, compatibility, and performance, according to the FDA (12). Different regulatory bodies 
may recognize different standards. Appendix III lists the standards, guidance, compendial methods, 
and technical reports to assist with the development of a PFS combination product. The FDA rec-
ognizes consensus standards, and EU harmonized standards are available online (16,27). The various 
testing standards help ensure regulatory compliance. Other PDA technical reports provide useful 
information related to sterilization, CCI test methods, and glass defects (28–33).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
