--- PDF p8 (print p1) ---
1
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Since the mid-2000’s, a large number of subcutaneously injected biotechnology drug products have 
been packaged in prefilled syringes (PFSs) because of significant benefits compared to vials or am-
pules. PFSs reduce medical dosing errors and the risk of microbial contamination by decreasing the 
number of necessary manipulations prior to injection, and they improve compliance due to ease of 
use. In addition to the patient benefits, PFSs often have lower overfill regulatory requirements than 
vials, thereby reducing product waste.
1.1	 Purpose/Scope
The purpose of this technical report is to present a discussion of requirements for the 1 mL long glass 
PFS for biotechnology applications (Figure 1.1-1). Topics covered are material selection and evalu-
ation for suitability, syringe preparation and handling (including human factors), and drug product 
compatibility (physical and chemical) with the syringe materials and mode of delivery. Plastic syringes 
and ancillary devices, such as autoinjectors, are not within scope. 
The terms “end user,” “customer,” and “user” are used interchangeably throughout this report. How-
ever, the definitions of these terms change according to the topic under discussion as the report 
progresses through the product life cycle of the PFS. For example, during development, the end user 
or target population may be the target patient, while the customer or user during production and 
delivery may be the supplier or manufacturer. Additionally, while this technical report provides more 
specific information related to the U.S. and European regions, requirements for different regulatory 
agency jurisdictions may vary, and applicants and manufacturers should be aware of the proper quali-
fication and validation expectations for the intended market.
While the focus of this report is on 1 mL long glass PFSs for biotechnology (large molecule) drug 
products, the concepts presented may be applied to other products and applications (e.g., small mol-
ecule drug products, luer, luer-lock, and plastic syringes). Every attempt has been made to provide 
comprehensive content, but some particular techniques and technologies may not be included. 
The task force that prepared this report consisted of members representing global companies and rep-
resentatives from regulatory bodies to ensure a consensus on the methods, terminology, and practices 
described. Experts in PFSs and PFS manufacturing performed technical reviews.
The information in this technical report appears in the general order of operations for developing and 
manufacturing 1 mL long glass PFSs. Throughout the report, the chevron diagram (below) serves as 
a guide for the reader and reflects the focus of each chapter.
The glossary contains a list of definitions and acronyms used in this report. When available, same or 
similar definitions to those included in FDA or ICH guidelines are used.
1.0  Introduction
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p9 (print p2) ---
2
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Figure 1.1-1	 Schematic drawing of a PFS
A typical 1 mL long staked needle syringe consists of a Type I borosilicate glass barrel. For a staked 
needle syringe, a stainless-steel needle is affixed to the syringe cone with adhesive, and the needle is 
embedded in an elastomeric needle shield. The inside of the syringe is siliconized to allow the plunger 
to be easily depressed during administration of the injectable (1,2).
Thumb pad
Plunger rod
Finger flange
Barrel
Cone
Needle
Needle shield
Shoulder
Drug solution 
for injection
Plunger stopper
Plunger
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
