--- PDF p38 (print p31) ---
31
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.6	 Data Evaluation
For extractables studies, a semiquantitative evaluation of substances compared to suitable internal 
reference substances or relative response factors is considered appropriate. Even so, for each analyti-
cal technique, method suitability tests should be conducted during the analysis using a suitable mix 
of test substances (e.g., stabilizers, antioxidants, filling materials, and element standards). Even for 
screening studies, an analysis of appropriate spiking samples is recommended to confirm method 
performance in the given sample matrix. 
For evaluation of leachable substances, (e.g., long-term exposure studies), methods should be devel-
oped and validated according to suitable guidelines or compendia, such as ICH Q2 (R1) (58). The 
current recommendation is to pay particular attention to product and method interference, especially 
during leachable determinations. 
Additional leachable substances may also be identified that were not detected during extractables stud-
ies. This may be due to an interaction of leached substances with components of the pharmaceutical 
matrix (e.g., oxidation/reduction processes, degradation, or formation of drug-extractable complex-
es). The structure elucidation of such interaction products can sometimes be difficult. Since the com-
pound structure of these substances is sometimes difficult to identify, a threshold approach (Section 
5.7) should be considered to balance resource requirements in a risk-based approach to compound 
identification. The use of mass spectrometry (MS) instrumentation with high resolution, different 
ionization techniques (e.g., chemical or electrospray ionization), or capability to perform multiple 
MS experiments is sometimes helpful for identification challenges. For example, signals with low mo-
lecular masses are often connected to oxidation of polymer additives, such as antioxidants [e.g., BHT 
or Tris (2,4-di-tert-butylphenyl) phosphite]. In some cases, adequate analytical reference materials for 
substances like these are not commercially available. If reference materials are unavailable, then con-
sider using a component with a similar structure (e.g., original antioxidant) or additional breakdown 
products to quantify the leachable substances. If it is not possible to identify the compound, then it 
is suggested to report MS spectra or other important facts, such as UV/visible spectrometry data (if 
available). In addition, it is possible to report the chemical substance class of an unknown signal to the 
extent possible through MS interpretation. A classification of extracted compounds can be proposed 
based on the level of knowledge collected from the analytical work; compounds can be classified as 
unknown, tentative, or confirmed structures.
Once leachable substances are identified and quantified, the impact of the leachable substance(s) on 
the drug molecule must be evaluated. This can be done on an overall basis through long-term stabil-
ity studies using the PFS components as they are intended to be used. Furthermore, it is possible for 
leachable substances to interact with the drug molecules in such a way as to cause the drug molecules 
to oxidize, aggregate, or even form drug-leachable adducts, all of which have the potential to cause 
an immunogenic response (59). 
5.7	 Threshold Evaluation
In 2006, the Product Quality Research Institute (PQRI) working group developed the threshold con-
cept for safety considerations of extractables and leachable compounds for the primary packaging 
of orally inhaled and nasal drug products (60, 61). Subsequently, a new PQRI working group, the 
Parenteral and Ophthalmic Drug Products (PODP) Leachables and Extractables Working Group was 
formed to extrapolate these conclusions to the packaging/delivery systems of parenteral and oph-
thalmic drug product applications. Although the PQRI-PODP toxicology team’s recommendations 
have not yet been finalized, the group’s intermediate recommendations were published in the PDA 
Journal of  Pharmaceutical Science and Technology (62).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p39 (print p32) ---
32
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
The potential approach for the threshold evaluation of the extractables and leachable evaluation for 
a PFS system (Appendix IV) is based on the preliminary conclusions of the PQRI-PODP team (62). 
However, the following should not be construed as an endorsement by regulatory agencies, and each 
manufacturer must apply a sound scientific approach (including expertise from a toxicologist) to eval-
uate leachables in their products to ensure appropriate thresholds are established prior to seeking 
regulatory approval.
There are two different levels in which to use the threshold approach to evaluate the safety qualifica-
tion of pharmaceutical containers and closures (61). First, a threshold evaluation of the analytical re-
sults of a controlled extraction study will facilitate the safety qualification of the constituent parts of 
the C/C system. Extractables studies on different parts of a PFS often result in long lists of impurities 
present in a material used in the manufacture of a packaging component. The identification status 
of a compound can range from confirmed identity with a high level of confidence to only tentative 
identification and some remaining unknowns. Applying the threshold approach to the results of a 
controlled extraction study also helps determine the subsequent steps to take in the leachable study 
(e.g., target leachables to study, additional identification efforts to make, and concentration ranges to 
consider when performing quantitative leachable studies).
Second, applying the threshold approach to the results of a leachable study could substantially reduce 
the level of effort in the leachable risk evaluation; leachable compounds present at less than their 
respective thresholds may not require any further individual safety assessment. Only the leachable 
compounds present at a concentration level that is higher than their respective threshold may need to 
be considered for further chemical and risk assessment.
For compounds that have been identified, the PQRI-PODP has defined in its preliminary conclusions 
three different classes of compounds with three different associated threshold levels outlined in Ap-
pendix IV (62). These three classes of compounds can be converted into analytical evaluation thresh-
olds (AETs) that allow direct assessment of analytical results in relation to their respective toxicologi-
cal thresholds. The AET is the threshold at or above which a particular extractable and/or leachable 
should be identified, quantified, and reported for further toxicological assessment (63).
5.8	 Conclusion
Extractable and leachable substances in the C/C system must be evaluated to provide an acceptable 
level of safety to the patient. This can be determined once the leachable substances have been identi-
fied and quantified, the safety of the compounds has been established, and the impact on drug prod-
uct quality and safety has been evaluated (via regular stability studies). If it is determined that lower 
levels of leachable substances are required, then the drug company may ask its vendor for another 
component or work with the vendor to develop a process that has decreased levels of the undesir-
able leachable substance. It must be noted, however, that a change in a component or manufacturing 
process will necessitate additional assessments to ensure that the desired outcome (i.e., decreased 
quantities of leachable substances or of a particular substance) has been achieved. When materials or 
processes are changed, it is necessary to ensure that no additional, unintended leachable substances 
have been introduced because of that change.
Leachables testing should be conducted along with drug product stability testing. Periodic review 
of the extractables/leachables package is suggested due to changes in manufacturing processes and 
analytical technology. The continued process validation concept may be integrated into this approach 
and aligned with applicable regulatory guidance.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p40 (print p33) ---
33
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The goal of this section was to provide a description of how the extractables and leachables profile 
can be established for a PFS, plunger stopper, needle shield, and assembled PFS syringe device. This 
effort is required for a drug company to demonstrate the appropriate controls and knowledge of 
the C/C system expected by regulatory agencies. Even after the initial evaluation of the extractable 
and leachable substances profile has been completed, the drug company must maintain a system of 
change controls with the component vendor and drug product manufacturing site to ensure that all 
changes to the manufacturing and/or processing steps are evaluated for their potential to affect the 
extractable and leachable substances.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
