--- PDF p44 (print p37) ---
37
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The staked needle used in a PFS for a biotechnology product is made from AISI 304 or AISI 304L 
stainless steel and covered with a needle shield (Figure 7.0-1). The needle is manufactured from an 
elongated stainless steel tube consistent with applicable requirements in ISO 7864, Sterile Hypoder-
mic Needles for Single Use, ISO 11608-2, Needle-Based Injection Systems for Medical Use—Require-
ments and Test Methods, and ISO 9626, Stainless Steel Needle Tubing for the Manufacture of Medical 
Devices (66–68). The tip is made by grinding the tube, and the bevels are made by changing the angles 
of the needle to the equipment. The bevel is the slanted surface of the needle tip and can have varying 
numbers and angularities of tip facets (Figure 7. 1.1-1). The needle tip is beveled to create a sharp, 
pointed tip, which facilitates skin penetration.
The bonding of the needles in the finished syringe barrels is performed in suitable assembling au-
tomats. The needles are affixed by a UV-cured adhesive.
Figure 7.0-1	 Syringe component diagram
Factors to consider when selecting a needle for a 1 mL long PFS include: 
• minimizing injection site experiences or reactions (ISEs)
• needle material compatibility with drug product
These factors are the topic of discussion for this section of the report.
7.1	 Minimizing Injection Site Experiences
Injection site experiences (ISEs) are characterized by pain, redness, or inflammation, and can affect 
the patient’s adherence to a treatment regimen. As a result, many studies have focused on evaluating 
needle designs that could decrease ISEs.
Several parameters may play a role in ISEs, including: 
• needle geometry
• needle lubrication 
• needle surface smoothness 
• needle defects
Sections 7.1.1, 7.1.2, and 7.1.3 provide a discussion of these parameters. 
7.0  Needle Requirements
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Needle Shield
Silicone Oil 
(outside)
Silicone Oil 
(inside)
Needle
Adhesive
Syringe 
Barrel
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p45 (print p38) ---
38
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
7.1.1	 Needle Geometry
Injection needles are identified by their bevel, outer diameter or gauge, and length. Needles using thin-
walled technology where the inner diameter of the needles is larger than that of standard needles are 
also available. This technology is included in ISO 11608-2 and allows patients to use smaller-diameter 
needles without a negative impact on flow rate, speed of injection, or penetration force (67, 69).
Multiple studies in models and patients have shown a positive relationship between ISE, needle gauge 
and bevel, as well as a positive relationship between penetration force and pain (70–73).
Needles for 1 mL long PFSs typically have a three- or five-bevel tip (Figure 7.1.1-1). Various studies 
have compared the designs of three- and five-bevel needles.
Figure 7.1.1-1	
Needles with Three- or Five-Bevel Tips
A number of factors determine needle diameter and length, including desired penetration length 
(route of administration), drug product formulation characteristics (e.g., pH and viscosity), and pa-
tient population. ISO 7864 and ISO 9626 cover needle dimensions and materials (66, 68). The dimen-
sions of most needles used for 1 mL long PFSs are 27G 1/2 inch and 29G 1/2 inch.
The abbreviations “27G” and “29G” describe the outer diameter of the needle. For example, a 27G 
needle has a nominal outside diameter of 0.40 mm, whereas a 29G needle has a nominal outside di-
ameter of 0.33 mm. The outer diameter does not indicate the inside diameter of the needle (66, 68).
In cases where the manufacturer selects a needle with dimensions that deviate from ISO standards to 
improve product performance, the manufacturer should demonstrate the needle’s fitness for its in-
tended use through design control activities (74). The manufacturer should also identify designs that 
deviate from ISO standards in product designation and customer technical documentation.
The 1/2 inch in the needle descriptor refers to the exposed needle length or the part of the needle out-
side the needle channel (Figure 7.1.1-2). Half-inch-long needles are commonly used for subcutaneous 
application. However, needles of other lengths may also be available.
Heel
Point
Heel
Point
Junction 
Heel: Bevel 1 (primary bevel); 
Point: Bevel 2 and 3
Heel: Bevel 1 (primary bevel); 
Point: Bevel 2 and 3 
Junction: Bevels 4 and 5
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p46 (print p39) ---
39
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Figure 7.1.1-2	
Exposed Portion of Needle
Needle diameter and length may affect the injectability (ability to inject the product) of the syringe; 
injectability is mainly characterized by the time, pressure, and force required for completion of an 
injection at a constant flow (75).
A needle with a smaller outside diameter may require lower penetration force. Such a needle, how-
ever, may also result in longer injection times and higher extrusion forces. Therefore, the inner diam-
eter of a needle or its wall thickness is a factor for consideration. Currently, some 27G needles have 
a larger inside diameter. A 27G normal-walled needle has a nominal inside diameter of 0.20 mm; a 
27G thin-walled needle has a nominal inside diameter of 0.26 mm. Therefore, the inside diameter of 
a 27G thin-walled needle is 30% larger than that of a 27G normal-walled needle. In a study that com-
pared pen needles of similar outer diameters but different inner diameters, a 49% reduction in flow 
resistance was observed with the needles that had larger inner diameters (76).
The drug product formulation, including volume and viscosity, also becomes critical in selecting nee-
dle diameter and length to minimize ISE risk (Figure 7.1.1-3). For the rapid delivery of large volumes 
or high-viscosity products, larger needles may be required or the injection time may increase if a 
small-diameter needle is chosen. If the needle’s outer diameter is increased to decrease injection time 
and force, then ISE risk could increase.
Figure 7.1.1-3	
Inner diameters of various needle gauges
Using first principles of engineering, a model has been developed to predict the potential impact of 
critical parameters, such as needle length and inner diameter, on extrusion force or injection time 
(76). Based on the Hagen-Poiseuille equation, the authors of this model predicted that the injection 
forces would decrease as the inside radius of the needle increased. The model has been evaluated 
using different syringe types and vendors by measuring the pressure drop for a liquid flowing across 
the syringe barrel and the needle at a constant rate to determine the impact of several parameters on 
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
23G TW
27G TW
27G NW
29G TW
29G NW
Reference: ISO 9626:1991/Amd. 1:2001
23G NW
25/26G TW
25/26G NW
Inner Diameter (minimum)
Comparable Needle IDs
23G NW ≈ 25G or 26G TW
25G or 26G NW ≈ 27G TW
27G NW ≈ 29G TW
Inner Diameter (mm)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p47 (print p40) ---
40
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
injectability. The researchers found that the inner diameters of the needles can greatly affect injection 
times and forces.
Thin-walled technology may be used to maintain the functionality of the needle with respect to flow 
rate, speed of injection, and the force applied on the syringe and drug solution (69). When design-
ing a needle, a balance must be achieved between the drug product formulation, desired penetration 
length, injection time, and needle dimensions to minimize ISE risk and increase patient physical com-
fort and adherence to the treatment.
7.1.2	 Needle Lubrication
Staked needles are treated to reduce penetration force during insertion. This treatment takes place 
after washing and immediately prior to mounting of the needle shield. Penetration force may be as-
sessed following the requirements of Deutsches Institut für Normung (DIN) 13097-4 (66, 68).
The typical lubricant is medical-grade silicone oil with a viscosity of 12,500 cSt. Applying the silicone 
occurs by wiping the needle with a sponge carrying silicone oil before assembling the rubber needle 
shield. The needle tip may pierce the needle shield during the process resulting in removal of silicone 
oil from the needle tip or compromising CCI. Removal of the silicone from the needle tip can be 
mitigated with the use of alternative silicone formulations and application methods (i.e., humidity-
cured and heat-cured formulations). Proper design of the components is required to avoid breaches 
in CCI. Intelligent (advanced) needle-shield systems in which the needle tip is free inside the needle 
shield are available.
For bulk syringes, the pharmaceutical company or the contract filler applies the silicone to the needles 
(Section 10.0). Needles are attached to the barrel prior to siliconization and checked for plugs or 
clogs. For presterilized syringes, the syringe manufacturer applies the silicone to the needles after the 
assembled syringes are washed and before the needle shield is mounted onto the syringe. An evalua-
tion to ensure that lubrication is present and effective is necessary. Syringes are then packed into nests 
and tubs, and subjected to sterilization.
7.1.3	 Needle Defects
Typical needle defects are axial deviations (from the longitudinal axis of the syringe), damage or dull-
ing at the tip, and clogs. If the needle has an axial deviation and is therefore positioned at an angle in 
the needle shield, then there is a risk of formation of rubber particles from the needle shield (frag-
mentation). In the worst case, the needle penetrates the needle shield sideways resulting in a loss of 
sterility of the entire system. Damage to needle tips (so-called “hooks”), dull needle tips, and burs can 
result in painful injections (Figure 7.1.3-1).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p48 (print p41) ---
41
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Figure 7.1.3-1	
Scanning electron micrograph of a needle hook
Needle polishing is an important step in needle manufacturing because it removes burs generated 
during cutting and grinding.
The needle-shield material may be important in the protection of the needle by decreasing the likeli-
hood of needle bending (69). The creation of a “hook” due to needle bending is a known defect and 
can increase ISE risk.
Section 14.3 provides a discussion on clogs—another defect caused by several factors. This type of 
defect affects the injectability of the drug product.
The construction material of the needle shield—whether rigid or nonrigid—should be evaluated dur-
ing needle design. Additional factors to consider should include the smoothness of the needle and any 
possible blockage of the needle. Needle, needle shield, and syringe manufacturers must ensure that 
processes are in place to control the potential for defects (Section 9.2). 
7.2	 Material Compatibility with Drug Products
There are several needle-related compounds that can affect the purity, efficacy, and safety of the drug 
product as discussed in Section 5.0. These compounds include metal ions, silicone oil, the adhesive 
used to connect the staked needle to the barrel, and tungsten (W salts residues). The compatibility 
between these compounds and the drug product is assessed during long-term stability studies.
7.3	 Conclusion
There are multiple factors to consider when selecting a needle for a 1 mL long PFS, including mini-
mizing ISE risk to increase patient comfort based on the desired penetration length, injection time, 
injection force required, and compatibility with the drug product. A careful balance between all of 
these factors should be evaluated for each drug application.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
