87
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
14.0  Drug Product Compatibility
This section focuses on the compatibility of a drug product with the various syringe components 
discussed in the previous sections, and the possible impact of surface interactions and stresses on drug 
product stability due to drug product manufacturing, shipping, storage, and handling.
14.1	Risk Assessment
Risk assessments are recommended to determine the sensitivity of the protein to various stress con-
ditions and interfaces. It is important during the risk assessment to understand the molecular char-
acteristics, including any known degradation pathways, to leverage this information during the risk 
assessment.
A risk assessment typically uses a risk-based approach involving FMEA to determine the criticality of 
process parameters and their effects on critical quality attributes, quality attributes, or manufacturing 
attributes. In the area of compatibility, an assessment of all interfaces of the product during manufac-
turing, and ultimately filling in the PFS, must be performed to determine their impact on the product. 
Any risk-mitigation activities applied must minimize the risk to the product. The risks are identified, 
scored, and characterized as being high, medium, or low to determine the mitigation strategy. The 
risk assessment makes it possible to obtain a complete understanding of the processes that the prod-
uct will be subjected to, and helps to determine any incompatibilities that may result from the drug 
product manufacturing process.
The risk assessment should involve members of the research and development unit, and the manu-
facturing unit to ensure the characteristics of the product and manufacturing process are understood. 
Once actions that are associated with risk-mitigation activities are complete, the FMEA is reevaluated, 
rescored, and relevant documents are updated accordingly. Table 14.1-1 presents only an illustrative 
example of the output of a risk assessment exercise, including process steps, parameters, risk ratio-
nale, criticality based on scoring, and recommended actions. For further information on conducting 
formal risk assessments, refer to PDA Technical Report No. 54: Implementation of  Quality Risk Manage-
ment for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations (36).
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
88
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Table 14.1-1	 Example of Risk Assessment Output
Process 
Step
Process Parameter
Rationale
Criticality
Action
Filter into 
Filling 
System
Filter specification
Noncompatibility of filter 
with formulation that could 
affect the product
High
Use adequate filter and 
conduct bacterial retention 
study over a designated 
time and range integrity 
Filling/ 
Stoppering
Residual vapor 
hydrogen peroxide 
(VHP) concentration
Possibility that residual VHP 
in stopper bowl, chutes, 
etc., will affect product; 
Demonstrated effect on 
product at specified levels
High
Monitor residual levels of 
VHP after the cycle and 
the profile of concentra-
tion due to air changes
Filter into 
Filling 
System
Filter contact time
Restricted time limit from 
bacterial retention study
Medium
Bacterial retention study 
over a designated time 
range
Filling
Fill speed
Need to ensure that 
appropriate filling speed range 
is defined for the product to 
prevent product impact
Medium
Shear level assessment of 
product for filling process
Filling
UV light exposure 
level from LPP
Possible effect on product of 
exposure to UV light 
Low
Light level reading during 
LPP cycle
Stoppering 
Stoppering speed
Possible effect on product 
and process of speed of 
stoppering 
Low
Assessment of stoppering 
speed during operational 
qualification runs on isolator
Inspection
Syringe 
specification
Possible effect on product of 
specification of the product 
contact parts 
Low
Confirmation that syringe 
is not damaged during 
loading and unloading from 
inspection equipment
14.2	Key Product and Manufacturing Attributes
14.2.1	Stability Studies
Stability studies that monitor the product in the syringe are critical to understanding the impact of the 
PFS on product characteristics. The stability studies should include studies in the expected/recom-
mended storage conditions, as well as in stress temperatures to assess thermal stability in support of 
the intended usage and excursions. For example, if the recommended storage temperature is 2–8°C, 
a study may evaluate the effects of an accelerated temperature of 25°C or 30°C (depending on the 
stability of the drug product) and stress storage condition of 30° or 40°C. Care should be taken to 
choose a stress temperature based on the specific properties (e.g., melting temperature) of the prod-
uct. Manufacturers should monitor photostability according to ICH guidelines to determine the ef-
fects during exposure to light (106). 
Other studies to consider are discussed in Section 14.8, including freeze and thaw cycling to under-
stand the impact on protein stability in case of shipping excursions; CCI and shipping simulations via 
shear studies; or actual transit trials depending on the clinical phase of the product. In addition, stud-
ies to evaluate silicone and tungsten may be useful as discussed in Section 14.5. Manufacturers should 
also evaluate exposure to vapor hydrogen peroxide or other sterilizing agents used prior to filling the 
syringes. Finally, if the syringe will be used in conjunction with a device, the final drug product pre-
sentation can include stability studies as suggested by ICH Q1A(R2), Stability Testing of New Drug 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
89
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Substances and Products (107). Table 14.2.1-1 presents an outline of the stability studies that may be 
used to assess a typical PFS program. 
Table 14.2.1-1	
Outline of Typical Stability Studies Used to Assess PFSs
Study 
Purpose
Considerations
Product Compatibility
Assess impact of product in 
siliconized PFS
If siliconization is an issue, process optimization 
should be considered. Options without silicone, 
such as polymer syringes, may also be considered 
if process optimization does not adequately address 
compatibility issues.
Comparability
Compare stability to previous 
drug product presentation in 
vials, if available
Leveraging of drug product data in vials may result 
in an advantage for the shelf-life setting if compara-
bility of dosage forms can be established.
Long-Term Stability
Assess impact of product 
when stored at recommended 
temperature and in accelerated 
and stress conditions over time
The impact on the product and the ability of the 
syringe to deliver the product after stability test-
ing must be assessed. Potential problems should 
be noted (e.g., needle clogging, changes in forces). 
Long-term stability tests should include the volumes 
used in clinical studies. May include a bracketing 
approach if the exact dose is not known at the time 
of the study (58).
Freezing and Thawing
Assess impact of freezing and 
thawing on product when it is 
stored in PFS
After the cycling, assuming that the syringes main-
tain stability, stability testing of the syringes should 
be considered to assess any reductions in the ex-
pected stability based on the initial freeze/thaw cy-
cling of the product in the PFS.
Shear 
Assess impact of shear on 
product in PFS
Shear may be introduced during the drug product 
manufacturing process and subsequent distribution 
steps. Shear impact may be different in benchtop 
testing and commercial processes. 
Silicone Sensitivity
Assess impact of silicone 
levels on product
A PFS with appropriate control of silicone levels 
must be chosen.
Tungsten Sensitivity
Assess impact of tungsten on 
product
Select a PFS with minimal tungsten that is compat-
ible with the drug product
Photostability
Required as per ICH guidelines 
(107)
Provide secondary packaging and include labelling 
text. Additional studies might be required in typical 
light conditions if photostability proves to be detri-
mental to the product.
Device Stability
Required as per ICH guidelines
This study determines whether an ancillary device 
will be used and must take into account the stability 
of the device when it is stored in nonrecommended 
conditions.
14.2.2	Analysis of Stability
Analysis of stability should include physical, biochemical, and potency/activity measures as outlined 
in Table 14.2.2-1. The tests in the table are examples and include characterization assays, which are 
not tested for each batch. Characterization can be conducted only on selected batches until sufficient 
knowledge for this parameter is obtained. Regulatory agencies have requested to consider particulate 
analysis as an additional assessment of the stability of the drug product (82,108).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
90
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Table 14.2.2-1	
Stability analysis for PFS contents
Category
Parameter
Test Methods Examples
Physical
Appearance/Particulates 
Light obscuration, microflow imaging
Viscosity
Cone or plate viscometer/rheometer, Force measurement
Biochemical
Aggregation
Size exclusion chromatography, dynamic light scattering
Deamidation/Oxidation
Reverse-phase HPLC, capillary isoelectric focusing gel, peptide 
mapping
Conformation 
Fluorescence, circular dichroism (CD)
Potency/Activity
Biacore, ELISA, cell-based assays
During all analyses, manufacturers must give special consideration to the presence of the silicone 
coating in glass PFSs and the potential for the product to interact with the silicone, as well as the 
movement of the silicone over time or when the product is delivered (109; 110). Beyond having a 
direct product impact, the presence of the silicone affects the analytical techniques employed. For 
particulate analysis in particular, silicone must be distinguishable from other product-related particles 
as mentioned in Section 10.8 (108). 
Depending on the fill volume of the syringe, there may be challenges for the analysis of the volumes 
required for visual inspection and particulate testing according to USP <788>, Particulate Matter in 
Injections. Manufacturers and suppliers commonly use small amounts of tungsten in the tips of glass 
PFSs with staked needles. The presence of tungsten has been shown to be incompatible with some 
products. This should be a consideration when regarding product quality. Refer to Section 14.6.2.1 
(81) for further discussion.
14.2.2.1	Force Measurements
The ability to measure the forces required to inject the drug product by means of the PFS is an im-
portant component of the stability testing process. This parameter may have an impact on a patient’s 
ability to self-inject, or a healthcare provider’s ability to use the product, as well as the reliability of 
the injection if the delivery is via a device. Monitoring the forces for delivery initially upon release is 
important. It is equally as important to monitor the forces for delivery over the intended shelf life of 
the drug product. This is to confirm that the potential physical changes in the drug product or in the 
silicone distribution in the syringe do not affect the ability of the PFS (or of the PFS in conjunction 
with a device) to deliver the required dose to the patient. The siliconization of the PFS, the properties 
of the drug product, and the needle gauge and its variability affect the forces required for delivery of 
the drug product. All of these issues should be a consideration when evaluating the force measure-
ments for the drug product. Finally, syringeability, which measures the force required for delivery 
at a given injection rate via a needle of a predetermined gauge and length, will enable the optimal 
injection conditions to be determined for the drug product, taking into account the product’s physical 
properties, flow rate, injection force, and needle gauge (111–114).
14.2.2.2	Special Considerations: the Effect of Silicone on Analytical Testing, including 
Particle Analysis
To evaluate the effect of silicone on analytical testing and particle analysis (including light obscuration and 
other orthogonal analytical techniques), pooling practices are often required to overcome the challenges 
of low volumes per container. In addition to having a potential impact on drug product stability, the pres-
ence of silicone has a significant impact on particulate analysis via light obscuration and other orthogonal 
techniques used for particulate testing, such as microflow imaging. The amount of silicone oil droplets 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
91
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
generated is dependent on the sampling method (removal from the barrel or injection via a needle) used 
to obtain the sample from the PFS for analysis. As a result, the sampling method that is used for the drug 
product should be evaluated and consistently used to analyze effectively the results of the particulate anal-
ysis. In addition, degassing and/or dilution may be needed to assist in providing consistent results. USP 
<788> and European Pharmacopeia, Section 2.9.19 require a volume of at least 25 mL, which is challeng-
ing to obtain when the volume in a PFS is generally 1 mL or less. When considering small-volume light-
obscuration methods to overcome the volume requirement, the sampling plan must be properly qualified 
and validated for the specific drug product. Finally, because of the impact of the silicone, using both light 
obscuration and orthogonal techniques capable of identifying silicone within the sample matrix during 
development will assist in the interpretation of the results generated during particulate analysis.
14.3	Compatibility of the Drug Product with the Plunger Stopper 
and Needle Shield
Drug products may come in contact with rubber material in the plunger stopper and needle shield 
during stability testing. For some bioproducts, incompatibility between the drug product and the 
plunger stopper or needle shield can lead to aggregation, increased chemical degradation, and loss of 
drug product potency.
14.3.1		Impact of Interaction between the Drug Product and  
Rubber in the Needle Shield
Incompatibility between the drug product and needle shield can lead to increased polymer formation 
resulting in partial or complete needle clogging. The increased risk of clogging can lead to obstruc-
tion of liquid flow, and therefore, to the requirement for higher forces to expel the product. The high-
er forces required to push liquid out of the syringe can cause great discomfort, especially to patients 
with dexterity limitations. An increase in force to expel the product could also lead to the patient not 
receiving the dose. There is also a risk that injecting the patient with higher-order aggregates and 
polymer can potentially lead to an immune response (115). Thus, a comprehensive characterization 
of incompatibilities between the needle shield and drug product is essential. 
Experiments conducted to evaluate incompatibility of the needle shield with the drug product need 
to account for the surface area to volume ratio between the product on the tip of the needle and the 
contact surface of the needle shield material. During product stability studies in syringes, the product 
solution may or may not come into contact with the needle shield. Thus, to evaluate the impact of 
the needle shield on product quality and stability more rigorously, extractables and leachables evalua-
tions, such as those described in Section 5, may be useful.
14.3.2 	Impact of Interaction between the Plunger Stopper and  
Drug Product
Section 5 discusses further considerations of extractables and leachables related to the plunger stop-
per. To evaluate the impact of the plunger stopper on product quality and stability, some or all of the 
following studies may be performed.
• Impact of leachables from the plunger stopper on the product — Plunger stoppers can have met-
als that are leachable. It is critical to evaluate the impact of metals on drug products in stability tests.
• Impact of silicone oil on the product — Plunger stoppers may be coated with silicone oil that may 
or may not be cross-linked. Section 14.5 provides the evaluation of interactions between silicone 
oil and the product.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
92
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
• Plunger stopper discoloration — Some plunger stoppers may become significantly discolored 
when they come in contact with the product. This may lead to a loss of the visual aesthetics of the 
product. An evaluation of the interaction between buffer components, excipients, and surfactants 
on the plunger stopper is needed. Some plunger stoppers may preferentially adsorb certain excipi-
ents or surfactants, and some excipients and buffer salts may also promote greater water adsorption 
into the plunger stopper and result in greater dimensional distortion. This can potentially lead to 
plunger stopper discoloration over time and changes in the functionality of the syringe.
14.3.3	Needle Shield Permeability 
Drying of the product in the needle may lead to needle clogging, increasing discomfort for the pa-
tient trying to inject the drug product through a clogged needle. Some products may have a greater 
propensity to become dry. For example, high-concentration formulations may become dry or form 
a gel more quickly than low-concentration formulations because high-concentration formulations 
are closer to their solubility limit and very little solvent is available for evaporation. In addition, drug 
product formulations may contain excipients that can precipitate, crystallize, or form a clog if solvent 
evaporation occurs. 
Needle-shield permeability may be a factor (in addition to needle-shield incompatibility) in product 
clogging in the needle. Moisture loss through the needle shield could lead to evaporation of the sol-
vent from the product on the needle tip leading to drying and clogging of the needle. The impact of 
relative humidity (5% to 70% relative humidity), and accelerated and stress temperatures (25oC and 
40oC) on the rate of needle clogging in filled syringes should be considered when evaluating the over-
all risk of needle clogging. Product suppliers may perform moisture transmission studies through the 
needle shield to evaluate and compare needle shields.
Injection instructions should call for removal of the needle shield just prior to injection. Needle-shield 
removal usually leads to the release of a few drops of drug product due to initial vacuum generation 
followed by positive pressure in the syringes. In cases in which the drug is not injected immediately 
by the patient after needle-shield removal, there may be a risk that the drug product will dry out on 
the needle tip leading to clogging of the needle. This risk is higher in drug products that have a high 
concentration of proteins because these have a greater propensity to become dry. This phenomenon 
can lead to greater discomfort for the patient because more force to dislodge the clog (or partial clog) 
in the needle may be required. 
For the above-mentioned reasons, it is necessary to characterize the clogging rate of the product as a 
function of environmental conditions and its impact for the delivery of appropriate patient instruc-
tions and training.
14.4	Needle Passage Shear
Protein therapeutics may experience multiple sources of shear stress during manufacturing processes, 
such as mixing, filtration, and filling. Manufacturing processes should consider the shear generated 
by fluid flow through the needle as it could yield sufficient torque to perturb, partially unfold, or even 
denature protein drug products (114,116).
14.4.1 Experimental Design
Theoretical calculation is necessary to evaluate shear as the product passes through the filling and injec-
tion needles unless clinical study data has already demonstrated product efficacy with the chosen prod-
uct design. The diameter and length of the needle, the flow rate (filling speed and injection speed), and 
the physical properties of the product (viscosity) can all affect the calculated shear. Therefore, a study 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
93
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
designed with a design space around the calculated shear to evaluate protein impact is recommended. 
The design space allows for some flexibility to optimize filling parameters in the future.
Several studies have shown that the loss of protein activity is proportional to the exposure time and 
shear rate (114,117). However, other studies have found no evidence that shear significantly destabi-
lizes proteins, but rather, show accelerated destabilization due to the turnover of interfacial interac-
tions (100).
The experimental design should also isolate the air-liquid interface from the stress due to shear. The 
stability study should include recommended and accelerated storage to evaluate the critical quality 
attributes through stability-indicating assays; these attributes include pH, concentration, aggregation, 
clipping, charge profile, potency, oxidation, and visible and subvisible particle formation.
14.5	Compatibility with Process Intermediates and Additives
A typical evaluation includes the effects of extractables and silicone—individually and in combina-
tion. As mentioned in Section 5, product suppliers should evaluate silicone oil compatibility for prod-
uct impact with different levels and distributions of silicone oil in the product contact area. An ad-
ditional study to consider is testing whether material surfaces (such as the surfaces of the container 
and particulate matter in the formulation) can interact with the drug product in terms of extractables 
and leachables. 
14.6	Types of Silicone
Commonly used silicone types for siliconization include silicone fluids, silicone emulsion, and silicone 
dispersion. Silicone fluids are identified in major international and national pharmacopeias. Table 
14.6-1 provides the classification of silicone fluids based on their kinematic viscosities (in cSt or mm2 
per second at 25°C).
Table 14.6-1	Types of Silicone
Pharmacopeia
Classification
Viscosity Range at 25°C (cSt)
USP
Dimethicone
20 – 30,000
European Pharmacopeia 
Dimethicone
20 – 1,300
European Pharmacopeia
Silicone oil used as 
a lubricant
1,000 – 30,000
Japanese Pharmacopeia
General
2 – 5,000
14.6.1	 Silicone Compliance with Monographs
To verify the compatibility with healthcare application, Table 14.6.1-1 shows common characteristics 
tested as called for in pharmacopeia monographs. The silicone oil supplier typically tests these char-
acteristics to meet compendial requirements for medical use.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
94
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Table 14.6.1-1	
Typical Silicone Oils Tests
Tests to Perform
Identification (infrared absorbance)
Viscosity at 2°C
Colorimetric (violet test)
Reaction of silicates
Acidity (potassium hydroxide titration)
Mineral oils
Phenylated compounds
Refractive index (at 20°C)
Heavy metals
Volatile matter or loss on heating
14.6.2	 Effects of Extractables on Products (spiking controls)
14.6.2.1 Tungsten
Interactions between tungsten and some therapeutic proteins have been previously documented (49). 
Tungsten salts and tungsten oxides—as well as metallic tungsten particles—can remain in the syringe 
after the formation process. Thus, there is a need to assess the sensitivity of the drug product to 
tungsten. To determine the effects of (spiked) tungsten pin extracts, manufacturers should evaluate 
the stability of the drug product. The scope of the characterization can be dependent on the level of 
sensitivity observed.
14.7	Process-related Compatibility and Stability 
The drug product manufacturing process can involve equipment that might affect the stability of the 
protein. Some of the key process steps for PFS manufacturing to evaluate include surface decontami-
nation of syringe tubs, isolator technology for aseptic filling, automated visual inspection for defects, 
labeling, and packaging. A risk evaluation during manufacturing through relevant product impact 
studies is also needed, but is not covered in detail in this technical report.
14.8	 Shock, Vibration, and Shipping Study
Agitating samples after filling should provide a preliminary understanding of how shipping and han-
dling may affect the contact surface area at the silicone/air/solution interface and the corresponding 
factor under evaluation.
For biopharmaceutical products, it is important to demonstrate the stability of the protein product 
in both static and dynamic conditions. A common method of filling and stoppering a PFS involves 
placing the plunger stopper into the syringe barrel using an insertion tube or vacuum. This results in a 
headspace (air or inert gas) between the top of the plunger stopper and the meniscus of the drug solu-
tion. Proteins have the potential to aggregate in the presence of air-liquid interfaces. Thus, it is critical 
to evaluate the stability of the product under dynamic conditions (agitation) that are comparable or 
worse than the stress applied in a pharmaceutical supply chain.
The effect of agitation on the stability of the product should be evaluated as part of formulation 
development (67).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
95
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Following selection of the final formulation composition, the manufacturer or supplier should per-
form a representative shipping study, either by actual transport or applying shipping conditions as 
recommended by ASTM, D4169-14, Standard Practice for Performance Testing of Shipping Contain-
ers and Systems (6). Simulation should include filling the drug solution into the PFS with the desired 
fill volume and plunger stopper position, then shipping the syringes under worst-case representative 
conditions (117). Worst-case conditions vary from product-to-product but should include those for fill 
volume, plunger stopper placement, temperature, excipient levels, pressure, and mode of transporta-
tion (ground and air). Incorporate shipping simulation if validation can show that it is representative 
of the shipping routes and generates stresses higher than stresses generated by real transport (6,8,117).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
