--- PDF p19 (print p12) ---
12
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Human factors engineering (HFE) considers a product’s design, intended uses, users, and use envi-
ronments, which can affect the safe and effective use of a product (34,35). The intent of HFE is to 
improve the quality of a product’s user interface design to eliminate or minimize errors during use.
This section describes best practices related to the application of HFE and use-related risk manage-
ment to the development of PFSs, including: 
• key principles of HFE as they apply to PFSs (intended to supplement and not to replace the current 
health authority guidance and approaches described within recognized consensus standards)
• key considerations in understanding the use of PFSs
• typical areas of usability issues (known issues) to consider in the development of PFSs
4.1	 Current Standards and Guidance
Regulatory bodies may request evidence of acceptable human factors summative/validation testing 
results and supporting processes during premarket application or submission reviews. The failure of 
manufacturers to apply a compliant and adequate HFE process can lead to serious consequences, 
including product approval delays/nonapprovals, negative audit and inspection findings, clinical and 
market complaints, and ultimately an unsafe, ineffective, and unsuccessful product. Available HFE 
standards and guidances include those listed in Table 4.1-1.
4.0  PFS Human Factors Engineering
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p20 (print p13) ---
13
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.1-1	 Human Factors Engineering-related Standards and Guidances
Standard/Guidance ID
Title
ANSI/AAMI/IEC/EN 62366-1:2015
Medical devices – Application of usability engineering to medical devices
AAMI/ANSI HE75:2009
Human Factors Engineering – Design of Medical Devices
ISO 14971:2007/(R) 2012
Medical Devices – Application of risk management to medical devices
IEC 60601-1-6:2010
Medical electrical equipment – Part 1-6: General requirements for basic 
safety and essential performance – Collateral standard: Usability
IEC 60601-1-8 Edition 2.1 2012-11
Medical electrical equipment – Part 1-8: General requirements for basic 
safety and essential performance – Collateral Standard: General require-
ments, tests and guidance for alarm systems in medical electrical equip-
ment and medical electrical systems
IEC 60601-1-11:2010
Medical electrical equipment – Part 1-11: General requirements for basic 
safety and essential performance – Collateral Standard: Requirements 
for medical electrical equipment and medical electrical systems used in 
the home healthcare environment
FDA/CDRH document # 1497
Medical Device Use – Safety: Incorporating Human Factors Engineering 
into Risk Management (2000): http://www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/de-
viceregulationandguidance/guidancedocuments/ucm094460.htm
FDA/CDRH document # 1128
Guidance on Medical Device Patient Labeling (2001): http://www.fda.
gov/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidancedocuments/
ucm070782.htm 
FDA/CDRH document # 1757
Applying Human Factors and Usability Engineering to Optimize Medical 
Devices (2011, draft*): http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceReg-
ulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm259748.htm 
FDA/CDRH document # 1750
Design Considerations for Devices Intended for Home Use (2014): http://
www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidanced-
ocuments/ucm331675.htm 
FDA/CDRH docket # HFA-305
Safety Considerations for Product Design to Minimize Medication Errors 
(2012 draft*): http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulato-
ryInformation/Guidances/ucm331808.htm
21 CFR 820.30, Subparts A-D
Human Factors Implications of the New GMP Rule Overall Requirements 
of the New Quality System Regulation http://www.fda.gov/medicalde-
vices/deviceregulationandguidance/humanfactors/ucm119215.htm
EMA/606103/2014 
EMA Guidance – April 2015, Good practice guide on risk minimization and 
prevention of medication errors. Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Com-
mittee (PRAC). (http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_li-
brary/Regulatory_and_procedural_guideline/2015/04/WC500185538.pdf)
Note:	The FDA draft guidance documents referenced above marked with * are not intended for implementation until 
finalized and are subject to change. The final versions will represent FDA’s final position on those areas.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p21 (print p14) ---
14
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
4.2	 Human Factors Evaluation
The application of HFE throughout the product development process can optimize product design 
and minimize use-related failures and difficulties. The need to perform a human factors summative/
validation study and include human factors data in premarket submissions can be determined based 
on whether there are potential use errors that could cause harm. For PFSs, there are known use errors 
that can result in delayed therapy (overdosing, underdosing, needle-stick injuries) and cause harm, 
such as reduced efficacy, infection, etc. A human factors summative/validation study can demon-
strate that representative users can use the device under simulated use conditions without producing 
patterns of failures that could result in negative clinical impact to patients or injury to device users 
(refer to Section 4.8). 
4.3	 Device-Use Characterization
The HFE process begins with characterizing device use. This includes consideration of user popula-
tions, use environment, and intended use scenarios as discussed below. 
4.3.1	 User Populations
Common users of PFSs are healthcare providers, lay caregivers, and patients. User groups often have 
unique characteristics that are capable of affecting the user’s ability to learn and use the product safely 
and effectively. The generally accepted term for a distinct group of users with unique characteristics 
in HFE is “user population.” 
Within each user population, individual user characteristics may vary. Key areas of differences be-
tween users or user populations include knowledge, skills, abilities, experience, cognitive functioning, 
perceptual acuity, and manual dexterity. Furthermore, user attitudes, emotions, and expectations may 
also affect the use of the device. Other factors that typically describe variations between user popula-
tions and user groups include gender, age, disease-related impairments, previous device experience 
and literacy, and education levels. 
The design of the device should be evaluated with individual users who are representative of the in-
tended users. This approach helps ensure that designs are optimized to support the needs of intended 
users to the extent possible.
Key considerations for users of injection devices in a home-use environment include the following:
• Injection-related anxiety/phobia: anxieties and phobias can make the task of self-injection/inject-
ing another individual difficult and may cause users to withdraw the needle before the injection is 
complete.
• Disease-related impairments: the same disease that the injection is intended to treat can impair 
the ability of users to inject the product by reducing hand and finger strength, impairing sensory 
abilities, and reducing manual coordination and dexterity.
• Negative transfer of learning between different products: users with prior experience with injec-
tion devices that operate in a specific way may incorrectly use a device that operates differently due 
to the assumption that the devices operate in the same way.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p22 (print p15) ---
15
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.3.2	 Use Environment
The use environment can affect the user’s ability to use a device safely and effectively. Specific consid-
erations for HFE may include the following:
• lighting (e.g., ambient, direct, and reflective light) that might affect the user’s ability to see the sy-
ringe components, markings, and accessories
• thermal factors (e.g., air temperature, humidity, heat, moisture, and air flow) that might affect how 
well the user can grip, hold, and inject the syringe
• auditory factors (e.g., background noise and alarms) that might cause distractions and an inability 
to hear feedback from the syringe (if present)
• workload (e.g., distraction and interruptions) that may cause difficulty, especially for users with 
cognitive, sensory, and/or manual dexterity impairment
4.3.3	 Intended Use Scenarios
Intended use scenarios describe how the user is expected to use the device. A device may also have 
multiple reasonably foreseeable use scenarios that may differ by user group. For example, a healthcare 
provider may be required to select the appropriate product for a patient; the same healthcare provider 
may need to visually identify and select a PFS among PFSs containing different drug strengths or dif-
ferent drugs. Alternatively, it may be necessary for the patient to possess the ability to self-administer 
the drug in the selected PFS.
Use scenarios are determined in part by the intended use of the product, and may include such fac-
tors as dosing regimen (e.g., variable dosing or fix dosing), dose frequency (e.g., once a day or once a 
month), type of medication (e.g., emergency versus routine), extent of training (e.g., naïve or experi-
enced user), and/or clinical supervision prior to or during use. Foreseeable scenarios involving misuse 
or use error (including stress, performing the tasks within a specific time limit, or the need to wear 
gloves when using the PFS) should be identified and considered part of the application of human fac-
tors’ techniques during design of the user interface.
4.4	 Defining User Needs
After characterization of device use and prior to initiation of the design process, manufacturers should 
investigate and define end-user needs. End-user needs can be documented as user requirements, and 
as such, validated (i.e., are testable).
Multiple sources exist for defining user needs, such as the following:
• user group-specific needs (Section 4.3.1)
• use environment (Section 4.3.2)
• intended use (Section 4.3.3)
• potential hazardous situations that may arise (Section 4.6.1)
• reviews of relevant published material (Section 4.6.1.1)
• empirical research conducted by interviews or observations of potential users (Section 4.6.1.2)
• known use-related problems with the same or similar products
• health authority guidance(s) and consensus standards (Section 4.1)
User requirements may be further refined as new information is evaluated during device development.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p23 (print p16) ---
16
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
4.5	 Design Requirements
To enable the product design process, user requirements are translated into engineering design re-
quirements. Design requirements are comprehensive, clear, quantifiable, and verifiable. For example, 
a user requirement might state, “The user needs to be able to remove the needle cap.” This might 
correspond to a specific design input requirement specifying the use of a suitable cap removal force 
or cap/syringe geometry. Design requirements related to the user-device interface may be derived 
from a range of sources, including anthropometric size and strength data or product-specific industry 
guidelines and standards. 
Once a design prototype has been developed, requirements may be further refined through a process 
of iterative usability evaluation and risk analysis. In most cases, such evaluations should include early 
formative testing with users (Section 4.7) in which the suitability of the design input requirement 
may be assessed and adapted as necessary.
4.6	 Risk Management
Use-related risk management is an integral part of the HFE process in the development of medical 
devices and combination products. This includes use-related hazard identification, risk analysis, iden-
tification and implementation of mitigation strategies. For further information on risk evaluation, 
analysis, and management refer to PDA Technical Report No. 54: Implementation of  Quality Risk Manage-
ment for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations (36).
4.6.1	 Hazard Identification
A hazard is a potential source of harm. Use errors and difficulties related to the product/user-interface 
design can lead to hazardous situations. All known and foreseeable use-related hazards associated with 
products are typically identified and documented within the use-related risk analysis (see Section 4.6.2). 
Early in the design process, it is best practice to identify and investigate potential hazards based on a 
systematic review of all known information related to the type of product under development. This 
information is typically acquired through literature searches, empirical research, and analytical meth-
ods. These sources are described in the following sections. 
4.6.1.1	Literature Search
Conduct a literature search to investigate known use-related issues with previous models or similar 
products. Typical sources of information include the following:
• scientific literature (e.g., study findings published in HFE and clinical journals)
• health authority complaints databases and reports (e.g., Manufacturer and User Facility Device Ex-
perience [MAUDE] and Medical Device Reporting [MDR] databases and adverse reporting data files)
• health authority alerts and/or warnings
• postmarketing product complaints for previous variants or similar devices
• clinical experience data, including clinical complaint records
• specialist support organizations (e.g., disease-specific patient support groups and associations)
• published standards and guidance
• previous formative and summative/validation studies of the device or similar device(s)
• support organization websites, social media, and blogs
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p24 (print p17) ---
17
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.6.1.2	Empirical Research
Empirical research is an approach to identify and specify user needs, identify potential use-related 
hazards of the device, and analyze behaviors in end-use contexts. Empirical research methods may 
include the following:
• Contextual inquiry: this ethnographic research method is used to observe and analyze behaviors 
in actual end-use contexts (actual environments and use scenarios). Contextual inquiry can reveal 
important use-related behaviors in actual use that may not be present in a controlled or artificial test 
environment (e.g., observing the use of existing syringes to identify use-related difficulties).
• User or expert interviews and focus groups: eliciting input from users through open-ended and/
or semi-structured interviews or conducting focus groups is a valuable means of attaining user 
insight. Since users often differ significantly in personal characteristics and use-related behaviors, a 
diversity of end users should be included.
• Formative HFE: simulated use of early prototypes are effective for identifying product use-related 
hazards and assessing the adequacy of implemented risk controls in addition to areas for further 
improvement. Section 4.7 provides further details on this topic.
4.6.1.3	Analytical Use Error Identification Methods
Analytical methods are useful in assessing user interfaces and key components of use-related risk 
analysis. Analytical methods involve the systematic description, decomposition, and assessment of 
tasks often used in identifying hazardous situations. Many analytical methods are available in differ-
ent domains and areas of focus. Refer to Stanton et al. for a comprehensive list of available methods 
(19,37–39).
A common analytical method effective for assessing a user interface is Hierarchical Task Analysis. 
This method systematically decomposes the steps necessary to attain the overall goal of the user into 
sub-goals and ultimately to the lowest-level tasks deemed appropriate for analysis. Hierarchical Task 
Analysis suggests how to organize related tasks, identifies sequence of specific tasks, and generates a 
clear structure for risk analysis. Once use-related hazards have been comprehensively identified, the 
risks associated with those hazards are assessed.
4.6.2	 Use-Related Risk Analysis
Employ a use-related risk analysis to systematically assess all of the steps involved in using the de-
vice (e.g., based on a task analysis), the errors that users might commit or the tasks users might fail 
to perform, potential negative clinical consequences of use errors and task failures, risk-mitigation 
strategies to reduce any moderate or high risks to acceptable levels, and the method of validating the 
risk-mitigation strategies (40). 
The potential use errors can be assessed for severity, occurrence, and detectability as described below 
(36,41). 
• Severity rating defines the potential impact of the hazardous situation on the user. The severity rat-
ing is determined based on product knowledge, customer interface, previous usability test results, 
and product complaints. Refer to ISO 14971 (2012) for comprehensive examples. When more than 
one hazard is identified, the most severe rating should be used with respect to a specific task. ISO 
14971 (2012) presents a description of each severity level and the rating assigned to each hazard 
identified in the FMEA (37). It is a recognized consensus standard applicable to medical devices (42). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p25 (print p18) ---
18
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
• Occurrence rating is an estimate of the frequency with which the identified harm occurs. It is 
determined based on product knowledge, previous usability test results, and product complaints. 
However, because it is difficult to determine accurately, estimates of severity should be used as the 
primary indicator of use error criticality (see Section 4.6.2.1).
• Detectability is the ability to detect, discover, or determine the existence, presence, or fact of a haz-
ard. Detectability must be factored in the estimate of overall risks, together with the likelihood of 
occurrence and severity of harm. The risk control strategy may include processes that improve the 
detectability of a hazard (43).
While conducting the use-related risk analysis, it is important to consider the impact (potential harm) 
on the patient if a use error occurs during use of the device. For example, the instructions tell the 
user to place the product in a refrigerator, but the user leaves the product out at ambient temperature 
and then uses the product. In this scenario, the worst-case harm may be that the drug efficacy is af-
fected, which could result in ineffective treatment. For this use error, the probability of occurrence is 
estimated as “occasional,” and the severity of the error rated as “serious” by the medical representa-
tive on the team (in this scenario the definition of “serious” could be an error that results in injury or 
impairment requiring professional medical intervention).
After severity and occurrence are rated, risk mitigation strategies are developed to minimize identi-
fied use-related hazards. These may include the following, in order of priority:
1.	 Design the device to remove the hazard, thereby reducing the likelihood that the user will 
encounter the hazard, or reduce the consequences if hazard occurs
2.	 Make the user interface— including its operating logic—error resistant or error tolerant
3.	 Alert the user to the hazard through the user interface (e.g., labeling/IFU)
4.	 Develop written procedures and training that inform the user of the hazard, and provide steps 
to avoid the hazard 
If unacceptable risks caused by use errors are identified through the risk assessment process, then the 
elements of the user interface that led to those use errors should be evaluated further to achieve ac-
ceptable risk levels by appropriate means, such as product redesign, to ensure that the changes made 
to eliminate or minimize hazards do not introduce new hazards (44).
Formative evaluations and human factors summative/validation testing are methods that demon-
strate the effectiveness of the implemented risk mitigation strategies. Justification for residual risks 
may take into account whether to eliminate these risks, or if eliminating/reducing these risks is high-
ly impractical and the residual risk is clearly outweighed by the benefits of the device.
4.6.2.1	Essential and Safety-Critical Task Identification
Employ the use-related risk analysis to identify essential and safety-critical tasks. Essential tasks are 
those that are necessary for successful use of the device for its intended purposes. Examples of typical 
essential tasks are removing a PFS from packaging, removing a needle shield or cap, inserting a needle 
into an injection site, and fully depressing the plunger. Safety-critical tasks are those that, if omitted or 
the user performs incorrectly, could have a negative clinical impact. A task may be both safety-critical 
and essential simultaneously. Examples of safety-critical tasks typically include full depression of the sy-
ringe plunger rod and activation of the safety needle-device mechanism. In addition, user understand-
ing of all safety-critical warnings and caution statements in the device labeling is essential. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p26 (print p19) ---
19
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Each task is assessed for device dependency based on interaction, if any, with the PFS:
• In device-dependent tasks, interaction with the device is required (e.g., removing a cap, depressing 
a plunger, or activating a needle-safety device). If a user successfully completes a task, then this is 
an indication that the success of the task completed is reasonably controlled by the design of the 
device. The performance of device-dependent tasks is important to ensure successful user perfor-
mance as part of the summative/validation testing. 
• Device-independent (“ancillary”) tasks include preparation tasks and are broadly defined as those that 
support the successful operation of the device (e.g., washing hands or checking the expiration date). 
These are often highly dependent on compliance with instructions; validation may occur through 
user comprehension of the labeling materials (notably the instructions for use) in summative/valida-
tion testing. Labeling comprehension is an important determinant when assessing whether critical 
warnings and cautions have been appropriately captured and users understand the intent. 
4.6.2.2	Common PFS Use-Related Hazards
Table 4.6.2.2-1 offers several examples of common use-related hazards and harm associated with PFS 
use. The table is not intended to be exhaustive, and certain hazards and harms may not apply to all 
situations. Once use-related hazards have been comprehensively identified, the risks associated with 
those hazards are assessed. It is the manufacturer’s responsibility to identify, implement, and validate 
risk mitigation strategies that effectively minimize risk (refer to Section 4.6.2 for the priority order of 
risk controls that should be implemented).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p27 (print p20) ---
20
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Table 4.6.2.2-1	 Examples of Common Use-Related Hazards and Harms Associated with PFS 
Use error
Example of a hazard
Example of a harm(s)
Inability to open packaging
Inability to use device 
Reduced efficacy
Inability to remove needle shield
Incorrect removal of needle shield 
Damaged needle
Injury
Incomplete plunger depression
Partial injection or no dose  
administered
Reduced efficacy
Premature removal of device from injection site
Failure to engage or activate a needle-safety 
feature
Exposed used needle 
Injury
Reuse of a syringe or needle 
Contaminated syringe or needle 
Infection
Inability to attach needle (if applicable to 
device type)
No dose administered
Reduced efficacy
Inability to set an accurate dose for devices 
requiring dose adjustment (if applicable to 
device type)
Inaccurate dose set 
Overdose 
Reduced efficacy 
(Underdose)
Removal of plunger from syringe
Damaged device 
Reduced efficacy
Failure to clean injection site prior to injection 
or contamination of injection site after cleaning 
(e.g., by blowing on or touching the site)
Unclean injection site 
Infection
Touching by needle to other surface (e.g., of a 
table) prior to injection 
Contaminated needle 
Failure to examine the product label
Administration of incorrect drug 
product or expired drug product
Injury
Reduced efficacy
Failure to examine the syringe prior to use
Damaged device
Injury
Failure to check the expiration date
Expired product 
Reduced efficacy and safety
Failure to wait for the PFS to warm up to room 
temperature  
Cold injection 
Discomfort or pain
Recapping of the needle
Handling of unprotected needle
Injury
4.7	 Formative Usability Evaluation
After the user and design requirements have been defined and the risk management documentation 
process has been initiated, the user interface design is integrated into the product design and then 
implemented. Formative human factors evaluations assess the usability and use safety of the device, its 
packaging, labeling (including instructions for use), and training programs using product prototypes. 
The intent of formative usability studies is to optimize the user interface by “designing out” any us-
ability problems or potential use-related hazards during the development of the product. The type and 
number of formative evaluations varies depending on the development effort and on the use-related 
risk analyses. The goal of this stage is to reduce use-related risks as much as is reasonably possible be-
fore the implementation of the design verification and summative/validation stage of development. 
A written study protocol and report provides the necessary documentation for each formative human 
factors evaluation. Typical content for the protocol includes a description of the scope and objectives 
of the study, as well as a description of the participants, use environment, and prototype product. In 
addition, the formative study report provides a description and evaluation of any variants (e.g., dif-
ferent rigid needle shields or different versions of the instructions for use) along with any actionable 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p28 (print p21) ---
21
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
conclusions from the study noted. Using the results and analyses from the formative study report, the 
use-related risk analysis is updated accordingly to ensure that any new risks and risk mitigations are 
appropriately captured.
4.8	 Summative/Validation Testing
The summative/validation test is intended to be the culmination of all prior HFE analyses and forma-
tive testing. At this point, modifications to the user interface and product design are complete based 
on the results of iterative testing. The product is ready for validation testing.
With the appropriate design, execution, and acceptable results, the human factors summative/validation 
test provides evidence that the device is safe and effective for intended use. This decision is based on the 
following two considerations: 
1) a representative sample of users satisfactorily completing all essential and critical tasks under expected 
use conditions, and 
2) there are no additional patterns of use errors resulting from design deficiencies. 
If this study is the first HFE effort (e.g., no formative evaluations were performed), or if the forma-
tive evaluations were not sufficiently robust, the summative/validation testing often uncovers user 
interface design problems that may result in use errors. When this happens, these new errors are 
evaluated to determine if additional user interface modifications are necessary. If the device is modi-
fied as a result of observed use errors, then the modified device is revalidated to demonstrate that 
the modifications effectively address the observed use errors and do not introduce new use errors. 
Since modifications to devices can be made during scale-up, the validation/summative testing is con-
ducted using production equivalent devices (final production units or demonstrable equivalents). The 
participants and test environment is expected to be representative of intended user populations and 
use environment. If there will be more than one user population (e.g., caregivers, patients, and/or 
healthcare professionals), then the summative/validation study should be performed with n ≥ 15 in 
each distinct user group (45). 
Formative usability evaluations may be conducted using empirical methods (e.g., user studies or 
expert reviews), analytical methods (e.g., hierarchical task analysis), or simulated-use studies. Pos-
sible formative studies include evaluations of different prototype device designs, instructional and/or 
training material, and safety-critical and essential tasks. Typically, these studies are conducted under 
conditions of simulated use (e.g., injection into a pad), and are facilitated by a human factors special-
ist to ensure that use-related issues are captured and appropriate root-cause analyses are performed. 
According to human factors best practices, a formative human factors study typically includes a mini-
mum of five to eight participants (38).
For products intended for submission to the U.S. FDA, study participants are typically representative 
of the intended user population (or populations) in the United States (e.g., able to read and speak 
English and reside in the United States). The tasks selected for testing are typically derived from the 
results of a comprehensive assessment of use-related hazards and analysis of risks that consider all 
functions of the device. The tasks are prioritized to reflect the relative importance of the task and 
the severity of the potential impact of omission or use error on the safety of the device and the user. 
Training provided in the study is typically representative of the end-user training for actual use. If it 
is foreseeable that actual users might not or will not consistently receive training, then an untrained 
group should be included in the summative/validation study to represent the anticipated population 
of untrained users. To account for “training decay,” time is allowed to elapse between the training and 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p29 (print p22) ---
22
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
the test session. This decay time is reflective of the decay time in actual use. For devices that are used 
daily, a (simulated) training decay period between training and testing of at least 30 minutes is usually 
appropriate. For devices that are used at longer intervals, an ideal representative training decay would 
be at least one day or longer.
The testing is designed to capture all objective (observational/performance) data and collect sub-
jective data (narrative responses to open-ended questions) after completion of simulated use tasks. 
Subjective data include responses to questions about the use of the device overall, critical tasks, any 
observed use errors, and use difficulties. A key purpose of the subjective data is to obtain an explana-
tion from the user’s perspective on the cause of use errors or use difficulties noted during simulated 
use in addition to the user’s overall use experience. 
For the purposes of assessing performance in summative/validation testing, a use error is generally 
defined as action or lack of action that was different from that expected by the manufacturer and can 
lead to patient harm (i.e., overdose, underdose, or incorrect therapy). Performance success criteria 
are typically predefined prior to the summative/validation testing, and the study moderator ensures 
that the use errors are accurately recorded as representing the errors that could cause harm during 
actual use. The study results should then be used to refine the use-related risk analysis to determine 
the overall acceptability of use-related risk and determine if further modifications are needed to the 
device design, device labeling (including instructions for use), and/or the training (if applicable) to 
reduce the use-related risks to acceptable levels.
The human factors summative/validation study report typically includes the following elements:
• rationale for the study design, including the data collected, the number and description of dis-
tinct user populations and test participants (who was studied), and critical and essential tasks (what 
tasks/ intended uses were assessed) 
• materials used within the study (what was tested) 
• summary of the test methods used (how was the study performed)
• summary of both objective task performance and subjective results obtained from the study
• detailed root-cause analysis for all use errors and difficulties that occurred
• conclusion about safe and effective use
4.9	 Labeling
Labeling includes device labels, instructions for use, information provided on the device, package 
inserts, package labels, and any accompanying informational materials. Labeling is considered part of 
the product user interface. As with the device design, labeling development starts with characteriza-
tion of the user and use environment. It is important to consider the physical and cognitive abilities 
of users, as well as the limitations of the environment during label development, especially for self-
administered devices. The workload or stress level of the user population should be a consideration 
because these can limit users’ ability to understand and remember complex, multistep instructions. 
Consider using several best-practice principles when developing instructional materials to ensure that 
the layout, content, and organization support safe and effective use of the device (46, 47). Use short, 
declarative, active-voice sentences to describe specific tasks for users. Enhance user instructions fur-
ther with additional graphics or diagrams. 
The use of formative evaluations can ensure that product labeling is ready for validation. As previ-
ously noted in Section 4.7, this can include expert reviews as well as testing with representative users. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p30 (print p23) ---
23
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Warnings and other risk mitigations implemented as part of labeling can also be evaluated. Finally, 
labeling represents a part of the user interface and is included in summative/validation testing to con-
firm safe and effective use. Information such as warnings and precautions are considered critical tasks 
and tested through assessments of users’ ability to read and understand the information.
4.10	Changes to Currently Marketed Products
Manufacturers may change a currently marketed PFS product for a variety of reasons. These may in-
clude use problems identified in postmarket reports or customer complaints, or changes due to other 
reasons, such as changes related to design or manufacturing, or new indicators related to the use of 
a “platform” device ( e.g., new patient population, new user groups, new use environments, etc.). 
An HFE impact assessment is developed and documented to evaluate product changes, describe each 
change, provide a rationale for making the change, and include an updated use-related risk analysis 
focusing on how those changes have impacted the user tasks and the risk profile (48). The assessment 
will indicate if revalidation of the risk-based decision is necessary. To inform the decision further, the 
history of commercial product complaints associated with use problems is typically included in the 
use-related risk analysis. If the change eliminates the possibility of the use error without affecting 
other aspects of use, then summative/validation testing may not be necessary with appropriate jus-
tification. If the HFE impact assessment or the use-related risk analysis identifies new use errors or 
hazardous situations that could lead to harm, then the summative/validation testing is needed and 
designed to focus on all aspects of the user interaction affected by the changes.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
