--- PDF p78 (print p71) ---
71
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Container closure integrity is an important element of the overall sterility assurance program for ster-
ile products. Various layers of controls, including design verification, stacked tolerance, qualification, 
manufacturing process controls, inspection and handling, process simulation (media fills), microbial 
challenge testing, and physical challenge testing ensure the integrity of the C/C system. CCI testing 
should ultimately demonstrate that the PFS can maintain the integrity of its microbial barrier, which 
is typically a product design criterion.
Consideration should be given to CCI testing for the PFS during C/C design, development, and qual-
ification phases, in addition to routine product manufacturing and product shelf-life stability pro-
grams. A risk-based, phase-appropriate approach should be used to identify the suitable application 
of CCI testing.
This section addresses best-practice approaches and considerations for control-strategy development 
related to CCI and the application of CCI testing to the PFS. The scope spans the temporal continu-
um, including component manufacturing at suppliers, through the pharmaceutical process of receipt, 
inspection, primary packaging assembly, secondary packaging, and distribution. It also presents a 
toolbox approach with the most useful available test methods and approaches to method selection, 
development, and validation.
12.1	Regulatory Basis for Container Closure Integrity
A variety of global regulatory guidance documents address expectations for CCI of sterile products 
at the time of manufacturing and throughout a drug product’s shelf life. A C/C system—such as a 
PFS—used in the packaging of a drug or biologic is a critical part of the submission to gain regulatory 
approval. A successful licensure application requires substantial testing to demonstrate the suitability 
of the selected C/C system, which can be qualified for its intended use based on the quality target 
product profile.
Suitability has four aspects: protection, safety, compatibility, and performance (12). In particular, pro-
tection from microbial contamination is critical for a parenteral product that purports to be sterile as 
required by regulations to ensure product safety (38).
Demonstrating absolute sterility of a lot requires testing every filled finished article in the entire lot, 
which is not practical (95,96). Therefore, a holistic approach provides the best means to accomplish 
sterility assurance. First, pharmaceutical companies must adequately validate products manufactured 
by terminal sterilization and/or aseptic processing under cGMP. Second, manufacturers/suppliers 
must demonstrate that the CCI for the primary packaging configuration (C/C system) can provide 
assurance and maintain microbiological quality throughout the raw material and product shelf life 
(5). Third, for each product lot purporting to be sterile, conformance to sterility requirements must 
be determined by a validated sterility testing method in accordance with compendial guidelines prior 
to release (97). This holistic approach is consistent with EU Guideline 10, Annex 1, which emphasizes 
that demonstration of sterility or other quality aspects of the product must not rely solely on any 
terminal process or finished product test (98).
In summary, protection of the drug product from microbial contamination by the C/C system 
throughout the product’s shelf life is an essential element of the holistic approach to sterility assur-
ance for patient safety as required by regulations. Sterility testing must be performed during product 
lot release unless parametric release has been approved. It is also essential to demonstrate the ability 
12.0  Container Closure Integrity Requirments
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p79 (print p72) ---
72
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
of the C/C system to maintain the integrity of its microbial barrier, and therefore, the sterility of a 
drug product throughout its shelf life. 
12.2	PFS Design Issues
Component selection for the PFS is based on a variety of design requirements, including the assur-
ance of CCI. In its role of protecting the dosage form, the syringe must prevent product contamina-
tion and leakage. The syringe components that prevent contamination and leakage are the barrel, 
the plunger stopper, and the needle shield and their interfaces. Figure 12.2-1 shows the component 
interfaces of relevance to CCI.
Figure 12.2-1	
Syringe component interfaces involved in CCI
12.2.1		Plunger Stopper/Barrel Interface
The plunger stopper/barrel interface is the circumferential contact between the plunger stopper and 
the inner diameter of the syringe barrel, typically in the presence of a silicone lubricating fluid. The 
primary functions of this interface are to protect the dosage form from leakage and solvent loss over 
the shelf life of the product and to prevent contamination by microbial agents or foreign material. 
Plunger stopper designs vary from supplier to supplier. Plunger stopper designs typically include a 
leading sealing surface closest to the drug product, followed by one or more secondary sealing ribs 
that also provide stability during travel in the barrel. An additional consideration of the design of 
these sealing interfaces is functionality, including break-loose and extrusion forces.
12.2.2		Barrel/Needle-Shield Interface
The barrel/needle-shield interface is composed of the tip of the syringe and the corresponding sealing 
surface of the needle shield. The primary function of this interface is to protect the needle from con-
tamination by microbial agents or foreign material. Understanding the specific needle-shield designs 
is necessary because different needle-shield designs respond differently to changes in environmental 
conditions (e.g., during sterilization cycles or CCI test method cycles). Additional considerations for 
this interface include performance requirements, such as permeability to sterilizing agents, removal 
forces, and device compatibility, if applicable.
12.2.3	Needle-shield/Needle Interface
The needle shield/needle interface protects the dosage form from contamination by microbial agents 
or foreign material, leakage, and solvent loss over the shelf life of the product.
Plunger stopper – Barrel Interface
Needle – Needle shield interface
Barrel – Needle shield interface
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p80 (print p73) ---
73
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
12.3	Supplier and Pharmaceutical Processes
Factors that ultimately ensure CCI for the PFS are many, spanning the manufacture of components 
and subassemblies through filling, closing assembly, inspection, final packaging, and transport.
12.3.1		Supplier Components, Subassembled Components, and Component 
Packaging and Distribution
The supplier is responsible for establishing design requirements for performance and compatibility among 
system elements during product development, including requirements related to ensuring CCI. The de-
sign/development process should include a risk assessment of the potential failure modes of the system. 
The supplier should validate the output of the design process to ensure that the resulting product meets 
established criteria and is suitable for its intended use. Design requirements related to CCI and sterility 
must include the C/C components, C/C system, and the secondary packaging system containing the 
PFS. In addition, suppliers must establish requirements for transport packaging and shipping processes.
The supplier is responsible for integrating design outputs into product specifications agreed to by the 
supplier and the pharmaceutical partner. The supplier is also responsible for establishing a quality sys-
tem that maintains processes in a state of control to deliver consistently the product in conformance 
with the quality specifications established.
Acceptance criteria should be established as part of product design/development activities for the 
critical product parameters related to CCI, such as dimensional specifications, relevant ISO standards, 
cleanliness (e.g., freedom from visible contaminants), and integrity of components (e.g., lack of elas-
tomer tears, glass cracks, or needle puncture through the needle shield) required for maintaining CCI 
over the shelf life of the PFS. Suitable supplier in-process controls should ensure CCI compliance 
(needle puncture, glass integrity, and geometry). The supplier and pharmaceutical partner should 
agree on the drawings and specifications output from design activities.
Appropriate statistical techniques should validate the supplier manufacturing and packaging process-
es, and demonstrate that the process is capable of delivering the product in compliance with specifi-
cations. To maintain product quality in a state of control, suppliers should establish appropriate in-
process control strategies related to dimensions, cleanliness, and defects. Appropriate sampling plans 
should demonstrate that the product released for sale meets established criteria for fitness for use and 
provide the basis for releasing finished good lots.
12.3.2		Incoming Receipt and Inspection
Development of the incoming control strategy should use a risk-based approach to ensure that it is 
possible to assemble incoming components properly to form integral C/C systems. The incoming 
control strategy should include identifying component attributes and assigning a criticality classifica-
tion (e.g., critical, major, or minor). For example, attributes potentially affecting the CCI would be 
considered critical. 
Pharmaceutical companies should take into consideration the supplier’s manufacturing process and 
control strategy, as well as nonconformance probability. When appropriate, pharmaceutical compa-
nies may rely on the supplier’s certification program to ensure that the component meets specifica-
tions, and accept it based on a certificate of analysis. However, for higher-risk critical attributes, in-
coming testing may be required to measure the conformance of the components to the specifications 
for each batch.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p81 (print p74) ---
74
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
The incoming testing strategy should identify the quality attributes to measure, the sampling plan 
and the acceptance criteria. A statistical analysis should provide the basis for these, including AQL or 
process capability. The testing methods should be appropriately validated and harmonized with sup-
plier test methods. Upon initial implementation, the control strategy should be closely monitored and 
improved as needed to ensure its continued suitability. 
12.3.3 Semifinished Syringes
A semifinished syringe is one lacking a plunger rod. This term refers to the primary packaging in 
which the product is filled and sealed. CCI requirements are directly associated with the life cycle of 
a sterile product. During the development phase, which includes the process parameters, the product 
design and its specifications, the initial assessment of CCI should encompass worst-case conditions 
that may explore the limits of the final product and process. This can include the use of components 
that have undergone preparation process steps (e.g., washing and sterilization) with parameters ex-
ceeding the ones that have been defined. For example, a higher irradiation dose for sterilization can 
be used to demonstrate the absence of impact on the mechanical properties of the elastomeric com-
pounds, and therefore, on the CCI of the product. The use of components from different batches 
and of different ages is also recommended to ensure that batch-to-batch variability and component 
degradation over time are adequately addressed. During this development phase, these attributes are 
commonly assessed via a formal risk assessment of how CCI may be affected and/or whether further 
evaluations are required. As per regulatory guidance, a robust rationale should be built when the ac-
tual product is not used to justify the use of these alternatives (98, 99).
The assessment of CCI should follow the evolution of the product/process development. It should 
encompass any change in the critical parameters of the process or in the primary packaging compo-
nents. Any change in the process or product should be assessed using a risk-based approach to identify 
any potential impact on the CCI of the final product and to conduct the appropriate studies.
When the product reaches the routine production stage, CCI should be monitored on a predefined 
basis. Depending on the validation strategy used and the risks identified in the process, this can in-
clude in-process checks of the integrity or release testing for integrity of the product. Additionally, it 
may be necessary to consider the aging of the packaging components until the end of the primary 
packaging shelf life to determine the potential impact on CCI, depending on applicable regulatory 
requirements. CCI assessment may also replace sterility testing on stability studies, which is in line 
with the recommendation from the FDA on CCI testing for sterile products (5).
Finally, distribution aspects should receive consideration at any stage of product development. A risk 
evaluation associated with the different distribution channels of the product should provide the ba-
sis for the evaluation (100). Temperatures, vibrations, pressure differences, and the sizes of the air 
bubbles within finished syringes should also be considered. These variables can have an impact on 
excessive plunger movement that could lead to a loss of sterility of the product, and should therefore 
receive a careful assessment, especially for semifinished syringes in which it can be more difficult to 
prevent plunger movement. 
12.3.4	Syringe Assembly and Secondary Packaging
The CCI of the assembled PFS (including finger-flange and plunger rod components) is predicated 
on the sterility assurance and CCI of the semifinished syringe introduced into the assembly process. 
The design/development of the assembly and secondary packaging processes should include risk 
assessment of the failure modes related to potential loss of drug product sterility and/or CCI of 
the semifinished syringe, including evaluation of the potential for plunger stopper and needle-shield 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p82 (print p75) ---
75
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
movement, and damage to the semifinished syringe. The processes should be validated to ensure that 
the resulting product meets established criteria and is suitable for its intended use.
12.3.5	 Shipping and Distribution of Semifinished Syringes and PFSs
The semifinished syringe and PFS may be exposed to transportation conditions that can include me-
chanical forces, pressure changes, and vibrations during shipping and distribution throughout the life 
cycle of the product. Shipping studies should provide an understanding of the capability of the product 
to maintain CCI following exposure to representative and/or worst-case transportation conditions.
12.4	CCI Test Method Toolbox: Method Selection, Development, 
and Validation
CCI testing ensures that the sterility of the syringe contents is maintained. Physicochemical CCI test-
ing methods are typically designed to challenge the PFS. Key technology options include microbial 
ingress, dye immersion, pressure/vacuum decay, mass extraction, high-voltage leak detection, and 
helium-leak detection. Table 12.4-1 compares and contrasts the major characteristics of the methods 
of CCI testing.
The CCI test method selected must be suitable for its intended use. The use of visual inspection 
and probabilistic methods (e.g., dye ingress) may aid in gross defect detection, whereas deterministic 
methods are more appropriate for definitive CCI testing, if applicable.
Nondestructive methods are generally preferred, which conserves the sample for further analyses. 
The use of quantitative methods should indicate if leak size information is required. Testing speed 
and throughput are key considerations for in-process and in-line CCI testing. In addition, consider-
ation of package content attributes should aid in ensuring that the selected methods are applicable. 
For example, contents with low electrical conductivity may preclude use of high-voltage leak detec-
tion methods. Another scenario may be one in which a proteinaceous drug product may clog leak 
defects and prevent reliable detection by vacuum-based methods (e.g., vacuum decay).
Critical method parameters must be optimized for the specific drug product package and fully dem-
onstrate the method’s applicability. Testing a number of intact samples bracketing typical drug prod-
uct variations (e.g., multiple batches of C/C components, drug products of different concentrations, 
and packages at different sites/lines) should ensure a low false-positive probability. The use of positive 
control samples of known defect sizes (prepared using micropipettes, wires, capillary columns, laser 
drilled defects, and/or microelectromechanical systems) can optimize and demonstrate method reli-
ability and sensitivity. Evaluation of additional types of actual and simulated real-world defects may 
further verify method effectiveness.
CCI test method validation should be specific to the drug product or product type and appropriate for 
various drug product development phases. After selection of the C/C system, packaging process, and 
drug product formulation, the CCI test methods selected should support various development stud-
ies, such as engineering and stability studies. Prior to licensure application, validation of the method 
must follow applicable ICH guidelines and regulatory requirements. Complete method robustness 
studies should enable future long-term routine use in commercial QC laboratories.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p83 (print p76) ---
76
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 72
Table 12.4-1	Comparison of CCI testing methods (101)
Considerations
Vacuum/Pressure Decay  
and Mass Extraction
High-Voltage Leak Detection
Helium-Leak Detection
Dye Ingress
Microbial Ingress
Best-Case Practical 
Detection Limit 
2-5 µm
2-5 µm
0.1-2 µm
20-50 µm
20-50 µm
Detection 
Deterministic
Deterministic
Deterministic
Probabilistic
Probabilistic
Destructiveness
Nondestructive
Nondestructive
Nondestructive
Destructive
Destructive
Quantitative
Qualitative and quantitative 
Qualitative only
Qualitative and quantitative
Qualitative only
Qualitative only
Typical Applications
Container/closure (C/C) 
development and qualification
Routine QC testing
100% in-line testing potentially 
feasible
Sealing process validation
C/C development and 
qualification
Routine QC testing
100% in-line testing potentially 
feasible
Sealing process validation
C/C development and 
qualification
Routine QC testing
100% in-line testing potentially 
feasible
Sealing process validation
C/C development and 
qualification
Routine QC testing
Sealing process validation
C/C development and 
qualification
Sealing process validation
Major Advantages 
Potentially applicable to 
injection devices
Testing under normal 
atmospheric pressure
Applicable to high-
concentration proteinaceous 
products
Highly sensitive
Widely used for decades
Industry and regulatory 
familiarity
“Last resort” used when all 
else fails
Widely used for decades
Industry and regulatory 
familiarity
“Last resort” used when all 
else fails
Major Limitations 
Possible interference 
with defect detection by 
proteinaceous products 
Requirement for electrically 
conductive fills
Not applicable to most 
injection devices
Possibility of causing drug 
product degradation
Requirement for helium-
containing headspace for drug 
product-filled syringes
Less sensitive
Probabilistic detection
Destructive
Less sensitive
Probabilistic detection
Destructive
Not applicable to drug-
product-filled syringes
Key Considerations
Assurance of proper fixture 
design to prevent plunger 
stopper movement and 
deformation
Sample surface and vacuum 
chamber preparation 
Possibility that syringe barrel 
area covered by needle shield 
is not assessable
Need to ensure that sample 
surfaces are free of adsorbed 
helium prior to testing to avoid 
false detection 
Need to ensure that a true 
failure can be detected (e.g., 
dye in syringe, liquid in ribs)
Inability to ensure the absence 
of pathogens
Reference or  
Standard method
ASTM F2338 (102)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
