--- PDF p67 (print p60) ---
60
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
After the syringe body is filled with the drug substance, the plunger stopper is inserted to complete 
the seal and provide the mechanism for dispensing the drug product. This chapter focuses on the de-
sign and selection of the plunger rod and plunger stopper combination.
11.1	Materials, Coatings, and Laminates
An elastomeric plunger is a critical element of the syringe system because it serves as the primary 
seal for CCI, maintains purity of drugs throughout shelf life, and delivers the contents of the barrel 
to the patient, either by means of a manual injection or by means of a secondary device, such as an 
autoinjector (57).
11.1.1	Formulations
Typically, manufacturers/suppliers use thermoset halobutyl to make plunger stoppers. A thermoset 
elastomer is a polymer system in which the elastomeric properties are derived from chemical cross-
links that are irreversibly created when the polymer is heated. Elastomer formulation technology is 
unique, and the components are manufacturer specific. 
The formulations are trade secrets, and the formulations of different manufacturers are not chemi-
cally equivalent. Changes to these formulations typically require requalification efforts, repeated test-
ing of drug product stability, and new regulatory filings.
Each formulation has a common list of raw materials. A typical elastomer formula with associated 
ingredient functions contains components outlined in Table 11.1.1-1 with consideration toward the 
application’s targeted elastomer properties.
Table 11.1.1-1	
Elastomer Components and Target Properties
Elastomer Component
Component Properties
Overall Elastomer Target Properties
Polymer
Elastic properties
• Low gas permeability and moisture 
vapor permeation
• Chemical and biological inertness
• Low levels of extractables
• Compliance with global compendial 
requirements
• Resistance to heat, ozone, and UV 
light
• Durometer hardness to maintain seal 
integrity
• Sterilization compatibility
• Stress-crack resistance
Curative
Cross-linking for elasticity and strength
Filler
Hardness, modulus, strength, and 
reinforcement
Processing aides
Enhance flexibility, fatigue resistance, 
and mold release
Antioxidants/
Antidegradants
Stabilization for UV light, oxygen, and 
ozone
Plasticizer
Processing aide and promotes flexibility
11.0  Plunger Stopper Suitability
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p68 (print p61) ---
61
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
11.1.2	 Laminates and Coatings
Most elastomeric plunger stopper components contain either a coating or a combination of coating 
and laminate film. These components ensure that proper mechanical feeding on fill-finish equipment 
adequately expels the drug from the syringe and reduces the level of extractables that migrate from 
the elastomer formulation. Manufacturers use direct spraying, mechanical tumbling, or addition dur-
ing washing of components to apply coatings onto plunger stoppers surfaces. Laminate films, which 
are applied during heat forming (molding) of the plunger stopper, are bound physically and chemi-
cally to the component surface. Plunger stoppers typically fall into four main coating and laminate 
film categories with different associated benefits, as summarized in Table 11.1.2-1. 
Table 11.1.2-1	
Typical 1 mL long syringe plunger stopper coatings and laminate films
Category
Material Class
Benefits
Coating
Non-cross-linked surface silicone oil
(multiple viscosities, e.g., 1,000 or 10,000 cSt)
Machine performance
Syringe functionality
Particle reduction
Coating
Cross-linked silicone oil
Machine performance
Syringe functionality
Particle reduction
Coating
Fluoropolymer
Machine performance
Syringe functionality
Particle reduction
Barrier properties
Laminate Film
Fluoropolymer
Machine performance
Syringe functionality
Particle reduction
Barrier properties
Silicone oil-based coatings, fluoropolymer coatings, and fluoropolymer laminate films increase lu-
bricity during machining of plunger stopper feeder bowls, tracks, and placement tubes. They also 
improve syringe functionality (e.g., break-loose and extrusion forces), and serve as barriers between 
the drug and the elastomer, reducing the potential for movement of extractables inherent in all elas-
tomer formulations.
Polydimethylsiloxane coatings do not have barrier characteristics. Silicone oil coatings applied to 
plunger stoppers can be classified as non-cross-linked or cross-linked. Non-cross-linked coatings typi-
cally have a single viscosity (e.g., 1,000 cSt); they are added in a pharmaceutical wash process and con-
sidered loose on the plunger stopper surface. Cross-linked coatings are blends of several silicone oil 
viscosities mixed with a chemical bonding agent. These coatings are sprayed on plunger stopper areas 
at a controlled spray level and bonded with UV light. Development of new and innovative coatings 
and films for plunger stopper components is ongoing. Therefore, it is important to discuss all plunger 
stopper product specifications and associated attributes with manufacturers.
Table 11.1.2-2 reflects possible plunger stopper coating options for use with 1 mL long glass barrel 
applications.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p69 (print p62) ---
62
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Table 11.1.2-2	
Plunger stopper coating options
Plunger Stopper Coating
Plunger Stopper Schematic
Non-cross-linked or Cross-linked Silicone Oil 
Fluoropolymer Laminate Film and Cross-linked 
Silicone Oil 
(Note: Dark outline designates fluoropolymer 
laminate film)
Fluoropolymer 
(Note: Front red outline designates fluoropolymer 
coating)
11.2	Function of Processing and Sterilization
The choice of plunger stopper formats is dependent upon the planned manufacturing process for 
bulk, ready-to-sterilize, and presterilized applications. Presterilized glass syringes and presterilized 
plunger stoppers, which are the standard benchmark, are typical choices for current and new market 
applications.
11.2.1	Bulk
In some applications, the drug manufacturer or a contract manufacturing organization manages 
pharmaceutical washing, post-treatment, siliconization, sterilization, and final sterile component 
packaging control. In these cases, after molding and trimming of plunger stoppers, the plunger stop-
per manufacturer applies a general wash process to remove processing aids. The plunger stoppers are 
then packaged using standard methods. Plunger stopper manufactures may also add silicone oil to 
non-fluoropolymer-coated or laminated plunger stoppers. 
11.2.2	Presterilized Plunger Stoppers
Prior to delivery to the drug manufacturer, presterilized plunger stoppers are washed and sterilized in 
conjunction with validated processes aligned with specifications for particulates and endotoxin levels. 
After molding, trimming, and in-process treatments, presterilized plunger stoppers are washed using 
a pharmaceutical-quality washing process. This process reduces the levels of loose particulate matter 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p70 (print p63) ---
63
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
and endotoxins/bioburden by using multiple rinse and agitation cycles of WFI for the rinse portions. 
In addition, washing and sterilization of components may have an impact on the potential extract-
ables profile of elastomeric plunger stoppers. This impact must be understood and considered for 
drug compatibility and long-term stability.
11.2.3	Sterilization
In most applications—and the industry standard—manufacturers supply plunger stoppers in a pre-
sterilized format (gamma or steam) for direct entry to a fill-finish line. Plunger stoppers may also be 
supplied in bulk or ready-to-sterilize formats that require pharmaceutical companies to complete the 
additional post-processing steps (e.g., pharmaceutical wash, siliconization, and sterilization. Refer to 
Figure 11.2.3-1) on plunger stoppers before drug filling. Pharmaceutical companies commonly con-
sult with the manufacturers to determine proper post-processing and sterilization conditions to apply 
to their plunger stopper elastomer formulation or product so that components are not over-processed 
(e.g., excessive temperature and time). Over-processing of components could have a negative impact 
on elastomer properties.
Manufacturers typically develop plunger stoppers and elastomer formulations to withstand validated 
radiation sterilization ranges (typically gamma) and validated steam autoclave sterilization cycles. 
Certain formulations and coatings are known to be sensitive to the effects of irradiation. Therefore, 
applying radiation or steam can minimize the impact on chemical and functional stability. ISO 11137, 
Sterilization of Health Care Products – Radiation, is used to validate radiation-sterilized plunger stop-
pers (86). This standard provides guidance for multiple methods to validate sterilization using irradia-
tion. Autoclave steam sterilization cycles are developed and validated to comply with a sterility assur-
ance level (SAL) of 10-6. Component and syringe manufacturers can provide guidelines, validation 
summaries, general technical information, and studies in support of component claims.
Figure 11.2.3-1	 Generalized Bulk sterilization process
11.3	Functional Properties
11.3.1	Seal Integrity
The plunger stopper provides a seal on the interior of the barrel between filling and drug adminis-
tration. This seal—along with the needle cover—reduces the likelihood that microbes will enter the 
syringe, thereby preserving the sterility of the syringe contents. At the same time, the seal prevents 
the syringe contents from leaking.
The plunger stopper may have more than one sealing rib. The function of the sealing rib(s) is to pre-
serve sterility. To enter the syringe, microbes must pass all barriers formed by the sealing ribs, starting 
with the rib that is farthest from the drug product and ending with the rib that is closest to the drug 
product. Each rib acts independently as a seal, and the redundancy of ribs increases the robustness of 
the system.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p71 (print p64) ---
64
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Care must be taken with respect to transitional movement of the plunger resulting from pressure fluc-
tuations such as those that can occur during air transport. In this case, the plunger first moves in the 
direction of the lower pressure (the cargo space), and then in the opposite direction when pressure is 
equalized again. Movement must be controlled to protect the syringe from microbial contamination.
To prevent any loss of content through leakage, the order of ribs that the drug product must pass is 
reversed. Drug product must first pass the innermost sealing-rib to enter the space between the first 
and second sealing-ribs. The drug product must then pass the second sealing-rib to enter the space 
between the second and third ribs, and so on. Redundancy of ribs, in this respect, also increases the 
robustness of the system. Liquid trapped between the ribs closest and second closest to the syringe 
contents, but not progressed to the next rib may be considered a cosmetic but not functional defect. 
This defect can result in customer complaints.
To preserve sterility and syringe content, the plunger stopper and barrel must have an appropriate 
interference fit. This implies that the sealing-rib diameters [of the plunger stopper] before assembly 
into the barrel are sufficiently large compared to the internal diameter of the barrel. At placement of 
the plunger stopper into the barrel, the sealing ribs are compressed and forced to adopt the dimen-
sion of the inside of the glass barrel, thereby forming sealing “rings” on the barrel. A higher number 
of sealing ribs and a higher interference fit not only leads to a greater system robustness in terms 
of seal integrity, but also entails less favorable gliding behavior. For uncoated plunger stoppers, ISO 
11040-4, Prefilled Syringes—Part 4: Glass Barrels for Injectables and Ready-to-Use Prefillable Syringes, 
and ISO 11040-5, Prefilled Syringes—Part 5: Plungers for Injectables, list barrel and plunger stop-
per dimensions that lead to an acceptable interference fit (64, 87). Fluoropolymer-laminated/coated 
plunger stoppers are currently outside the scope of ISO 11040-5. Fluoropolymer-laminated/coated 
plunger stoppers are dimensionally designed to fit to glass according to ISO 11040-4. The shape and 
rib diameters, however, do not follow ISO 11040-5, and the rib closest to the liquid may have a higher 
interference fit.
According to ISO 11040-5, uncoated plunger stoppers for 1 mL long syringes have either two or three 
sealing-ribs plus a trim edge. The diameter of the sealing ribs is largely determined by the correspond-
ing dimensions in the mold the manufacturer uses for the product.
The trim edges of non-fluoropolymer-coated and fluoropolymer-coated plunger stoppers are not 
considered to be sealing ribs, even if there is contact with the wall of the barrel. For fluoropolymer-
laminated plunger stoppers, the trim edge may provide a sealing function.
Seal integrity between the plunger stopper sealing-ribs and the walls of the syringe must be main-
tained during storage. Between filling and drug administration, the seal of the plunger stopper on the 
barrel is essentially a static seal. Under the influence of changes in pressure (e.g., during air transport), 
the plunger can move. If this occurs, then the plunger stopper acts as a dynamic seal. Typically, move-
ment during air transport is minimal (depending on the air space within the syringe). Subsequent 
transport studies (real or simulated) to measure plunger movement can be used to evaluate this type 
of potential sterile boundary compromise.
The plunger stopper provides a dynamic seal when the syringe is activated. It prevents loss of any 
syringe contents due to leakage through the ribs of the plunger stopper, which is in dynamic contact 
with the interior of the barrel. The rib-barrel interfaces must be protected from defects in materials or 
coatings. Refer to Section 12.0 of this report for more information on CCI requirements.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p72 (print p65) ---
65
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
11.3.2	 Extrusion Behavior
The plunger must move at the time of activation. The force required to start the plunger moving 
is—in the majority of cases—greater than the force required to sustain the movement of the plunger 
(Figure 11.3.2-1). The starting force is usually referred to as the “break-loose force” or “activation force.”
Figure 11.3.2-1	 Gliding Curves of Two Plungers in the Same Type of Syringe Barrel
Break-loose and extrusion force is a property that is a complex function of many factors, including 
the plunger stopper, barrel, drug solution, needle and injection device (if one is used), and test con-
ditions—especially the propagation speed imposed on the plunger. Extrusion behavior assessed in 
empty syringes can be substantially different from gliding behavior assessed in filled syringes. Mea-
surements of extrusion behavior in empty syringes are valuable for assessing the surface state of the 
syringe barrel—especially its siliconization, whereas measurement in the filled syringe is relevant to 
the intended use of the syringe. The material properties of the plunger stopper (such as hardness and 
permanent deformation), its dimensions (especially its rib diameters), and its surface state (siliconiza-
tion or presence of a polymer coating), are the main parameters to control. See Section 10.0 for a 
more in-depth discussion of siliconization.
11.4	Plunger Rod/Plunger Stopper Interactions
To ensure proper force transmission from the plunger rod to the plunger stopper at the time of ad-
ministration, the plunger rod should be designed so that the plunger rod matches the threads of the 
plunger stopper and meets the length and diameter requirements dictated by the glass barrel. Plunger 
rods are available in different polymeric materials, colors, and thumb-pad designs. These characteris-
tics should be included in the evaluation of the assembled syringe (see example in Figure 11.4-1). The 
plunger rod does not have any specific processing or sterilization requirements. Thumb-pad design 
may vary according to specific human factor needs.
Lower constant force levels 
correspond with gliding force
Peak force levels correspond with 
breakloose force (activation force)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
