77
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
13.0  Manufacturing Requirements
13.1	Component Packaging from the Component Manufacturer
This section discusses the following principle steps of processing of prefilled syringes: preparation 
of syringes, filling, and secondary packaging (labeling, blistering, cartoning) for both presterilized 
syringes and bulk.
13.1.1 Packaging of Presterilized Syringe Systems
To ensure the isolation of the product, the assembled syringe is placed into a nest to prevent con-
tamination from the external environment. The nest is then placed into a tub that serves as primary 
packaging. The tub is sealed with a Tyvek® sheet before being placed into a single or double steribag, 
which is also sealed using the system shown in Table 13.1.1-1. 
Table 13.1.1-1	
Packaging methods 
Primary Packaging system
Material
Steribag Packaging
Tyvek® lid
Tyvek® sheet
Syringe
Nest
Tub
13.1.1.1 Nest
Nest supports are made of rigid plastic material with slots that can vary in number and diameter. The 
design of the supports ensures the syringes remain at a proper distance from one another and reduces 
the risk of breakage during subsequent manipulations and transfers.
Nests with 100 or 160 syringes (i.e., slots) are common for 1 mL long syringes. These nests can be 
made of polystyrene, polypropylene, or another material. The design minimizes deflection or warp-
ing of the tub and nest during filling. Warping leads to variations in plunger stopper position between 
the middle and edges of the nests.
Double steribag
Single steribag
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
78
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
13.1.1.2 Tub
The tub, which is a container of a plastic rigid material, maintains the nest in the correct position. It 
is usually white to permit the detection of the printing on the side of the tub by automatic camera 
systems. ISO 11040-7 describes common dimensions for tubs (103).
13.1.1.3 Tyvek® sheet and Tyvek® lid
A Tyvek® lid is coated and heat-sealed on top of the tub to isolate the product from the external 
environment before and after sterilization to obtain a sterile barrier. Single or double Tyvek® sheets 
consist of one (single) or two sealed foils (double) to ensure sufficient protection of the glass barrels 
during depackaging operations.
The Tyvek® lid is suitable for the sterilization methods described under Section 13.2. For further pro-
cessing, the correct position of the sealing, the strength of the sealing (which might be influenced by 
the type of glue used to seal the lid), and any imprinting on the lid must be considered. The sterile bar-
rier system consists of the tub sealed by the Tyvek® lid. The protective bag (single or double steribag) 
covers the sterile barrier system and its contents, preventing particle contamination and damage. Sec-
tion 13.1 discusses different methods of tub openings.
13.1.1.4 Steribag
Enclosing the tub into a steribag that is welded shut creates another barrier against possible environ-
mental contamination and facilitates the movement operations of the primary packaging of assem-
bled syringes. Again, consideration must be given to the size and position of the seals on the steribag 
for automated bag opening prior to filling.
The steribag is composed of a porous plastic portion (Tyvek®) for the penetration of the sterilization 
agent and a nonporous plastic-portion low-density polyethylene or high-density polyethylene (LD-PE 
or HD-PE). The configuration of the steribag, header bag, and reel bag depends on the dimension of 
the porous portion.
Reel bag
Header bag
Figure 13.1.1.4-1	Steribag Components
Steribags are available in different dimensions for packaging. The selection of the steribag depends on 
the depackaging equipment. Depending on the depackaging process, single or double bagging might 
be more suitable. These options must be identified when sterilization validation occurs.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
79
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
13.1.1.5 External Box
To facilitate the movement of the primary packaging and avoid creating a barrier to the sterilization agent, 
the tub is ideally packaged in a plastic box that can be sterilized (see Figure 13.1.1.5-1 for an example).
Figure 13.1.1.5-1	Packaging configuration
13.1.2 Presterilized Component Sterilization
The packed and palletized units described above undergo a sterilization process. If the sterilization 
process uses EO, then an aeration phase is needed to eliminate the chemical residues created dur-
ing the process. Validation of the sterilization process demonstrates the quality of the process, the 
removal of EO residues, as well as the sterility and endotoxin levels (55). A qualified subcontractor 
versed in using EO can develop these processes.
If validated in accordance with ISO 17665-1, Sterilization of Health Care Products – Moist Heat – Part 
1: Requirements for the Development, Validation and Routine Control of a Sterilization Process for 
Medical Devices, ISO 11137, Sterilization of Health Care Products – Radiation – Part 2: Establishing 
the Sterilization Dose, and ISO 14937, Sterilization of Health Care Products – General Requirements 
for Characterization of a Sterilizing Agent and the Development, Validation and Routine Control of 
a Sterilization Process for Medical Devices, then other sterilization methods can also be considered 
(86,104,105). These methods can include gamma sterilization (not suitable for glass syringes due to 
discoloration [turns clear glass amber]), steam sterilization, and electron beam sterilization.
13.1.3	 Bulk Syringes
A supplier can deliver prefillable syringes to the pharmaceutical company in the “not washed and not 
sterilized” form (i.e., as bulk syringes). The pharmaceutical company performs the processing steps, 
such as washing, siliconization, assembly of the needle shield, and sterilization. After the glass barrel 
formation and needle assembly steps, the bulk syringes are placed into a plastic rondo tray, then into 
a plastic or cardboard box.
13.1.4	 Rondo Trays: Materials, Dimensions, and Designs
Bulk syringes are packed in plastic (polystyrene and polyethylene terephthalate) rondo trays. The 
pharmaceutical company and the supplier agree to the material, dimensions, configuration, and num-
ber of syringes per rondo tray. A certain number of rondo trays are stacked in a specific orientation 
(Figure 13.1.4-1) and wrapped with a plastic bag for protection.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
80
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Figure 13.1.4-1	 Rondo Tray
13.1.4.1 Secondary Packing of Rondo Trays
The filled rondo trays are packed in plastic (corrugated polypropylene boxes) or cardboard boxes 
to avoid damage during transport. For the biotechnology applications that are the subject of this 
technical report, corrugated polypropylene boxes are considered state-of-the-art. The supplier and 
pharmaceutical company agree to the material, dimensions, and configuration (see Figure 13.1.4.1-1 
for an example).
Figure 13.1.4.1-1	
Packaging orientation illustration
13.2	Machinability
13.2.1		Filling of Presterilized Syringes (Tub-Nest Configuration)
Introduction of syringe components (syringes and plunger stoppers) into the filling line can be ac-
complished with presterilized (ready to be filled) syringes. There are different ways to introduce sy-
ringes into the clean room, and the level of automation varies from line-to-line and site-to-site.
13.2.2		Electron Beam Tunnel
After being unwrapped, outside surface decontamination occurs by introducing the naked tubs into 
an electron beam tunnel. The dose for sterilization is often set at 25 kilogray (kGy), which for most 
applications is more than needed given the very low bioburden on the outside surface of the tubs. An 
exhaust system removes the ozone generated by the electron beam. Using this method of outside de-
contamination requires demonstrating that the tub/nest configuration is compatible with remaining 
impurities or process contaminants. The tunnel unloads directly into the filling area.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
81
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
13.2.3		Hydrogen Peroxide Pass-through Locks
Hydrogen peroxide is a sterilizing agent suitable for externally decontaminating the tubs before intro-
duction into the filling area. However, the hydrogen peroxide must not ingress into the tubs as this 
could have negative effects on the product.
13.2.4		Low-Pressure Plasma
The low-pressure plasma (LPP) unit is a process that decontaminates the outside surface of the sy-
ringe tub after removal of the protective bag and before entering the filling line. However, the process 
only removes low levels of incidental bioburden that may contact the tub during bag removal and 
transfer to the LPP unit. Because these operations are accomplished under laminar flow units produc-
ing Grade A quality air, any incidental contamination is low. The purpose of the LPP unit is to protect 
the environment within the filling line, not to sterilize the components.
The decontamination mechanism is UV light produced by generation of the plasma under low pres-
sure. Plasma is a partly ionized gas. Using LPP to generate the UV light allows the plasma to be 
generated around the object, thereby directly contacting the surface of the object and eliminating 
any shadow areas. Measurement of cycle parameters and UV light output (by spectrometer) enables 
automatic confirmation of a satisfactory cycle. 
UV light is also a sterilization method for surface decontamination. Neither the UV light nor the 
plasma can penetrate the object undergoing sterilization. When using the UV light as a decontamina-
tion method, the target microbiological reduction is log 4 (as opposed to log 6 for use as a sterilization 
method) (99).
13.2.5		Alcohol Wipe Disinfection Followed by Automatic Bag  
Opening and Transfer
In less automated processes, the bag with the tub is sprayed or wiped with alcohol before introducing 
it into higher classified areas. The disinfectant is commonly isopropanol, n-propanol, ethanol, or mix-
tures thereof. For a double-bagged tub, removal of the first bag might occur after being sprayed as it 
moves from a controlled but unclassified area to a Grade C area. The second bag can then be removed 
as it moves from a Grade C to a Grade A area. Ideally, a debagging unit should provide the automa-
tion needed for this critical introduction. In some recent cases, an automated spray tunnel replaces the 
manual spray. Table 13.2.5-1 outlines a possible process for completing these tasks.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
82
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 72
Table 13.2.5-1	
Process for Filling Presterilized Syringes
Process step
Description
1. Plunger stopper introduction
The three main plunger stopper insertion methods are the mechanical vent tube, vacuum insertion tub, and vacuum bell methods. 
Mechanical vent tube method 
A transfer arm moves the plunger stoppers over the vent tubes. A push rod then pushes and compresses each plunger stopper down to the bottom of 
the vent tube. The vent tube retracts out of the syringe barrel, and the push rod remains behind. The plunger stopper exits the vent tube and expands. 
The push rod retracts out of the syringe barrel, and the table moves to a new filled syringe position for the next plunger stopper insertion cycle. Due to 
differences in geometry and construction materials of the plunger stoppers, dedicated format parts (e.g., bowl or tracks) may be required. 
Vacuum insertion tub 
The plunger stopper is moved into a small enclosure, which seals the syringe, and a vacuum is pulled. Then, a push rod pushes the stopper a certain 
distance into the syringe, and the plunger stopper slides into the final position due to the vacuum. 
Vacuum bell method 
This is similar to the vacuum insertion tub, but does not include a push rod, meaning the stopper is pulled into the syringe by vacuum only. This method 
is mainly used for nested stoppers.
2. Tub delidding
The tub is moved into the fill area, and the Tyvek® seal sheet is peeled off and discarded. To make this operation easier, the rim of the tub might be heated 
to plasticize the glue.
3. Tub Inlay Sheet removal
The tub is conveyed to a second station, where the Tyvek® inlay sheet is removed.
4. Tub denesting
The tub is conveyed to the denester station, where the nest is lifted out of the tub and positioned on a coordinate table by a mechanical arm. The nest is 
lightly shaken to ensure that the syringe flange bottoms are in contact with the nest.
5. Syringe filling
The path of syringe filler consists of a holding tank and multiple pumps with filling needles. Different types of pumps are used in the process (e.g., rotary 
piston pumps, peristaltic pumps, membrane pumps, time-pressure systems). The user is responsible for evaluating and validating a method and process 
for the operation. The determination of the size of the filling needles is based on the required fill volume and solutions properties. Nitrogen overlay during 
filling/stoppering might be considered for oxygen-sensitive products. 
Discharge rate, fill needle movement, and other configurable settings can be adjusted to minimize undesirable filling characteristics (e.g., splashing, drip-
ping). Filling volume accuracy must be well characterized to meet the end-user requirements.
6. Plunger stopper insertion
The three main plunger stopper insertion methods are the mechanical vent tube, vacuum insertion tub, and vacuum bell methods. In the mechanical vent 
tube method, the coordinate table moves filled syringe barrels under the mechanical vent tubes. The vent tubes insert the plunger stoppers into the sy-
ringes at the same time as the vibratory bowl conveys, sorts, and inverts sterile plunger stoppers down linear tracks for insertion. A transfer arm moves 
the plunger stoppers over the vent tubes. A push rod then pushes and compresses each plunger stopper down to the bottom of the vent tube. The vent 
tube retracts out of the syringe barrel, and the push rod remains behind. The plunger stopper exits the vent tube and expands. The push rod retracts out 
of the syringe barrel, and the table moves to a new filled syringe position for the next plunger stopper insertion cycle.
Due to differences in geometry and construction materials of the plunger stoppers, dedicated format parts (e.g., bowl or tracks) may be required.
7. Tub re-nesting
Upon completion, the nest is removed from the coordinate table by the mechanical arm and returned to its original tub.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
83
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
13.3	Filling of Bulk Syringes
The processing approach for bulk syringes and the approach for presterilized syringes described in the 
previous section differ in that preparation of bulk syringes occurs at the location where filling occurs. 
Preparation includes washing, siliconization, and sterilization prior to filling. Although this provides 
direct process control, it also requires a high level of internal subject matter expertise. Table 13.3-1 
outlines a possible process for completing these tasks.
Table 13.3-1	Process for Filling Bulk Syringes
Process step
Description
1. Washing
Conducted with water to reduce particle levels, bioburden, lower endotoxin levels to ac-
ceptable levels, and lower levels of residue, such as tungsten (when required). Typically, 
washing, siliconization, and fitting of needle shields are performed on one machine, usually 
in a Grade C area under laminar flow.
Consists of one or more cycles of rinsing with purified water (inside and outside of the bar-
rel) followed by a final rinse with WFI. It is good practice to avoid recycling any of these 
rinses and to use only one pass. After washing, one or more drying steps with sterile filtered, 
pressurized air removes excess water.
Process should result in a reduction of particles as well as endotoxin and bioburden levels 
because the syringes are subsequently steam sterilized.
2. Siliconization
Discussed in Section 10.0. For 1 mL long syringes with a staked needle, the process is usu-
ally performed with pure, medical-grade silicone oil of predefined viscosity. State-of-the-art 
approach is dynamic spraying of oil using a spraying nozzle. This technique allows applica-
tion of silicone oil with uniform distribution and adequate quantities to ensure functionality 
of the syringes, without over-application of the oil. Also includes siliconization of the outside 
of the needle.
3. Fitting of Needle 
Shields
The final step before sterilization. Needle shields are provided via vibrator-bowl/conveyor-
belt systems and mechanically pushed onto the syringes. Care must be taken not to pierce 
the needle shields because this would compromise the CCI of the system. Machines have 
units that check 100% of the integrity of the needle shields. The plastic caps on RNSs should 
not be damaged. Some operations fit the needle shields after separate sterilization of the 
syringes and needle shields.
4. Sterilization
It is good practice to transfer automatically the washed and siliconized syringes in hold-
ing systems to an autoclave under laminar flow in a Grade C environment (e.g., robotic 
systems). Steam sterilization in the autoclave is performed using a validated process. The 
validation needs to consider hard-to-reach areas in the C/C and the possibility that needle 
shields may become dislodged during the process.
5. Filling
Bulk syringes are usually fed into the filling machine in a single-lane mode, in contrast to the 
filling of presterilized syringes, which remain in the nest during filling. Filling is performed in 
a Grade A laminar flow environment with a Grade B background. Restricted access barrier 
systems have improved the classical aseptic process by separating operators from the criti-
cal fill areas. The use of isolators in a Grade C area has increased in recent years adding the 
advantage of fully automated decontamination.
Several pump systems are used—often alternatively—on the same machine. 
6. Stoppering
Two types of stopper placement technologies are available: placement tube/pin combina-
tions and vacuum stoppering. Technology selection should be on a product-by-product ba-
sis. Placement tube/pin combinations allow precise placement but require a certain size of 
air bubble to avoid wet plunger stoppers. In contrast, vacuum stoppering can be used to fill 
syringes with a minimal air bubble, which can be very useful for the application of viscous 
solutions by avoiding the physical pressure-buffering effect of the air bubble.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
84
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
13.4	Visual Inspection 
The purpose of the visual inspection process is to identify defects in filled syringes and reject those 
that do not meet established criteria. The visual inspection process is performed by trained techni-
cians prior to assembly in specially designed rooms. The European Pharmacopeia in Section 2.9.20 
describes visual inspection and provides details on both the apparatus consisting of a black and white 
background with a defined light source and the inspection method (85).
Syringe and plunger stopper inspection occurs during the visual inspection process. The process iden-
tifies and classifies defects, such as those described in Table 13.4-1. For each container, technicians 
document defects in a “defect library,” which should include pictures and descriptions of each defect. 
For training purposes, operating procedures should provide documentation of defect classification 
and the handling of rejects. The classification of the defects must include an acceptance criterion for 
the number of rejected syringes per defect before further actions are initiated.
Table 13.4-1	Examples of post-filling visual inspection defects
Inspected 
Area
Examples of Defects
Inspected 
Area
Examples of 
Defects
Inspected 
Area
Examples of 
Defects
Syringe Barrel
Cracked
Plunger 
Stopper
Liquid in the ribs
Needle 
Shield
Bent
Air line
Tilted
Missing
High fill
Upside-down
Discolored
Low fill
Soiled condition
Broken
No fill
Foreign material
Foreign material
Scuffed
Damaged finger flange
After the syringes are filled and closed in the syringe filling line, the syringes are taken to the visual 
inspection area or stored at the intended storage conditions for future inspection. If inspection oc-
curs later, then technicians must provide adequate time to allow the syringes to reach ambient tem-
perature before inspection begins. Otherwise, water condensation on the outer syringe surface could 
negatively affect inspection.
The visual inspection process starts once the syringes arrive at the inspection area. For manual inspec-
tions, each trained technician chooses a number of syringes and visually inspects each for the defects 
described in the defect library. Technicians identify syringes without defects as such and allocate ac-
cordingly; syringes with major and critical defects are rejected and segregated. Each trained techni-
cian documents the number of rejected syringes per defect. The inspection process continues until all 
syringes in a batch have been inspected. 
13.4.1 Semiautomated Visual Inspection
In the semiautomated process, manufacturers may use denesters to remove the syringes from the 
tubs and automatically place the syringes on a moving track. The syringes move at a certain rate in 
front of the trained technician, who manually diverts any rejected syringes into a different track.
13.4.2	 Automated Visual Inspection
Performing the visual inspection process may use a fully automated inspection machine on which 
syringes are denested, placed on a moving track, inspected by a vision system, and renested back into 
tubs or packed in rondo trays for subsequent assembly.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
85
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The design of automated inspection equipment must consider factors that affect product quality. For 
example, an assessment of the effect of spinning, photo-exposure, and heat generated by equipment 
must ensure that the biologic product is suitable for automated inspection. Test runs with equipment 
or theoretical estimates leveraging stability data are recommended as part of the equipment specifica-
tion and design.
Trays or tubs of filled syringes are fed into the inspection machine; syringes are detrayed/denested 
and automatically inspected for defects. Defective syringes are ejected from the machine and are com-
monly collated by defect category. Acceptable pieces are placed into trays or tubs for further process-
ing. As part of the machine qualification, finished syringes undergo manual AQL inspection to ensure 
that the automated inspection machine is operating within its qualified state.
The automated inspection machine is qualified against a defect library. This library contains descrip-
tions of C/C and product-specific defects and should remain current. Prior to inspecting batches of 
filled syringes, the inspection machine is challenged with the defect library to ensure that it is operat-
ing within the desired parameters. More details are available in PDA Technical Report No. 43: Identi-
fication and Classification of  Nonconformities in Molded and Tubular Glass Containers for Pharmaceutical 
Manufacturing (33).
13.5	Final Drug Assembly and Product Secondary Packaging
Secondary packaging and final drug assembly are separate unit operations. Only high-throughput 
lines may combine filling, inspection, assembly, and final packaging operations. Additionally, final 
assembly sometimes has specific requirements for individual markets. Smaller packaging lots require 
frequent changeovers, so staging before final assembly makes sense.
Secondary packaging for syringes encompasses labeling, blistering, and cartoning. For this technical 
report, needlestick prevention devices and pen assemblies are out of scope.
13.5.1 Labeling, Plunger Rod, and Backstop Placement
In general, component suppliers label either the syringe or the surrounding needle-safety device. La-
bels might be transparent, semitransparent, or colored. Labels might also include graduations if not 
already printed on the glass barrel. Also included in the label are areas for variable data printed on line 
during production, such as the expiration date and batch number. Finally, there are coding areas, such 
as lumicodes, which check automatically the presence and position of labels.
This unit operation can also include the placement of backstops. Backstops are fitted onto the finger 
rest of the syringe and enlarge the grip area for injection while securing the plunger from accidentally 
being pulled out.
Plunger rod insertion for 1 mL long syringes includes the screwing-in motion of the threaded top of 
the rod into the threaded plunger stopper. The setting of the machine normally includes a torque that 
determines the final position. An important requirement is minimal movement of the plunger stop-
per during plunger rod placement. The risk is that the plunger stopper will move back into the non-
sterile area of the syringe or the plunger stopper will move to the proximal end of the barrel, creating 
an overpressure inside that leads to splashing during removal of the needle shield.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
86
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
13.5.2	 Blistering
Modern blister machines automatically place the syringes into thermoformed blister bodies. The 
sizes and shapes vary by use and size of the plunger rod and backstop. The manufacturer usually 
places low cost, frequent-dose products, such as heparin, into multisyringe blisters (i.e., blisters of five 
syringes), and pack less frequently dosed and higher-cost products into single-syringe blisters. The 
most common blister material is polyvinylchloride; polyethylene terephthalate and polypropylene 
are also blister materials. 
Manufacturers can seal the blister with plastic foil, but paper or Tyvek® foils are also common. Balanc-
ing the need for complete sealing of the blisters and easy opening must be considered and carefully 
managed. Most blistering operations are performed under clean (i.e., controlled, not classified), but 
not aseptic conditions. Gassing the sealed blisters with EO, or in rare cases by gamma irradiation, 
can achieve external surface sterility of the syringe. The design of the blister ensures that the syringe 
remains undamaged during transport. Ideally, the plunger rod is fixed in the blister to avoid plunger 
movement during air shipment and ensure that the plunger stopper does not move into the nonster-
ile areas of the syringe. Sometimes manufacturers pack alcohol swabs into the blisters for the user’s 
convenience. There are other packaging configurations in use as well that pack the syringe or syringes 
directly into a specially designed carton without blistering (Dividella-type packaging).
13.5.3 Cartoning 
Automated lines can also perform cartoning. Component producers must add variable data, such as 
batch number and expiration date, and bar codes or data matrix codes to the boxes online using ink-
jet or laser printing. 
Based on the blister size, the carton size and number of syringes will vary per box. Additionally, the 
blister inserts the folded patient information leaflet or booklet into the boxes.
13.5.4 Bundling and Palletizing
After cartoning of the syringe blisters, the cartons might be bundled and palletized into suitable pack-
aging configurations for storage and shipping.
13.5.5 Special Considerations for Serialization
In an effort to stop the introduction of falsified medication into supply chains, an increasing number 
of authorities mandate individual serialization of package units. Initially, this was performed directly 
on the individual syringes with printing, etching, or other techniques. Today, manufacturers mark 
each package unit with a unique identifier. A central worldwide computer network generates and 
tracks the identifier. The healthcare provider or pharmacist at the point-of-sale can use this code to 
verify the identity of the product.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
