--- PDF p73 (print p66) ---
66
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Figure 11.4-1	
Plunger Rod
11.5	Plunger Stopper Suitability: Hold-up Volume
The geometric design of the inner syringe shoulder area mainly defines the hold-up volume (or dead 
volume). However, it is possible for an optimized plunger-stopper design (light taper/cone instead of 
a flat top of the plunger stopper, as shown in Figure 11.5-1) to affect accurate delivery of the syringe 
contents by minimizing the hold-up volume. 
Figure 11.5-1	
Plunger Stopper with Lightly Tapered Tip
11.6	Dimensional Control
11.6.1		Defining Critical Plunger Stopper Dimensions
Since the dimensions of the plunger stopper affect seal integrity, functional performance, and man-
ufacturability/machinability of the PFS, the pharmaceutical company should collaborate with the 
component manufacturer to determine the critical plunger stopper dimensions. Several methodolo-
gies, such as quality function deployment, quality by design, and stacked tolerance analysis, serve 
as useful tools, and may be employed to identify and define the critical plunger stopper dimensions. 
These methodologies may be used to correlate the system-level C/C attributes (e.g., functionality, 
CCI, drug-product formulation interface, and manufacturability) with the component-level attributes 
(e.g., material properties, dimensions, and cosmetics). Such tools aid in determining the impact of 
out-of-specification components and specification changes on the C/C system, and may serve as a 
basis for risk assessments to define commercial control strategies.
11.6.2		Plunger Stopper Dimensional Control at Component  
Manufacturer Site
The end user should establish specifications with the manufacturer of the plunger stopper compo-
nent to ensure critical dimensions, tolerances, and any other features that are critical to the function 
of the plunger stopper are adequately controlled. The component manufacturer must demonstrate 
that the appropriate in-process controls are in place to monitor and control the plunger stopper di-
mensions, qualified or validated methods are used, and appropriate mold monitoring and mainte-
nance programs are implemented. To understand and evaluate the dimensional control capability of 
the plunger stopper, the component manufacturer should provide and discuss historical data for the 
critical plunger stopper dimensions, and if applicable, discuss dimensions measured as part of a mold 
wear and control-monitoring program with the end user.
Plunger rod
Thumb pad
Threads
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p74 (print p67) ---
67
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
11.6.3		Sampling Plans and Acceptance Sampling System for End User 
Incoming Inspection Site 
The component manufacturer and the end user should discuss and agree on the sampling plan and 
the acceptance sampling system (e.g., AQL or process capability index) criteria. Commonly used stan-
dards for sampling procedures for inspection by variables or attributes and corresponding quality 
levels or limits include ANSI/ASQ Z1.4, ISO 2859-1, and ISO 3951-1 (88–90).
11.6.4		Dimensional Measurement Methods and Harmonization
In defining user geometric requirements, special attention must be given to the nonrigid behavior 
of the material. Due to the inherent compressive nature of the elastomer, the use of noncontact 
measurement tools, such as a coordinate measuring machine with vision system capability, is highly 
recommended as an alternative to the use of contact measurement tools. Contact measurement tools 
(such as calipers) used to measure plunger stopper dimensions should be employed with extreme care 
and avoided if possible to minimize elastomer deformation resulting from the contact measurement 
tool. The selected measurement system must be properly qualified.
11.7	Product Interactions
FDA industry guidance on C/C systems for human drugs and biologics requires packaging com-
ponents that are compatible with a dosage form not to interact in a way that causes unacceptable 
changes in the quality of either the dosage form or the packaging component (5). 
In addition, the materials used to construct packaging components must not leach harmful or un-
desirable amounts of substances to the patient. The plunger stopper material must, at a minimum, 
meet the appropriate compendial standards to demonstrate material safety for its intended use (29).
Certain buffer solutions, solution concentrations, high temperatures, and sensitivities of the drug 
product to the plunger stopper formulation may cause interactions between the drug product and the 
plunger stopper when in contact for extended periods of time. Examples of such interactions include 
discoloration of the drug product or the plunger stopper; pH shifts; reductions in the concentration 
of any of the drug product components due to adsorption, absorption, or leachable-induced degrada-
tion; and loss of potency of the active drug substance induced by a chemical entity or a degradation 
product leached from the plunger stopper.
Section 14.3.2 describes considerations for assessing the compatibility of the drug product formula-
tion with the plunger stopper material. Results from such studies may be used to aid in choosing the 
lead C/C component and in designing the formulation stability studies to further characterize the 
chemical, physical, and functional interactions between the drug product and the plunger stopper.
11.8	Secondary Packaging
When the pharmaceutical/biotechnology company or the contract manufacturing organization chooses 
to process bulk plunger stoppers, typically these components are supplied in a basic package configura-
tion of fibrous corrugated cartons and non-cleanroom-quality polyethylene bags intended only for pre-
handling and not for sterilization. Plunger stoppers must be removed and placed in suitable containers for 
any additional post-processing, including washing, treatment (e.g., siliconization), and sterilization.
Because of the different sterilization techniques and multiple technologies in use to fill and seal syringes 
(e.g., aseptic transfer, isolators, or RABS), different construction materials and packaging design formats 
are available. The drug manufacturer must select the appropriate sterile package to meet the filling tech-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p75 (print p68) ---
68
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
nology hardware requirements. Some examples of sterile package formats (see Figure 11.8-1) readily 
available to drug manufacturers are given below:
• 10×10 nest plunger stoppers in sealed multilayer polymer film bags (radiation sterilized)
• Bulk plunger stoppers in sealed multilayer polymer film bags (radiation sterilized)
• Bulk plunger stoppers in sealed multilayer polymer film bags with an attached rapid transfer port 
(radiation sterilized)
• Bulk plunger stoppers in sealed Tyvek®/multilayer polymer film bags (steam sterilized)
• Bulk plunger stoppers in sealed Tyvek®/multilayer polymer film bags with an attached rapid trans-
fer port (steam sterilized)
Figure 11.8-1	
Examples of Sterilized Plunger stoppers in Secondary Packaging
10X10 Nest
Bulk
Rapid transfer 
port (RTP)
The packaging material used to maintain the physical and sterile barrier for presterilized plunger stop-
pers must also be qualified for integrity following the gamma or steam autoclave sterilization process, 
transportation simulation, and aging performance. The packaging material may also be evaluated for 
any potential extractable or leachable components (Section 5.0). The product is typically packaged 
with at least three sealed layers (a primary layer for the plunger stopper and two secondary layers for 
protection) to ensure product integrity during transportation and handling. This design also allows 
cleanroom decontamination wipe down and shedding of layers as the product is staged for aseptic fill-
ing. Care must be taken to avoid particle contamination. Validation and qualification of the packaging 
are typically performed according to the following standards: 
• ISO 11607-1 (91)
• ASTM D4169 (6)
• ASTM F1980 (92)
• Center for Devices and Radiological Health consensus standards (see Section 18.0)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p76 (print p69) ---
69
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
11.9	Shelf Life and Storage
Plunger stopper shelf life or storage time is often specified in conjunction with a specific product and 
packaging conformation. The total period, from the date of manufacture to the date by which an 
item must be used (expiration date), must be determined. Plunger stopper shelf life is influenced by 
several factors, such as exposure to temperature, moisture, and light, as well as any processing. Elas-
tomers that are stored in a bulk format with no additional processing, such as sterilization, typically 
have a longer shelf life than those that have been sterilized. The type of sterilization used can also alter 
the shelf life of the plunger stopper. Temperature is one of the most important factors in determin-
ing shelf life. A general rule is that as component storage temperature drops, shelf life increases. The 
component manufacturer considers these factors when assigning the shelf-life values to their product.
The customer must consider the useful life of the plunger stopper, which includes the shelf-life date, as 
well as the duration of the actual use of the component. The useful lifetime is based on the ability of 
the component to perform its intended function, compatibility of the drug after any post-processing 
that the customer performs, and the duration of use. The useful life can only be determined during 
the component’s contact with the drug product by means of accelerated or real-time stability studies.
11.10	Processing Interactions  
		(Plunger Stopper Design vs. Equipment Requirements)
A number of plunger stopper design features can influence the processing ability of the plunger 
stopper. This section discusses in brief several of these features and their interactions relative to the 
plunger stopper.
11.10.1 Elastomer Selection
Different elastomers stretch and compress at different rates affecting insertion tube compression of 
any laminates/films on the plunger stopper surface, as well as the final length of the plunger stopper 
once it is inserted into the syringe. The length of the inserted plunger stopper is generally noticeably 
different from the length of the plunger stopper as molded. This changes the point where the inser-
tion rod must push the plunger stopper within the insertion tube to obtain the proper alignment at 
the bottom of the insertion tube/insertion rod. Proper insertion is required to ensure proper venting 
of the syringe before the plunger stopper is set.
11.10.2 Surface Treatments
Surface treatments are used, in part, to prevent elastomer from sticking in the packaging and aid in 
the processing of the plunger stoppers through the bowls, tracks, and other processing equipment, as 
well as functionality in a glass syringe barrel.
The type of surface treatment can affect the consistency of plunger stopper siliconization within the 
plunger stopper bags. The sprayed-on treatments have a tendency to migrate and can result in some 
pockets of dry plunger stoppers within the bags (more prevalent with the larger packaging formats, 
such as containers for alpha-beta rapid transfer ports). This dry plunger stopper phenomenon does 
not appear to be as common with cross-linked silicone oil coatings, indicating that—in addition to 
amount—the type of siliconization matters. Surface treatments may also influence the type of plung-
er stopper placement used (insertion tube versus vacuum placement). Depending on the insertion 
tube quality (e.g., lack of surface imperfections, straightness, and strength), vacuum insertion is less 
likely to damage surface lamination.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p77 (print p70) ---
70
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Finally, surface treatments may influence the shape of the plunger stopper. Smooth finishes on the 
product contact face of the plunger stopper may require special consideration of the surface finish of 
the bowl to ensure that components do not stick together.
11.10.3 Plunger Stopper Dimensions
For plunger stopper designs, the trim edges must have specifications for the maximum outer diameter. 
However, the height and consistency/smoothness of the trim edge can also be important for vision 
systems. The smoothness and relative outer diameter of the trim edge compared to the rest of the 
plunger stopper are important for the machining through the insertion tubes. Friction/resistance in-
creases if the trim edge is close to the outer diameter of the plunger stopper and is not smooth or larger 
than the outer diameter. Rougher trim edges can also wear down the equipment bowls and tracks.
The center of gravity defined by the plunger stopper dimensions is also a key factor in the design of 
plunger stopper bowls to ensure proper orientation of the components before placement into the 
syringe barrel.
11.11	 Plunger Stopper Geometry
Pharmaceutical companies should work closely with plunger stopper venders to identify/develop 
plunger stoppers with a geometry that is suitable for meeting the requirements of the product. This 
includes examination of details discussed in previous sections:
• Functional properties
• Plunger rod/device interactions
• Plunger stopper suitability based on hold-up volume
• CCI
• Dimensional control
At present, the number of reference standards related to the suitability of PFS plunger stoppers is 
limited. ISO 11040-5 provides the most direct reference (87). This standard provides guidance on the 
shapes and dimensions of elastomeric plunger stoppers that are used in combination with glass bar-
rels and is to be used in conjunction with ISO 11040-4 (64). Neither ISO 11040-5 nor any other part of 
the ISO 11040 series on PFSs provides test methods or limits for assessing plunger stopper suitability. 
Plastic barrels are described in ISO 11040-6, but there is no separate corresponding document for 
plunger stoppers for plastic barrels at this time (93).
A number of indirect references to plunger stopper suitability exist, such as USP <1207> Sterile Prod-
uct Packaging—Integrity Evaluation, and documents from the FDA (5,94).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
