--- PDF p67 (print p60) ---
60
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
After the syringe body is filled with the drug substance, the plunger stopper is inserted to complete 
the seal and provide the mechanism for dispensing the drug product. This chapter focuses on the de-
sign and selection of the plunger rod and plunger stopper combination.
11.1	Materials, Coatings, and Laminates
An elastomeric plunger is a critical element of the syringe system because it serves as the primary 
seal for CCI, maintains purity of drugs throughout shelf life, and delivers the contents of the barrel 
to the patient, either by means of a manual injection or by means of a secondary device, such as an 
autoinjector (57).
11.1.1	Formulations
Typically, manufacturers/suppliers use thermoset halobutyl to make plunger stoppers. A thermoset 
elastomer is a polymer system in which the elastomeric properties are derived from chemical cross-
links that are irreversibly created when the polymer is heated. Elastomer formulation technology is 
unique, and the components are manufacturer specific. 
The formulations are trade secrets, and the formulations of different manufacturers are not chemi-
cally equivalent. Changes to these formulations typically require requalification efforts, repeated test-
ing of drug product stability, and new regulatory filings.
Each formulation has a common list of raw materials. A typical elastomer formula with associated 
ingredient functions contains components outlined in Table 11.1.1-1 with consideration toward the 
application’s targeted elastomer properties.
Table 11.1.1-1	
Elastomer Components and Target Properties
Elastomer Component
Component Properties
Overall Elastomer Target Properties
Polymer
Elastic properties
• Low gas permeability and moisture 
vapor permeation
• Chemical and biological inertness
• Low levels of extractables
• Compliance with global compendial 
requirements
• Resistance to heat, ozone, and UV 
light
• Durometer hardness to maintain seal 
integrity
• Sterilization compatibility
• Stress-crack resistance
Curative
Cross-linking for elasticity and strength
Filler
Hardness, modulus, strength, and 
reinforcement
Processing aides
Enhance flexibility, fatigue resistance, 
and mold release
Antioxidants/
Antidegradants
Stabilization for UV light, oxygen, and 
ozone
Plasticizer
Processing aide and promotes flexibility
11.0  Plunger Stopper Suitability
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p68 (print p61) ---
61
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
11.1.2	 Laminates and Coatings
Most elastomeric plunger stopper components contain either a coating or a combination of coating 
and laminate film. These components ensure that proper mechanical feeding on fill-finish equipment 
adequately expels the drug from the syringe and reduces the level of extractables that migrate from 
the elastomer formulation. Manufacturers use direct spraying, mechanical tumbling, or addition dur-
ing washing of components to apply coatings onto plunger stoppers surfaces. Laminate films, which 
are applied during heat forming (molding) of the plunger stopper, are bound physically and chemi-
cally to the component surface. Plunger stoppers typically fall into four main coating and laminate 
film categories with different associated benefits, as summarized in Table 11.1.2-1. 
Table 11.1.2-1	
Typical 1 mL long syringe plunger stopper coatings and laminate films
Category
Material Class
Benefits
Coating
Non-cross-linked surface silicone oil
(multiple viscosities, e.g., 1,000 or 10,000 cSt)
Machine performance
Syringe functionality
Particle reduction
Coating
Cross-linked silicone oil
Machine performance
Syringe functionality
Particle reduction
Coating
Fluoropolymer
Machine performance
Syringe functionality
Particle reduction
Barrier properties
Laminate Film
Fluoropolymer
Machine performance
Syringe functionality
Particle reduction
Barrier properties
Silicone oil-based coatings, fluoropolymer coatings, and fluoropolymer laminate films increase lu-
bricity during machining of plunger stopper feeder bowls, tracks, and placement tubes. They also 
improve syringe functionality (e.g., break-loose and extrusion forces), and serve as barriers between 
the drug and the elastomer, reducing the potential for movement of extractables inherent in all elas-
tomer formulations.
Polydimethylsiloxane coatings do not have barrier characteristics. Silicone oil coatings applied to 
plunger stoppers can be classified as non-cross-linked or cross-linked. Non-cross-linked coatings typi-
cally have a single viscosity (e.g., 1,000 cSt); they are added in a pharmaceutical wash process and con-
sidered loose on the plunger stopper surface. Cross-linked coatings are blends of several silicone oil 
viscosities mixed with a chemical bonding agent. These coatings are sprayed on plunger stopper areas 
at a controlled spray level and bonded with UV light. Development of new and innovative coatings 
and films for plunger stopper components is ongoing. Therefore, it is important to discuss all plunger 
stopper product specifications and associated attributes with manufacturers.
Table 11.1.2-2 reflects possible plunger stopper coating options for use with 1 mL long glass barrel 
applications.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p69 (print p62) ---
62
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Table 11.1.2-2	
Plunger stopper coating options
Plunger Stopper Coating
Plunger Stopper Schematic
Non-cross-linked or Cross-linked Silicone Oil 
Fluoropolymer Laminate Film and Cross-linked 
Silicone Oil 
(Note: Dark outline designates fluoropolymer 
laminate film)
Fluoropolymer 
(Note: Front red outline designates fluoropolymer 
coating)
11.2	Function of Processing and Sterilization
The choice of plunger stopper formats is dependent upon the planned manufacturing process for 
bulk, ready-to-sterilize, and presterilized applications. Presterilized glass syringes and presterilized 
plunger stoppers, which are the standard benchmark, are typical choices for current and new market 
applications.
11.2.1	Bulk
In some applications, the drug manufacturer or a contract manufacturing organization manages 
pharmaceutical washing, post-treatment, siliconization, sterilization, and final sterile component 
packaging control. In these cases, after molding and trimming of plunger stoppers, the plunger stop-
per manufacturer applies a general wash process to remove processing aids. The plunger stoppers are 
then packaged using standard methods. Plunger stopper manufactures may also add silicone oil to 
non-fluoropolymer-coated or laminated plunger stoppers. 
11.2.2	Presterilized Plunger Stoppers
Prior to delivery to the drug manufacturer, presterilized plunger stoppers are washed and sterilized in 
conjunction with validated processes aligned with specifications for particulates and endotoxin levels. 
After molding, trimming, and in-process treatments, presterilized plunger stoppers are washed using 
a pharmaceutical-quality washing process. This process reduces the levels of loose particulate matter 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p70 (print p63) ---
63
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
and endotoxins/bioburden by using multiple rinse and agitation cycles of WFI for the rinse portions. 
In addition, washing and sterilization of components may have an impact on the potential extract-
ables profile of elastomeric plunger stoppers. This impact must be understood and considered for 
drug compatibility and long-term stability.
11.2.3	Sterilization
In most applications—and the industry standard—manufacturers supply plunger stoppers in a pre-
sterilized format (gamma or steam) for direct entry to a fill-finish line. Plunger stoppers may also be 
supplied in bulk or ready-to-sterilize formats that require pharmaceutical companies to complete the 
additional post-processing steps (e.g., pharmaceutical wash, siliconization, and sterilization. Refer to 
Figure 11.2.3-1) on plunger stoppers before drug filling. Pharmaceutical companies commonly con-
sult with the manufacturers to determine proper post-processing and sterilization conditions to apply 
to their plunger stopper elastomer formulation or product so that components are not over-processed 
(e.g., excessive temperature and time). Over-processing of components could have a negative impact 
on elastomer properties.
Manufacturers typically develop plunger stoppers and elastomer formulations to withstand validated 
radiation sterilization ranges (typically gamma) and validated steam autoclave sterilization cycles. 
Certain formulations and coatings are known to be sensitive to the effects of irradiation. Therefore, 
applying radiation or steam can minimize the impact on chemical and functional stability. ISO 11137, 
Sterilization of Health Care Products – Radiation, is used to validate radiation-sterilized plunger stop-
pers (86). This standard provides guidance for multiple methods to validate sterilization using irradia-
tion. Autoclave steam sterilization cycles are developed and validated to comply with a sterility assur-
ance level (SAL) of 10-6. Component and syringe manufacturers can provide guidelines, validation 
summaries, general technical information, and studies in support of component claims.
Figure 11.2.3-1	 Generalized Bulk sterilization process
11.3	Functional Properties
11.3.1	Seal Integrity
The plunger stopper provides a seal on the interior of the barrel between filling and drug adminis-
tration. This seal—along with the needle cover—reduces the likelihood that microbes will enter the 
syringe, thereby preserving the sterility of the syringe contents. At the same time, the seal prevents 
the syringe contents from leaking.
The plunger stopper may have more than one sealing rib. The function of the sealing rib(s) is to pre-
serve sterility. To enter the syringe, microbes must pass all barriers formed by the sealing ribs, starting 
with the rib that is farthest from the drug product and ending with the rib that is closest to the drug 
product. Each rib acts independently as a seal, and the redundancy of ribs increases the robustness of 
the system.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p71 (print p64) ---
64
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Care must be taken with respect to transitional movement of the plunger resulting from pressure fluc-
tuations such as those that can occur during air transport. In this case, the plunger first moves in the 
direction of the lower pressure (the cargo space), and then in the opposite direction when pressure is 
equalized again. Movement must be controlled to protect the syringe from microbial contamination.
To prevent any loss of content through leakage, the order of ribs that the drug product must pass is 
reversed. Drug product must first pass the innermost sealing-rib to enter the space between the first 
and second sealing-ribs. The drug product must then pass the second sealing-rib to enter the space 
between the second and third ribs, and so on. Redundancy of ribs, in this respect, also increases the 
robustness of the system. Liquid trapped between the ribs closest and second closest to the syringe 
contents, but not progressed to the next rib may be considered a cosmetic but not functional defect. 
This defect can result in customer complaints.
To preserve sterility and syringe content, the plunger stopper and barrel must have an appropriate 
interference fit. This implies that the sealing-rib diameters [of the plunger stopper] before assembly 
into the barrel are sufficiently large compared to the internal diameter of the barrel. At placement of 
the plunger stopper into the barrel, the sealing ribs are compressed and forced to adopt the dimen-
sion of the inside of the glass barrel, thereby forming sealing “rings” on the barrel. A higher number 
of sealing ribs and a higher interference fit not only leads to a greater system robustness in terms 
of seal integrity, but also entails less favorable gliding behavior. For uncoated plunger stoppers, ISO 
11040-4, Prefilled Syringes—Part 4: Glass Barrels for Injectables and Ready-to-Use Prefillable Syringes, 
and ISO 11040-5, Prefilled Syringes—Part 5: Plungers for Injectables, list barrel and plunger stop-
per dimensions that lead to an acceptable interference fit (64, 87). Fluoropolymer-laminated/coated 
plunger stoppers are currently outside the scope of ISO 11040-5. Fluoropolymer-laminated/coated 
plunger stoppers are dimensionally designed to fit to glass according to ISO 11040-4. The shape and 
rib diameters, however, do not follow ISO 11040-5, and the rib closest to the liquid may have a higher 
interference fit.
According to ISO 11040-5, uncoated plunger stoppers for 1 mL long syringes have either two or three 
sealing-ribs plus a trim edge. The diameter of the sealing ribs is largely determined by the correspond-
ing dimensions in the mold the manufacturer uses for the product.
The trim edges of non-fluoropolymer-coated and fluoropolymer-coated plunger stoppers are not 
considered to be sealing ribs, even if there is contact with the wall of the barrel. For fluoropolymer-
laminated plunger stoppers, the trim edge may provide a sealing function.
Seal integrity between the plunger stopper sealing-ribs and the walls of the syringe must be main-
tained during storage. Between filling and drug administration, the seal of the plunger stopper on the 
barrel is essentially a static seal. Under the influence of changes in pressure (e.g., during air transport), 
the plunger can move. If this occurs, then the plunger stopper acts as a dynamic seal. Typically, move-
ment during air transport is minimal (depending on the air space within the syringe). Subsequent 
transport studies (real or simulated) to measure plunger movement can be used to evaluate this type 
of potential sterile boundary compromise.
The plunger stopper provides a dynamic seal when the syringe is activated. It prevents loss of any 
syringe contents due to leakage through the ribs of the plunger stopper, which is in dynamic contact 
with the interior of the barrel. The rib-barrel interfaces must be protected from defects in materials or 
coatings. Refer to Section 12.0 of this report for more information on CCI requirements.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p72 (print p65) ---
65
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
11.3.2	 Extrusion Behavior
The plunger must move at the time of activation. The force required to start the plunger moving 
is—in the majority of cases—greater than the force required to sustain the movement of the plunger 
(Figure 11.3.2-1). The starting force is usually referred to as the “break-loose force” or “activation force.”
Figure 11.3.2-1	 Gliding Curves of Two Plungers in the Same Type of Syringe Barrel
Break-loose and extrusion force is a property that is a complex function of many factors, including 
the plunger stopper, barrel, drug solution, needle and injection device (if one is used), and test con-
ditions—especially the propagation speed imposed on the plunger. Extrusion behavior assessed in 
empty syringes can be substantially different from gliding behavior assessed in filled syringes. Mea-
surements of extrusion behavior in empty syringes are valuable for assessing the surface state of the 
syringe barrel—especially its siliconization, whereas measurement in the filled syringe is relevant to 
the intended use of the syringe. The material properties of the plunger stopper (such as hardness and 
permanent deformation), its dimensions (especially its rib diameters), and its surface state (siliconiza-
tion or presence of a polymer coating), are the main parameters to control. See Section 10.0 for a 
more in-depth discussion of siliconization.
11.4	Plunger Rod/Plunger Stopper Interactions
To ensure proper force transmission from the plunger rod to the plunger stopper at the time of ad-
ministration, the plunger rod should be designed so that the plunger rod matches the threads of the 
plunger stopper and meets the length and diameter requirements dictated by the glass barrel. Plunger 
rods are available in different polymeric materials, colors, and thumb-pad designs. These characteris-
tics should be included in the evaluation of the assembled syringe (see example in Figure 11.4-1). The 
plunger rod does not have any specific processing or sterilization requirements. Thumb-pad design 
may vary according to specific human factor needs.
Lower constant force levels 
correspond with gliding force
Peak force levels correspond with 
breakloose force (activation force)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p73 (print p66) ---
66
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Figure 11.4-1	
Plunger Rod
11.5	Plunger Stopper Suitability: Hold-up Volume
The geometric design of the inner syringe shoulder area mainly defines the hold-up volume (or dead 
volume). However, it is possible for an optimized plunger-stopper design (light taper/cone instead of 
a flat top of the plunger stopper, as shown in Figure 11.5-1) to affect accurate delivery of the syringe 
contents by minimizing the hold-up volume. 
Figure 11.5-1	
Plunger Stopper with Lightly Tapered Tip
11.6	Dimensional Control
11.6.1		Defining Critical Plunger Stopper Dimensions
Since the dimensions of the plunger stopper affect seal integrity, functional performance, and man-
ufacturability/machinability of the PFS, the pharmaceutical company should collaborate with the 
component manufacturer to determine the critical plunger stopper dimensions. Several methodolo-
gies, such as quality function deployment, quality by design, and stacked tolerance analysis, serve 
as useful tools, and may be employed to identify and define the critical plunger stopper dimensions. 
These methodologies may be used to correlate the system-level C/C attributes (e.g., functionality, 
CCI, drug-product formulation interface, and manufacturability) with the component-level attributes 
(e.g., material properties, dimensions, and cosmetics). Such tools aid in determining the impact of 
out-of-specification components and specification changes on the C/C system, and may serve as a 
basis for risk assessments to define commercial control strategies.
11.6.2		Plunger Stopper Dimensional Control at Component  
Manufacturer Site
The end user should establish specifications with the manufacturer of the plunger stopper compo-
nent to ensure critical dimensions, tolerances, and any other features that are critical to the function 
of the plunger stopper are adequately controlled. The component manufacturer must demonstrate 
that the appropriate in-process controls are in place to monitor and control the plunger stopper di-
mensions, qualified or validated methods are used, and appropriate mold monitoring and mainte-
nance programs are implemented. To understand and evaluate the dimensional control capability of 
the plunger stopper, the component manufacturer should provide and discuss historical data for the 
critical plunger stopper dimensions, and if applicable, discuss dimensions measured as part of a mold 
wear and control-monitoring program with the end user.
Plunger rod
Thumb pad
Threads
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p74 (print p67) ---
67
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
11.6.3		Sampling Plans and Acceptance Sampling System for End User 
Incoming Inspection Site 
The component manufacturer and the end user should discuss and agree on the sampling plan and 
the acceptance sampling system (e.g., AQL or process capability index) criteria. Commonly used stan-
dards for sampling procedures for inspection by variables or attributes and corresponding quality 
levels or limits include ANSI/ASQ Z1.4, ISO 2859-1, and ISO 3951-1 (88–90).
11.6.4		Dimensional Measurement Methods and Harmonization
In defining user geometric requirements, special attention must be given to the nonrigid behavior 
of the material. Due to the inherent compressive nature of the elastomer, the use of noncontact 
measurement tools, such as a coordinate measuring machine with vision system capability, is highly 
recommended as an alternative to the use of contact measurement tools. Contact measurement tools 
(such as calipers) used to measure plunger stopper dimensions should be employed with extreme care 
and avoided if possible to minimize elastomer deformation resulting from the contact measurement 
tool. The selected measurement system must be properly qualified.
11.7	Product Interactions
FDA industry guidance on C/C systems for human drugs and biologics requires packaging com-
ponents that are compatible with a dosage form not to interact in a way that causes unacceptable 
changes in the quality of either the dosage form or the packaging component (5). 
In addition, the materials used to construct packaging components must not leach harmful or un-
desirable amounts of substances to the patient. The plunger stopper material must, at a minimum, 
meet the appropriate compendial standards to demonstrate material safety for its intended use (29).
Certain buffer solutions, solution concentrations, high temperatures, and sensitivities of the drug 
product to the plunger stopper formulation may cause interactions between the drug product and the 
plunger stopper when in contact for extended periods of time. Examples of such interactions include 
discoloration of the drug product or the plunger stopper; pH shifts; reductions in the concentration 
of any of the drug product components due to adsorption, absorption, or leachable-induced degrada-
tion; and loss of potency of the active drug substance induced by a chemical entity or a degradation 
product leached from the plunger stopper.
Section 14.3.2 describes considerations for assessing the compatibility of the drug product formula-
tion with the plunger stopper material. Results from such studies may be used to aid in choosing the 
lead C/C component and in designing the formulation stability studies to further characterize the 
chemical, physical, and functional interactions between the drug product and the plunger stopper.
11.8	Secondary Packaging
When the pharmaceutical/biotechnology company or the contract manufacturing organization chooses 
to process bulk plunger stoppers, typically these components are supplied in a basic package configura-
tion of fibrous corrugated cartons and non-cleanroom-quality polyethylene bags intended only for pre-
handling and not for sterilization. Plunger stoppers must be removed and placed in suitable containers for 
any additional post-processing, including washing, treatment (e.g., siliconization), and sterilization.
Because of the different sterilization techniques and multiple technologies in use to fill and seal syringes 
(e.g., aseptic transfer, isolators, or RABS), different construction materials and packaging design formats 
are available. The drug manufacturer must select the appropriate sterile package to meet the filling tech-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p75 (print p68) ---
68
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
nology hardware requirements. Some examples of sterile package formats (see Figure 11.8-1) readily 
available to drug manufacturers are given below:
• 10×10 nest plunger stoppers in sealed multilayer polymer film bags (radiation sterilized)
• Bulk plunger stoppers in sealed multilayer polymer film bags (radiation sterilized)
• Bulk plunger stoppers in sealed multilayer polymer film bags with an attached rapid transfer port 
(radiation sterilized)
• Bulk plunger stoppers in sealed Tyvek®/multilayer polymer film bags (steam sterilized)
• Bulk plunger stoppers in sealed Tyvek®/multilayer polymer film bags with an attached rapid trans-
fer port (steam sterilized)
Figure 11.8-1	
Examples of Sterilized Plunger stoppers in Secondary Packaging
10X10 Nest
Bulk
Rapid transfer 
port (RTP)
The packaging material used to maintain the physical and sterile barrier for presterilized plunger stop-
pers must also be qualified for integrity following the gamma or steam autoclave sterilization process, 
transportation simulation, and aging performance. The packaging material may also be evaluated for 
any potential extractable or leachable components (Section 5.0). The product is typically packaged 
with at least three sealed layers (a primary layer for the plunger stopper and two secondary layers for 
protection) to ensure product integrity during transportation and handling. This design also allows 
cleanroom decontamination wipe down and shedding of layers as the product is staged for aseptic fill-
ing. Care must be taken to avoid particle contamination. Validation and qualification of the packaging 
are typically performed according to the following standards: 
• ISO 11607-1 (91)
• ASTM D4169 (6)
• ASTM F1980 (92)
• Center for Devices and Radiological Health consensus standards (see Section 18.0)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p76 (print p69) ---
69
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
11.9	Shelf Life and Storage
Plunger stopper shelf life or storage time is often specified in conjunction with a specific product and 
packaging conformation. The total period, from the date of manufacture to the date by which an 
item must be used (expiration date), must be determined. Plunger stopper shelf life is influenced by 
several factors, such as exposure to temperature, moisture, and light, as well as any processing. Elas-
tomers that are stored in a bulk format with no additional processing, such as sterilization, typically 
have a longer shelf life than those that have been sterilized. The type of sterilization used can also alter 
the shelf life of the plunger stopper. Temperature is one of the most important factors in determin-
ing shelf life. A general rule is that as component storage temperature drops, shelf life increases. The 
component manufacturer considers these factors when assigning the shelf-life values to their product.
The customer must consider the useful life of the plunger stopper, which includes the shelf-life date, as 
well as the duration of the actual use of the component. The useful lifetime is based on the ability of 
the component to perform its intended function, compatibility of the drug after any post-processing 
that the customer performs, and the duration of use. The useful life can only be determined during 
the component’s contact with the drug product by means of accelerated or real-time stability studies.
11.10	Processing Interactions  
		(Plunger Stopper Design vs. Equipment Requirements)
A number of plunger stopper design features can influence the processing ability of the plunger 
stopper. This section discusses in brief several of these features and their interactions relative to the 
plunger stopper.
11.10.1 Elastomer Selection
Different elastomers stretch and compress at different rates affecting insertion tube compression of 
any laminates/films on the plunger stopper surface, as well as the final length of the plunger stopper 
once it is inserted into the syringe. The length of the inserted plunger stopper is generally noticeably 
different from the length of the plunger stopper as molded. This changes the point where the inser-
tion rod must push the plunger stopper within the insertion tube to obtain the proper alignment at 
the bottom of the insertion tube/insertion rod. Proper insertion is required to ensure proper venting 
of the syringe before the plunger stopper is set.
11.10.2 Surface Treatments
Surface treatments are used, in part, to prevent elastomer from sticking in the packaging and aid in 
the processing of the plunger stoppers through the bowls, tracks, and other processing equipment, as 
well as functionality in a glass syringe barrel.
The type of surface treatment can affect the consistency of plunger stopper siliconization within the 
plunger stopper bags. The sprayed-on treatments have a tendency to migrate and can result in some 
pockets of dry plunger stoppers within the bags (more prevalent with the larger packaging formats, 
such as containers for alpha-beta rapid transfer ports). This dry plunger stopper phenomenon does 
not appear to be as common with cross-linked silicone oil coatings, indicating that—in addition to 
amount—the type of siliconization matters. Surface treatments may also influence the type of plung-
er stopper placement used (insertion tube versus vacuum placement). Depending on the insertion 
tube quality (e.g., lack of surface imperfections, straightness, and strength), vacuum insertion is less 
likely to damage surface lamination.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p77 (print p70) ---
70
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Finally, surface treatments may influence the shape of the plunger stopper. Smooth finishes on the 
product contact face of the plunger stopper may require special consideration of the surface finish of 
the bowl to ensure that components do not stick together.
11.10.3 Plunger Stopper Dimensions
For plunger stopper designs, the trim edges must have specifications for the maximum outer diameter. 
However, the height and consistency/smoothness of the trim edge can also be important for vision 
systems. The smoothness and relative outer diameter of the trim edge compared to the rest of the 
plunger stopper are important for the machining through the insertion tubes. Friction/resistance in-
creases if the trim edge is close to the outer diameter of the plunger stopper and is not smooth or larger 
than the outer diameter. Rougher trim edges can also wear down the equipment bowls and tracks.
The center of gravity defined by the plunger stopper dimensions is also a key factor in the design of 
plunger stopper bowls to ensure proper orientation of the components before placement into the 
syringe barrel.
11.11	 Plunger Stopper Geometry
Pharmaceutical companies should work closely with plunger stopper venders to identify/develop 
plunger stoppers with a geometry that is suitable for meeting the requirements of the product. This 
includes examination of details discussed in previous sections:
• Functional properties
• Plunger rod/device interactions
• Plunger stopper suitability based on hold-up volume
• CCI
• Dimensional control
At present, the number of reference standards related to the suitability of PFS plunger stoppers is 
limited. ISO 11040-5 provides the most direct reference (87). This standard provides guidance on the 
shapes and dimensions of elastomeric plunger stoppers that are used in combination with glass bar-
rels and is to be used in conjunction with ISO 11040-4 (64). Neither ISO 11040-5 nor any other part of 
the ISO 11040 series on PFSs provides test methods or limits for assessing plunger stopper suitability. 
Plastic barrels are described in ISO 11040-6, but there is no separate corresponding document for 
plunger stoppers for plastic barrels at this time (93).
A number of indirect references to plunger stopper suitability exist, such as USP <1207> Sterile Prod-
uct Packaging—Integrity Evaluation, and documents from the FDA (5,94).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
