--- PDF p49 (print p42) ---
42
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
This section describes the functions, materials, and formulations used by manufacturers and suppliers 
to develop the needle shield.
8.1	 Functions of the Needle Shield
The function of the needle shield is to cover the needle, protect the needle mechanically, minimize 
risk of needle contamination from the external environment, and keep the sharpness of the needle 
from being compromised. Because the sharp end of the needle is embedded in the elastomeric needle 
shield, the needle shield serves as a seal that prevents leakage or microbial ingress through the needle 
opening. In addition, the interference fit between the elastomeric needle shield and the glass cone pro-
vides a seal against microbial ingress into the external surface of the needle. This interference fit also 
provides resistance to separation of the needle shield from the syringe tip during normal handling and 
distribution. Furthermore, the seal isolates the needle from external contaminants.
In the market, two versions of the needle shield are in use: the soft or flexible needle shield, which con-
sists only of the elastomer, and the rigid needle shield (RNS), which has a plastic cover over the elasto-
mer. The RNS has higher impact resistance, and pulling it off is more intuitive for the user. Some RNS 
designs offer additional mechanical resistance to needle shield separation from the needle tip or to pro-
vide tamper evidence. Figure 8.1-1 provides schematics of the two types of needle shield for reference. 
Figure 8.1-1	 Nonrigid (soft) Needle Shield (L) and Rigid Needle Shield (RNS) (R)
In many cases, the syringe is provided ready-for-filling. The nonrigid needle shield or RNS material 
and design must be compatible with the EO sterilization process typically used for sterilization. In 
situations where empty syringes are supplied in bulk, the pharmaceutical company washes, assembles 
(siliconized) with a needle shield, and sterilizes the syringes. The needle-shield materials must be com-
patible with the sterilization process, which typically consists of autoclaving by steam.
The elastomeric part of the needle shield can make contact with the product after filling. There-
fore, the manufacturer must demonstrate that any needle shield elastomer material is compliant with 
safety regulations and compatible with the drug product. The design and installation of the elastomer 
needle shield must be confirmed to ensure satisfactory CCI of the needle end of the filled assembled 
product throughout the life cycle of the drug product. For details, refer to Section 14.3 of this report 
for information on compatibility requirements, and Section 12.0 for details on CCI requirements.
8.0  Needle-Shield Requirements
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p50 (print p43) ---
43
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Often, a PFS product is attached to an add-on device, such as a safety device or autoinjector. The di-
mensions of nonrigid needle shields and RNSs should be compatible with the devices and machines 
that assemble them. These details are not within the scope of this technical report.
8.2	 Material Property Requirements
Needle shields and the elastomeric parts of RNSs are typically made from thermoset rubber or ther-
moplastic rubber formulations. A thermoset rubber formulation is a polymer system in which the ba-
sic elastomeric properties are derived from covalent bonds between adjacent polymer chains. These 
chemical bonds are referred to as “cross-links” and are typically created through a high-temperature 
molding process. In addition, the elastic properties are influenced by interfaces among filler and poly-
mer materials and the incorporation of wax and plasticizer ingredients, when required for product 
functionality or improved processability. Chemical cross-links are considered to be irreversible follow-
ing the molding step.
The industry uses two families of thermoplastic elastomer formulations. These formulations include 
materials from the styrene block copolymer and thermoplastic vulcanizate (TPV) families. Ther-
moplastic elastomers based on the styrene block copolymer family are traditionally composed of a 
thermoplastic elastomer, such as styrene-isobutylene-styrene, styrene-butadiene-styrene, or styrene-
ethylene-butylene-styrene; a thermoplastic polymer, such as polypropylene or polyethylene; paraffin 
or mineral oil; fillers, colorants, and antidegradants.
Thermoplastic rubbers (TPRs) based on the styrene block copolymer family derive their elastic prop-
erties from hard polystyrene domains that act as physical cross-links. Following the molding step, this 
kind of TPR can be reprocessed if necessary. TPRs from the TPV family are made of a thermoset 
rubber/thermoplastic polymer mixture, such as ethylene propylene diene monomer (EPDM) and 
polypropylene. Within TPV polymer systems, the rubber phase is highly cross-linked by means of 
traditional thermoset-curing systems, such as peroxide or sulfur. TPVs obtain their elastic properties 
from the cured EPDM segment and the interaction between the thermoset rubber and the thermo-
plastic polymer segment. Similar to thermoset rubber formulations and TPRs from the styrene block 
copolymer family, TPVs traditionally contain various other materials, including cross-linked EPDM, 
polypropylene, paraffin oil, antidegradants, and colorants.
Elastomer formulations are unique to the component and manufacturer. The formulations are trade 
secrets of the manufacturer. Formulations of different manufacturers are not chemically equivalent, 
and switching from one formulation to another typically requires requalification efforts, including 
drug product stability and regulatory filing.
Some needle shield materials have been known to be susceptible to embrittlement or cracking (e.g., 
through ozone attack). The selection of needle shield material should account for such aging proper-
ties. Additionally, consideration of needle shield and needle interactions that may result in corrosion 
should also be included when selecting the needle shield materials.
For a list of typical rubber ingredients other than the polymer and of the properties and requirements 
of elastomeric formulations, see Section 11.1.1. For sterilization purposes, needle shields typically 
require a sufficiently high level of gas and water vapor permeability.
The material of the elastomer needle shield must be compatible with the EO or steam sterilization 
process of the subassembly that consists of the barrel, needle, and the needle shield (nonrigid or 
RNS). Ethylene oxide or steam must be able to permeate the wall of the elastomer needle shield in 
order to sterilize the surface of the needle and the interface between the needle shield and glass cone. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p51 (print p44) ---
44
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Moreover, residual EO must be able to move out of the elastomer needle shield at the end of the 
sterilizing cycle. Therefore, the elastomer needle shield material must have sufficiently high perme-
ability for steam and gas. Needle shield elastomer formulations suitable for this process are dedicated 
polyisoprene and styrene-butadiene formulations, as well as certain thermoplastic elastomer formula-
tions. Meeting this high permeability requirement is difficult for elastomer formulations used for vial 
closures and syringe plunger stoppers.
The requirements for compatibility with the EO or steam sterilization process are the same for the 
elastomeric part of a nonrigid needle shield or RNS. For the RNS, the plastic part must be designed in 
such a way as not to interfere with the accessibility of EO or steam to its elastomeric part (55).
8.2.1	 Needle-Shield Extractables Profile
Elastomeric needle shield formulations are chosen to comply, at a minimum, with the requirements 
of USP <381> Elastomeric Closures for Injections, and European Pharmacopeia 3.2.9, Rubber Clo-
sures for Containers for Aqueous Parenteral Preparations for Powders and for Freeze-Dried Powders 
(21, 77). USP <381> requires conformity of the closures as they are shipped by the closure supplier 
and in their final ready-to-use state. Materials used for the “rigid” portion of the needle shield should 
be compliant with USP <381> and ISO 10993, Biological Evaluation of Medical Devices (54).
To minimize the risk of a negative impact of leachables from the needle shield elastomer on the qual-
ity of the drug product, the customer (e.g., pharmaceutical company) and the syringe supplier should 
collaborate to obtain the potential extractables profile for the elastomer. The customer should then 
examine the list with the toxicology group and complete the necessary studies. Refer to Sections 5.3 
and 14.0 for details on compatibility requirements.
8.2.2	 Needle-Shield Leachables Profile
While the contact area between the elastomeric part of the nonrigid needle shield or RNS is small, 
this does not preclude migration of extractables from the elastomer needle shield into the pharma-
ceutical product once the syringe is filled. A number of such migration cases have been reported as 
leachable cases in PFS drug formulations. This possibility must be taken into account during drug 
product development. Refer to Sections 5.3 and 14.3.1 for additional details.
8.2.3	 Needle-Shield E-beam Compatibility
When e-beam surface sterilization is employed at the form/finish line, the manufacturer should se-
lect needle shield (nonrigid or RNS) materials that have been confirmed to be compatible with the 
equipment and process. Some aging evaluation may be warranted because the impact of radiation on 
elastomers could be delayed. Similar considerations should be taken into account if another “surface 
sterilization” approach is used.
8.2.4	 Needle-Shield Elastomer Cleanliness
The elastomer needle shield should not contaminate the needle. Prior to assembly of the barrel, the 
elastomer should be appropriately cleaned so that fibers or other contaminants are not introduced.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p52 (print p45) ---
45
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
8.3	 Mechanical Property Requirements
8.3.1	 Needle-Shield Pull-off Force
Before injection, the needle shield (nonrigid or RNS) must be removed manually or in a semiautomat-
ed or automated fashion (i.e., using an autoinjector). The force to remove the needle shield (nonrigid 
or RNS) from the syringe tip is known as the “needle-shield pull-off force.”
Depending on the type of elastomer formulation, sterilization treatment, design and other charac-
teristics, the pull-off forces can vary from type-to-type. Therefore, it is recommended that the system 
supplier and customer (usually the pharmaceutical company) agree on the minimum and maximum 
pull-off forces for the needle shield (nonrigid or RNS). The customer can use incoming inspection of 
the needle shield pull-off force in empty syringes at appropriate frequency to check the robustness of 
the supplier’s process For further details, refer to ISO 11040-4 (64).
A specification for final product performance must consider the end user’s therapeutic area and any 
requirements associated with combination product devices, if applicable. The specified pull-off force 
range or value for the empty syringe should guarantee the tightness on the syringe during the filling 
process, downstream processes, and storage throughout the product’s shelf life.
It should be cautioned that sometimes test results from empty syringes do not necessarily correlate 
with the results for the final filled syringe system. It is also important to establish agreement among 
the suppliers and pharmaceutical companies on a control strategy to minimize risk.
For RNSs, the separation force of the plastic cap from the elastomer shield must be higher than the 
pull-off force of the complete RNS assembly from the syringe barrel to ensure proper functionality and 
avoid detachment of the plastic cap from the elastomeric needle shield during preparation for injection.
8.3.2	 Influence of Needle Shield on Needle Sharpness
The sharpness of the needle tip is not likely to be reduced by assembly of the needle shield (nonrigid 
or RNS), although the sharp end of the needle is embedded into the elastomeric needle shield. Test-
ing the sharpness of the needle should be in accordance with ISO Method 11040-4 and confirmed by 
the syringe supplier or customer/filler during incoming inspection. The quality agreement between 
the syringe supplier and the customer (e.g., a pharmaceutical company) should include additional 
controls, if desired.
8.4	 Container Closure Integrity Requirements
8.4.1	 Empty Syringe
During validation of the syringe manufacturing process by the system supplier, an appropriate sta-
tistical sampling plan should be used to assess the seal of the needle shield (nonrigid or RNS) and 
maintenance of sterility during transportation and storage of the sterilized syringe. A statistical sam-
pling plan may be used during both the supplier’s outgoing inspection and the customer’s incoming 
inspection to evaluate empty assembled syringes for critical defects, such as tears or cracks of the 
needle shield (nonrigid or RNS), needle protrusion through the needle shield (nonrigid or RNS), and 
dimensional nonconformities that could jeopardize CCI. The quality agreement should address the 
sharing of steps implemented to ensure integrity of the CCI.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p53 (print p46) ---
46
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
8.4.2	 Filled Syringe throughout the Life cycle
The needle shield (nonrigid or RNS) must not exhibit surface cracks or other surface imperfections 
visible to the naked eye. Application of suitable methods should ensure the CCI of the PFS through-
out the product’s life cycle. Refer to Sections 12.4 for requirements related to filled and finished sy-
ringes, and common methods for CCI testing and assurance.
8.5	 Dimensional Requirements
A PFS can be used without additional attachments, such as a safety device or an autoinjector. How-
ever, a PFS is often further assembled with add-on devices to meet various customer needs. Com-
patibility among the dimensions of the assembled syringe, including the needle shield (nonrigid or 
RNS) and the add-on devices is, therefore, a critical requirement for successful assembly and proper 
functioning of the final combination product. This subject is outside the scope of this technical re-
port, but it should be noted that such alignment of the various dimensions should occur during the 
development program before the design of the add-on device or the needle shield (nonrigid or RNS) 
is finalized.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
