--- PDF p58 (print p51) ---
51
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Major suppliers of glass syringes have advanced capabilities now to provide a wide variety of silicon-
ization solutions for lubrication purposes. The reader is advised to work closely with the supplier to 
identify the appropriate solution. This section provides a collection of best practices for siliconization 
from industry leaders. Alternative methods for achieving lubrication and silicone oil-free systems are 
not discussed here.
Current standard glass syringe systems rely on lubrication for syringe functionality. Lubrication en-
ables the plunger stopper to move in the glass barrel when the plunger is depressed. The standard 
method of lubrication is to apply (liquid) silicone oil to the plunger stopper and barrel. In some 
functional cases, the silicone oil layer acts as a barrier to prevent interactions or side reactions with 
the glass. In addition to the plunger stopper and barrel, the supplier lubricates the needle to facilitate 
needle insertion and retraction.
Overall, the goal of lubricating glass syringe systems is to apply the optimal quantity of oil without ex-
posing the patient to unnecessary processing aids, and yet apply enough oil to guarantee process func-
tionality throughout the product’s shelf life. Additionally, potential interactions of silicone oil with rub-
ber compounds and the drug product must be assessed as part of the stability and functional studies.
10.1	Type of Silicone and Areas of Application
The silicone oil (polydimethylsiloxane) used for lubrication must be of medical grade and appropri-
ate viscosity. Application of the silicone oil can occur in various viscosity ranges (typically 1,000 and 
12,500 cSt) in compliance with monographs from the USP, European Pharmacopeia, Japanese Phar-
macopeia, and the regulations of other countries as required (78,79,80).
10.1.1	Empty Staked needle Syringe Barrel
Processing to date involves spraying silicone oil, either with a static spraying nozzle (spraying into the 
barrel from the finger flange), or by means of a more advanced, dynamic-diving nozzle that enters 
the syringe barrel and distributes silicone oil more evenly. Spraying with dynamic nozzles results in a 
very even distribution of the silicone oil, an overall reduction in the quantity of the silicone oil used, 
precision dosing, and maintains low and consistent break-loose and gliding forces. Diving nozzle sys-
tems improve the control of siliconization, which can be tailored to improve not only the syringe’s 
functional performance, but also its suitability for filling and finishing processes.
To optimize the filling process, it is possible to program the silicone oil application system to apply 
the silicone oil in specific patterns. For example, vacuum plunger stopper placement may require 
more silicone near the flange than in the product area. The specific profile for this requirement can be 
programmed with a diving nozzle system. Similarly, for mechanical placement (e.g., vent tube place-
ment), the profile can be optimized to deliver more silicone oil where the plunger stopper is placed.
10.0  Siliconization
14.0 
Drug Product 
Compatibility
13.0 
Manufacturing 
Requirements
12.0 
Container 
Closure 
Intergrity
11.0 
Plunger 
Stopper 
Suitability
10.0 
Siliconization
9.0 
Cosmetic 
Imperfections
6.0, 7.0, 8.0 
Glass Barrel, 
Needle, & 
Needle Shield
3.0 
PFS 
Development & 
Licensing
5.0 
Extractables & 
Leachables
4.0 
Human 
Factors
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p59 (print p52) ---
52
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
10.1.2	Effects of Fixed-nozzle Systems
Figure 10.1.2-1 depicts a siliconization profile based on a fixed-nozzle system. The syringe is ori-
ented as shown below. The different sections (based on the setup of the ZebraSci® system) show the 
uneven silicone profile inside the syringe based on the technology used. Sections 1, 2 and 3 have the 
most silicone as evidenced by the “Schlieren” patterns (optical interference due to local variations of 
silicone oil thicknesses, which becomes observable when combined with a specific background pat-
tern). Section 4 is the first section covered with only a small amount of silicone oil. Single droplets 
are detectable in this area. The single droplets in sections 5 and 6 cannot spread all over and build up 
a homogeneous silicone layer inside. Section 7 demonstrates the major disadvantage of a fixed-nozzle 
system because only single droplets are located in this area.
Figure 10.1.2-1	 Fixed-Nozzle Siliconization (injected mass 0.8 mg, image based on ZebraSci® system)
Figure 10.1.2-2 reflects a typical break-loose and gliding force profile of a syringe siliconized with a 
fixed-nozzle system. The graph shows the force results of syringes with identical siliconization pro-
files to that of the ZebraSci® system in Figure 10.1.2-1. 
Break-loose force and the first millimeter of the path have good gliding force results. Section 3 of 
Figure 10.1.2-1, which represents approximately the area of a 25 mm path, shows the increase in glid-
ing force due to the reduced silicone overlay in this area and worsens through the end of Section 7.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p60 (print p53) ---
53
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Figure 10.1.2-2	 Fixed-Nozzle Siliconization – Break-Loose and Gliding Force Profile
10.1.3	Effects of Diving Nozzle Systems
Figure 10.1.3-1 shows a siliconization profile based on a diving/movable nozzle system. The syringe 
is oriented as shown. The different sections (based on the setup of the ZebraSci® system) show the 
even silicone profile inside the syringe based on the technology used. The large droplets in Section 1 
(finger-flange side) are a result of the laboratory-based siliconization system and are not typical. The 
syringe was washed and transferred to the laboratory. All sections show the same profile of silicone 
distribution (e.g., spraying parameters and velocity) and diving parameters based on a special design 
of parameters for this type of syringe.
Figure 10.1.3-1	 Diving Nozzle Siliconization (image based on ZebraSci® system)
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Force [N]
Path [mm]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Break-loose 
Force
Gliding 
Force
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p61 (print p54) ---
54
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Figure 10.1.3-2	 Diving Nozzle Siliconization: Optimal Break-loose and Gliding Force Profile
Figure 10.1.3-2 shows the optimal break-loose and gliding force profile of a syringe siliconized with 
a diving/movable nozzle system. The graph demonstrates the force results of syringes with identical 
siliconization profiles shown by the image based on the ZebraSci® system (Figure 10.1.3-1). There is a 
more homogenous distribution of silicone within this syringe than the one depicted in Figure 10.1.2-
1 resulting in a constant gliding force.
10.2	PFS Barrel and Plunger Stopper Combination
The combination of a well-lubricated barrel and plunger stopper as defined in the user requirement 
ensures consistent force for delivering the drug product during injection and easy assembly of the 
plunger into the syringe barrel. 
Typically, plunger stoppers are lubricated with silicone oil. The lubrication serves multiple purposes 
by ensuring machinability (in vibrator bowls and tracks), lubrication of insertion tubes, and plunger 
stopper functionality in the syringe.
The oil for the plunger stoppers is commonly added during the final washing steps of component 
preparation. Studies are necessary to establish suitable siliconization levels that balance machinability 
and break-loose/extrusion force. Silicone oil can also contribute to the level of subvisible particles in 
the drug product solution and may affect subvisible particle test results. Subvisible particles are rou-
tinely monitored during drug product release and stability studies for PFS products. Additional char-
acterization techniques that differentiate silicone particles from other particles may enhance product 
characterization. The reader is encouraged to start with the highest level of silicone oil and slowly 
reduce the amount applied to find the optimum level that achieves this required balance.
An alternative solution is precoated plunger stoppers that do not require the addition of silicone oil. 
The coating applied is cross-linked silicone oil with or without polytetrafluoroethylene coating.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Force [N]
Path [mm]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Break-loose 
Force
Gliding Force
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p62 (print p55) ---
55
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
10.3	PFS Barrel and Needle-Shield Combination
The combination of a barrel and needle shield ensures an appropriate pull-off force for the patient 
or healthcare provider to remove the needle shield and allow the injection. Care must be taken not 
to overlubricate the plunger stopper, which could compromise CCI during shipping and throughout 
shelf life.
For an RNS, additional balancing of siliconization and the force required for plastic overcap removal 
must be considered. If the deshielding or separation force is lower than the pull-off force, the rigid 
plastic cover may separate from the rubber needle shield. Typically, the syringe suppliers have already 
optimized this careful balance of siliconization with other requirements.
10.4	Siliconization of the Injection Needle
The injection needle is often siliconized to manage the friction during needle insertion and removal 
during drug administration. Typically, 12,500 cSt (high viscosity) silicone oil is applied using a wiping 
process. However, the wiping process requires frequent replenishing of silicone oil.
10.5	Drug Product Requirements
The PFS with all its components (including siliconization) is—like any primary packaging—an inte-
gral part of the drug product. Therefore, development (including stability testing of the drug prod-
uct) should be performed in packaging systems representative of the final commercial configuration. 
This should include assessing (e.g., during stability studies using relevant quality attributes of the drug 
product, including particle analysis; see also Section 10.8.1) the compatibility of primary container 
components and associated process-related impurities with the active ingredient in its formulation. 
Interaction may also affect the functionality of the syringe system. Therefore, it is necessary to assess 
functionality during development (extended characterization) and in the final drug product configu-
ration to determine the effects of such factors as manufacturing operations, storage, and transporta-
tion. Appropriate testing for functionality can include break-loose forces, gliding forces, and injection 
time (e.g., for autoinjectors).
10.6	Shelf-life Effects
Filled syringe stability programs should consider all endpoints routinely assessed for parenteral prod-
ucts, such as CCI, visible and subvisible particles, physicochemical stability, and microbiological qual-
ity (e.g., sterility and endotoxins). Control of the orientation of empty syringes during storage and 
shipment is a relevant factor. Empty syringes are typically stored and shipped with the needle pointing 
up to prevent the silicone from accumulating in the needle opening.
10.7	Methods Toolbox
This section provides a discussion on available analytical methods suited for characterizing/assessing 
the silicone content of an empty syringe.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p63 (print p56) ---
56
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
10.7.1		Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy is one method used to identify the silicone oil content of 
an empty syringe. In this method, silicone oil identification occurs through organic extraction from 
the glass and elastomer surfaces of the syringe followed by solvent evaporation under vacuum. In 
some applications, it is also possible to measure the silicone oil directly on the rubber surface with an 
infrared probe.
It is possible to measure break-loose and gliding forces in empty syringe barrels indirectly using me-
chanical force systems. This method is advantageous because it is quick and also suitable for in-pro-
cess controls.
10.7.2		Powder Tests
Other methods described add glass powder or flour to the siliconized syringe, and the dry powder’s 
adherence to siliconized surfaces provides an approximate visualization of the silicone oil distribution 
(81). The images below show the powder distribution within syringes sprayed with silicone oil via 
fixed nozzles (Figure 10.7.2-1) and diving (dynamic) nozzles (Figure 10.7.2-2).
Figure 10.7.2-1	 Siliconization with fixed nozzles
Figure 10.7.2-2	 Siliconization with diving nozzles
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p64 (print p57) ---
57
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
10.7.3		Reflectometry Measurements
Reflectometry is based upon the different refractive indices of the syringe glass and the silicone.Re-
flectometry measurements can determine the distribution and thickness of the silicone oil layer.
Figure 10.7.3-1 shows the radial silicone oil distribution on the barrel of the empty syringe. The sy-
ringe is stored horizontally and the silicone oil is redistributed. On the lower part of the barrel, more 
than 10 times the amount of silicone is visible. The uneven distribution is due to the redistribution of 
the oil during horizontal storage. Because some areas have less silicone oil, the impact on break-loose 
extrusion force should be assessed. This method is used primarily for silicone layer characterization 
during research and development, but not for batch release or incoming goods control during com-
mercial supply of syringe barrels.
Figure 10.7.3-1	 Radial silicone oil distribution measurement
10.7.4		Schlieren Effect Analysis
This method uses high-resolution cameras, special lighting, and software (to calculate coverage) to 
visualize oil droplets that form at the interface of glass and product solution (Figure 10.7.4-1). This 
method is qualitative, fast, and mainly used for silicone layer characterization during research and de-
velopment, but not for batch release or incoming goods control during commercial supply of syringe 
barrels. Key considerations for this method include plunger stopper selection (siliconization or no 
siliconization), age, sterilization or no sterilization, plunger stopper placement, position, timing after 
plunger stopper placement, and velocity.
Measuring break-loose force and gliding force in an empty syringe requires the use of different test pro-
cedures. It is possible to measure gliding force results directly after siliconization of the barrel, whereas 
break-loose force measurement requires preparation time. The plunger stopper must be placed in the 
correct/defined position using vent tube equipment, and the syringe must be stored for at least 24 
hours up to 72 hours in real-time conditions, or undergo accelerated aging in a climate chamber. 
A common setup for the measuring devices is 100 mm/min up to 150 mm/min speed. The measur-
ing path depends on the barrel length and plunger stopper position.
1500
1250
1000
750
500
250
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p65 (print p58) ---
58
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73
Figure 10.7.4-1	 Silicone Oil Droplet Visualization
10.7.5		Break-loose and Extrusion Force
It is possible to measure break-loose and gliding forces in empty syringe barrels indirectly using me-
chanical force measurement systems. Advantages to this method are that it is fast and suitable for 
in-process controls. Major disadvantages are that the test is performed into air (not into tissue or any 
material more closely representing tissue), and test conditions are artificial and often do not reflect 
actual product use conditions (e.g., injection force, speed, and time).
10.8	Measuring Silicone Oil in Solutions
Silicone oil can mechanically detach from the wall during filling operations, storage through vibra-
tion, or as a result of plunger movement during injection. This last scenario (plunger movement dur-
ing injection) occurs because the plunger stopper not only glides upon a silicone layer, but also pushes 
silicone oil toward the needle upon injection. In water-based drug product formulations, which make 
up the majority of drug products presented in PFSs, the partitioned silicone oil may enter the solution 
as dispersed microscopic silicone oil droplets. The droplets may be stabilized in the aqueous disper-
sion aided by surface-active drug product formulation ingredients, such as proteins and surfactants. 
In many parenteral drug product formulations, especially in therapeutic protein drug products, sur-
factants are used as stabilizers. This silicone oil partitioning effect, observed in systems lubricated by 
free silicone oil and to a lesser extent, in systems lubricated by baked on silicone oil, must be evaluated 
carefully for product interactions. 
One method for determining the amount of silicone oil dispersed in the drug product solution (as 
presented in Section 5.5) is inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). 
The amount of silicone oil in the drug solution may be of interest from a patient safety perspective 
because one must assume that the dispersed silicone oil—together with the drug solution—will be 
injected into the patient. However, the potential amount of silicone oil that could be injected using 
siliconized syringe presentations—even with repeated applications—is typically much lower than any 
toxicologically relevant doses. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

--- PDF p66 (print p59) ---
59
Technical Report No. 73
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Another area of interest in which the amount of silicone oil in the drug product solution may be 
relevant is the potential interaction of silicone oil with the active ingredient or stabilizing formulation 
excipients. Drug/silicone oil or excipient/silicone oil interactions are very product specific and the 
drug product development program of any PFS presentation should address this (see Section 14.0). 
10.8.1		Subvisible Particle Analysis 
Subvisible particle analysis of particles larger than 10 µm and 25 µm by light obscuration is a man-
datory compendial test method for any injectable drug (82–85). In recent years, testing of particles 
smaller than 10 µm has also gained interest from regulatory bodies. Silicone oil droplets dispersed in 
solution typically contribute to these subvisible particle counts because the droplets are often in the 
relevant size ranges, and the light-obscuration technique cannot differentiate particle counts by par-
ticle composition. As a result, subvisible particle counts by compendial methods for PFS products are 
often higher and more variable than counts in corresponding presentations using less or no silicone 
oil (e.g., vial presentations).
To gain insight into particle type, particle number, size distribution, and particle variability, it may be 
useful to apply extended characterization techniques that help differentiate silicone oil droplets from 
other particles that might be present in the product solution. For particles and silicone oil droplets in 
the micrometer size range, flow-microscopy techniques are useful and commercially available from 
several vendors. The differentiation of particle types in flow-imaging techniques is based on mor-
phological differences between spherical silicone oil droplets and oddly shaped or amorphous other 
particles made visible by the imaging feature of the instruments. A visual assessment of images pro-
vides an estimate of particle type, as well as distribution of particle sizes in the micron range in the 
product. This technique is, however, time consuming and not suitable for routine operations, and the 
equipment is not suitable for quality control use. A higher degree of automation may be achievable 
with software filters for automated counting of different particle types. Several basic options are avail-
able in the commercial software, and more advanced options have been proposed in the literature. 
Applicability must be tested product-by-product.
Other exploratory techniques (such as resonant mass measurement) for studying particles in submi-
cron size ranges are under development. However, the various emerging methods are currently in 
the research and feasibility stage and are far from routine use for characterization purposes, let alone 
for quality control.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
