8 Operation
8.1 Operational planning and control
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8 Operation
8.1 Operational planning and control
The organization shall plan, implement and control the processes (see 4.4) needed to meet the
requirements for the provision of products and services, and to implement the actions determined in
Clause 6, by:
a) determining the requirements for the products and services;
b) establishing criteria for:
1) the processes;
2) the acceptance of products and services;
c) determining the resources needed to achieve conformity to the product and service
requirements;
d) implementing control of the processes in accordance with the criteria;
e) determining, maintaining and retaining documented information to the extent necessary:
1) to have confidence that the processes have been carried out as planned;
2) to demonstrate the conformity of products and services to their requirements.
The output of this planning shall be suitable for the organization's operations.
The organization shall control planned changes and review the consequences of unintended changes,
taking action to mitigate any adverse effects, as necessary.
The organization shall ensure that outsourced processes are controlled (see 8.4).
Product realization planning shall consider the requirement for consistent processing of primary
packaging materials. Planning shall also take account of the need for taking and retaining samples in
appropriate conditions.
The organization shall ensure that risk management processes are included in the planning and
implemented throughout product realization; records shall be maintained (see 7.5.3.4).
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
29
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith7ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT
ISO 15378:2017(E)
8.2 Requirements for products and services
8.2.1 Customer communication
8.2.1.1 General
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.2 Requirements for products and services
8.2.1 Customer communication
Communication with customers shall include:
a) providing information relating to products and services;
b) handling enquiries, contracts or orders, including changes;
c) obtaining customer feedback relating to products and services, including customer complaints;
d) handling or controlling customer property;
e) establishing specific requirements for contingency actions, when relevant.
8.2.1.2 Additional GMP-related requirements
8.2.1.2.1
The organization shall establish and maintain a documented feedback system to provide early
warning of potential and actual quality problems and to facilitate customer input into the corrective and
preventive action system.
8.2.1.2.2
When required by the customer, the organization shall agree with the customer which
changes require written confirmation prior to approval and which changes require notification only.
Proposed changes shall be communicated in a timely manner and the process for introducing changes
agreed (see 8.2.2).
It is recommended that, between the organization and the customer, there is a documented
technical/quality assurance agreement that includes the action to be taken for nonconformities (see 8.3).
8.2.1.2.3
If specified by the customer, samples and certification documents provided for evaluation,
stability testing or clinical trials for marketing authorization applications, shall be compliant with the
appropriate GMP procedures and controls.
As part of a marketing authorization application, the customer can require the organization to provide
specified information. An appropriately qualified individual within the organization shall approve such
information.
EXAMPLE Such information are composition, test data, specifications, control methods and processing
conditions.
Changes that affect any of the data supplied by the organization should be communicated to the
customer or the regulatory authority, as appropriate (see 8.2.2 and 8.5.6).
NOTE To facilitate organization confidentiality, scientific and technical information can be supplied as
a dossier directly to the global authorities, for example in the form of a Drug Master File (DMF), or European
Pharmacopoeia Certificate of Suitability, in connection with the application for a marketing authorization and
records maintained.
8.2.1.2.4
For GMP requirements for printed primary packaging materials, Annex C shall apply.
30
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT © ISO 2017 – All rights reserved
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 15378:2017(E)
8.2.2 Determining the requirements for products and services
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.2.2 Determining the requirements related to products and services
When determining the requirements for the products and services to be offered to customers, the
organization shall ensure that:
a) the requirements for the products and services are defined, including:
1) any applicable statutory and regulatory requirements;
2) those considered necessary by the organization;
b) the organization can meet the claims for the products and services it offers.
Requirements related to the product, including changes requiring notification, shall be determined and
documented.
Customer requirements to avoid unauthorized use of waste primary packaging material (including
samples, print media, labels) shall be determined and documented.
8.2.3 Review of the requirements for products and services
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.2.3.1
The organization shall ensure that it has the ability to meet the requirements for products
and services to be offered to customers. The organization shall conduct a review before committing
to supply products and services to a customer, to include:
a) requirements specified by the customer, including the requirements for delivery and post-
delivery activities;
b) requirements not stated by the customer, but necessary for the specified or intended use,
when known;
c) requirements specified by the organization;
d) statutory and regulatory requirements applicable to the products and services;
e) contract or order requirements differing from those previously expressed.
The organization shall ensure that contract or order requirements differing from those previously
defined are resolved.
The customer's requirements shall be confirmed by the organization before acceptance, when the
customer does not provide a documented statement of their requirements.
NOTE In some situations, such as internet sales, a formal review is impractical for each order. Instead, the
8re.v2i.e3w.2 can cover relevant product information, such as catalogues.
The organization shall retain documented information, as applicable:
a) on the results of the review;
b) on any new requirements for the products and services.
31
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith7ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 15378:2017(E)
8.2.4 Changes to requirements for products and services
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.2.4 Changes to requirements for products and services
The organization shall ensure that relevant documented information is amended, and that relevant
persons are made aware of the changed requirements, when the requirements for products and
services are changed.
8.3 Design and development of products and services
8.3.1 General
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.3 Design and development of products and services
8.3.1 General
The organization shall establish, implement and maintain a design and development process that is
appropriate to ensure the subsequent provision of products and services.
8.3.2 Design and development planning
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.3.2 Design and development planning
In determining the stages and controls for design and development, the organization shall consider:
a) the nature, duration and complexity of the design and development activities;
b) the required process stages, including applicable design and development reviews;
c) the required design and development verification and validation activities;
d) the responsibilities and authorities involved in the design and development process;
e) the internal and external resource needs for the design and development of products and
services;
f) the need to control interfaces between persons involved in the design and development process;
g) the need for involvement of customers and users in the design and development process;
h) the requirements for subsequent provision of products and services;
i) the level of control expected for the design and development process by customers and other
relevant interested parties;
j) the documented information needed to demonstrate that design and development requirements
have been met.
The organization shall implement documented procedures for design and development. These
procedures shall include risk assessment, determination of relevant aspects of GMP and any potential
impact on the customer and ultimately the patient.
32
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT © ISO 2017 – All rights reserved
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 15378:2017(E)
The responsibility for design and risk assessment should be agreed between the customer and the
organization.
8.3.3 Design and development inputs
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.3.3 Design and development inputs
The organization shall determine the requirements essential for the specific types of products and
services to be designed and developed. The organization shall consider:
a) functional and performance requirements;
b) information derived from previous similar design and development activities;
c) statutory and regulatory requirements;
d) standards or codes of practice that the organization has committed to implement;
e) potential consequences of failure due to the nature of the products and services.
Inputs shall be adequate for design and development purposes, complete and unambiguous.
Conflicting design and development inputs shall be resolved.
The organization shall retain documented information on design and development inputs.
8.3.4 Design and development controls
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.3.4 Design and development controls
The organization shall apply controls to the design and development process to ensure that:
a) the results to be achieved are defined;
b) reviews are conducted to evaluate the ability of the results of design and development to meet
requirements;
c) verification activities are conducted to ensure that the design and development outputs meet
the input requirements;
d) validation activities are conducted to ensure that the resulting products and services meet the
requirements for the specified application or intended use;
e) any necessary actions are taken on problems determined during the reviews, or verification and
validation activities;
f) documented information of these activities is retained.
NOTE Design and development reviews, verification and validation have distinct purposes. They can be
conducted separately or in any combination, as is suitable for the products and services of the organization.
Verification and validation in this context is limited to design and development. For verification and
validation of production and service provision, see 8.5.
33
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith7ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 15378:2017(E)
8.3.5 Design and development outputs
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.3.5 Design and development outputs
The organization shall ensure that design and development outputs:
a) meet the input requirements;
b) are adequate for the subsequent processes for the provision of products and services;
c) include or reference monitoring and measuring requirements, as appropriate, and acceptance
criteria;
d) specify the characteristics of the products and services that are essential for their intended
purpose and their safe and proper provision.
e) are verified as suitable before finalizing product specifications.
The organization shall retain documented information on design and development outputs.
NOTE 1 The organization and customer are encouraged to work together to verify the appropriateness of the
primary packaging materials for their intended use.
NOTE 2 Design and development outputs can include records (specifications, manufacturing procedures,
engineering drawings, engineering or research logbooks) and samples.
8.3.6 Design and development changes
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.3.6 Design and development changes
The organization shall identify, review and control changes made during, or subsequent to, the
design and development of products and services, to the extent necessary to ensure that there is no
adverse impact on conformity to requirements.
The organization shall retain documented information on:
a) design and development changes;
b) the results of reviews;
c) the authorization of the changes;
d) the actions taken to prevent adverse impacts.
Changes that affect any of the data supplied shall be reported to the customer and, if a technical
dossier/master file has been supplied by the organization, directly to the regulatory authorities.
When implementing change, the existing validation and documents affected by the change shall be
reviewed and revised; personnel shall be retrained as appropriate.
NOTE Confidential scientific and technical information (of the organization) can be supplied as a dossier
directly to the regulatory authorities (e.g. technical dossier and/or master file).
34
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT © ISO 2017 – All rights reserved
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 15378:2017(E)
8.4 Control of externally provided processes, products and services
8.4.1 General
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.4 Control of externally provided processes, products and services
8.4.1 General
The organization shall ensure that externally provided processes, products and services conform to
requirements.
The organization shall determine the controls to be applied to externally provided processes,
products and services when:
a) products and services from external providers are intended for incorporation into the
organization's own products and services;
b) products and services are provided directly to the customer(s) by external providers on behalf
of the organization;
c) a process, or part of a process, is provided by an external provider as a result of a decision by the
organization.
The organization shall determine and apply criteria for the evaluation, selection, monitoring of
performance, and re-evaluation of external providers, based on their ability to provide processes or
products and services in accordance with requirements. The organization shall retain documented
information of these activities and any necessary actions arising from the evaluations.
The organization shall maintain relevant purchasing information, i.e. documents (see 7.5.2 and 7.5.3.3)
and records (see 7.5.3.4), to the extent required for traceability as given in 8.5.2.2.
If any quality critical process is outsourced, the organization shall ensure that the process complies
with the requirements of this document.
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`--- 35
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith7ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT
ISO 15378:2017(E)
8.4.2 Type and extent of control
8.4.2.1 General
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.4.2 Type and extent of control
The organization shall ensure that externally provided processes, products and services do not
adversely affect the organization's ability to consistently deliver conforming products and services
to its customers.
The organization shall:
a) ensure that externally provided processes remain within the control of its quality
management system;
b) define both the controls that it intends to apply to an external provider and those it intends to
apply to the resulting output;
c) take into consideration:
1) the potential impact of the externally provided processes, products and services on the
organization's ability to consistently meet customer and applicable statutory and regulatory
requirements;
2) the effectiveness of the controls applied by the external provider;
d) determine the verification, or other activities, necessary to ensure that the externally provided
processes, products and services meet requirements.
8.4.2.2 Additional GMP-related requirements on type and extent of control
8.4.2.2.1
The organization shall approve suppliers of
a) starting materials,
b) quality critical process aids, and
c) packaging materials for use in cleanrooms.
8.4.2.2.2
The organization shall notify the customer prior to outsourcing any part of the production
process.
8.4.2.2.3
All outsourced services that can affect product quality shall be controlled, including
origination (artwork), laboratory services, sterilization, calibration services and qualification services,
maintenance, cleaning, haulage, pest control and waste contractors, depending on the risks involved.
8.4.2.2.4
Consultants advising on the production and control of primary packaging materials shall be
considered as suppliers.
8.4.2.2.5
Suppliers of quality critical materials and services shall be approved by the quality unit(s) or
a person assigned by the quality unit(s).
8.4.2.2.6
The organization shall evaluate and record the competence of laboratories to perform quality
critical activities. The organization shall only use laboratories that it has accepted as being competent to
perform quality critical activities.
36 --``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,``` ,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT © ISO 2017 – All rights reserved
ISO 15378:2017(E)
8.4.2.2.7
If the sterilization process is outsourced, the organization shall ensure that the process
complies with the requirements of 8.5.1.2, 8.5.1.3 and 8.5.1.4.
8.4.2.2.8
Changing the source of quality critical raw materials shall be subject to change control.
8.4.2.2.9
Incoming materials shall be physically or administratively quarantined until they have been
approved and released for use.
NOTE In exceptional circumstances, material under test can be used, provided there are fail-safe procedures
in place to prevent the release of primary packaging material, until the status of those materials has been
confirmed.
8.4.2.2.10
For quality critical materials, the organization shall periodically verify the relevant
and/or critical information received from their suppliers on a certificate of analysis (CoA), certificate of
conformity (CoC), or certificate of testing (CoT).
NOTE 1 This can mean performing similar testing on site, by an independent contractor, or routine audit of
the facilities to ensure that there is a high level of confidence in the supplier information. Alternatively, an audit
can be replaced by a certified management system if justified.
NOTE 2 In lieu of such testing by the organization, a report of analysis, e.g. CoA, CoC, or CoT, can be accepted
from the supplier, provided that at least one specific identity test is conducted on the material or sub-component
by the organization.
8.4.2.2.11
Records of the verification shall be maintained (see 7.5.3).
8.4.2.2.12
Sampling activities shall be conducted in accordance with a sampling method, using
procedures, facilities and equipment designed to avoid contamination.
8.4.3 Information for external providers
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.4.3 Information for external providers
The organization shall ensure the adequacy of requirements prior to their communication to the
external provider.
The organization shall communicate to external providers its requirements for:
a) the processes, products and services to be provided;
b) the approval of:
1) products and services;
2) methods, processes and equipment;
3) the release of products and services;
c) competence, including any required qualification of persons;
d) the external providers' interactions with the organization;
e) control and monitoring of the external providers' performance to be applied by the organization;
f) verification or validation activities that the organization, or its customer, intends to perform at
the external providers' premises.
37
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith7ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 15378:2017(E)
8.5 Production and service provision
8.5.1 Control of production and service provision
8.5.1.1 General
ISO 9001:2015, Quality management systems — Requirements
8.5 Production and service provision
8.5.1 Control of production and service provision
The organization shall implement production and service provision under controlled conditions.
Controlled conditions shall include, as applicable:
a) the availability of documented information that defines:
1) the characteristics of the products to be produced, the services to be provided, or the
activities to be performed;
2) the results to be achieved;
b) the availability and use of suitable monitoring and measuring resources;
c) the implementation of monitoring and measurement activities at appropriate stages to verify
that criteria for control of processes or outputs, and acceptance criteria for products and
services, have been met;
d) the use of suitable infrastructure and environment for the operation of processes;
e) the appointment of competent persons, including any required qualification;
f) the validation, and periodic revalidation, of the ability to achieve planned results of the
processes for production and service provision, where the resulting output cannot be verified by
subsequent monitoring or measurement;
g) the implementation of actions to prevent human error;
h) the implementation of release, delivery and post-delivery activities.
i) the definition of the date of manufacture, taking into account the processes involved;
j) special attention to marking, labelling and packaging operations to provide effective control and to
prevent errors;
k) a documented procedure defining the management of process deviations [the quality critical
deviations shall be investigated and the outcome recorded (see 7.5.3)].
8.5.1.2 Additional GMP-related requirements on verification, qualification and validation
8.5.1.2.1
Verification and/or qualification or validation shall be performed when significant changes
to the facilities, equipment and process occur which can affect the quality of the product.
NOTE 1 Change control of the validation process is part of the organization's change control policy.
NOTE 2 Guidance on verification, qualification and validation requirements for primary packaging materials
is given in Annex D.
38
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT © ISO 2017 – All rights reserved
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 15378:2017(E)
8.5.1.2.2
Where appropriate, validation of the individual product shall be carried out as agreed with
the customer.
8.5.1.2.3
The results of validation shall be recorded (see 7.5.3). Validation records shall be maintained
throughout the life of the equipment and process and for a period of two years beyond retirement or as
agreed with the customer.
8.5.1.2.4
For software used in quality critical processes, functional tests to verify the traceability,
transfer accuracy and retention of data shall be performed in sufficient number and under appropriate
conditions. The system shall be checked, e.g. by entering correct and incorrect data in order to detect the
traceability, transfer accuracy and retention of data or records.
8.5.1.2.5
The results of these tests and checks shall be recorded (see 7.5.3).
8.5.1.2.6
Electronic records shall be secured and protected against loss and accidental corruption and
in a form that will permit regeneration; if this is not possible, hard copy prints shall be retained for a
period of two years beyond equipment retirement or as agreed with the customer (see 7.5.3.5).
NOTE For further details on data security, management and software validation, see IEC 60601–1, the GAMP
(Good Automated Manufacturing Practice) Guide, and US/FDA Code of Federal Regulations 21, part 11.
8.5.1.2.7
The organization shall identify the quality critical processes within its operations, namely
those that influence the quality of the primary packaging material. Control over any of these processes
where the resulting output cannot be verified by subsequent monitoring or measurement shall be
demonstrated through validation and documented.
8.5.1.2.8
Risk assessment shall be used to determine which processes are quality critical, and to
determine the extent of the validation work necessary to demonstrate control of these processes. Risk
analysis shall be related to product quality related attributes.
8.5.1.2.9
Equipment, utilities and facilities used for manufacturing primary packaging materials shall
be verified or qualified /validated, in accordance with a documented risk assessment.
8.5.1.2.10
There shall be regular, recorded challenge tests of automatic inspection equipment (e.g.
100 % camera inspection systems and code system readers) to verify the continued functionality.
8.5.1.2.11
Test equipment used in determining the acceptance of quality critical starting materials,
intermediate/in-process or finished product shall be calibrated and additional qualification tests
performed if appropriate.
8.5.1.3 Cleanliness of product and contamination control
8.5.1.3.1
The organization shall establish and maintain documented requirements for cleanliness of
primary packaging materials and procedures to prevent contamination of equipment or product.
The potential risks associated with any materials or process aids which can carry a risk to patient
safety, e.g. transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE), should be evaluated.
8.5.1.3.2
All production processes in clean zones or in controlled areas, including environmental
controls, production, in-process controls and packaging of primary packaging materials shall comply
with the specified area conditions and operating criteria. Cleanrooms shall have airlocks.
8.5.1.3.3
Production processes in controlled environmental conditions shall be agreed between the
customer and organization. (See also 9.1.2.)
39
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith7ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:27:17 MDT
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 15378:2017(E)
8.5.1.3.4
The organization shall also establish documented cleanliness requirements for primary
packaging materials when
a) primary packaging material is cleaned by the organization prior to sterilization by the organization
and/or its use, or
b) primary packaging material is to be supplied non-sterile and its cleanliness is of significance in use, or
c) process agents are to be removed from product during manufacture.
8.5.1.3.5
Storage containers and their attendant manifolds, and filling and discharge lines shall be
identified.
8.5.1.3.6
Special attention (e.g. identification, security, cleanliness) shall be given prior to discharge in
and out of bulk containers/silos.
8.5.1.3.7
Handling/transfer containers shall be clean and not contribute to particulate contamination.
For product contact packaging materials they shall be covered or appropriately sealed.
8.5.1.3.8
Written procedures shall be established for the cleaning of equipment used in the production
of primary packaging materials. Records of cleaning equipment that are critical to the quality of primary
packaging materials shall be maintained (see 7.5.3).
8.5.1.3.9
Production equipment/areas shall be identified as to content and cleaning status.
8.5.1.3.10
The incorporation of reprocessed materials is inherent in the manufacture of some materials
(e.g. glass, aluminium, paper, thermoplastics). Reprocessing parameters shall be defined and agreed with
the customer. (See also 9.1.2.)
8.5.1.3.11
Unless agreed with the customer, thermoplastic materials shall not be reground and reused
in primary packaging materials. (See also 9.1.2.)
8.5.1.3.12
There shall be a line clearance inspection between different batches to remove all materials and
documentation not required for the next operation. Line clearance activities shall be recorded (see 7.5.3).
NOTE As an example, reusable handling/transfer containers used to hold starting materials during
processing are subject to a documented cleanliness check before being loaded with a different material to avoid
