3.3.8. STERILE SINGLE-USE PLASTIC
SYRINGES
This general chapter is published for information.
DEFINITION
Sterile single-use plastic syringes are medical devices
intended for immediate use for the administration of
injectable preparations. They are supplied sterile and bacterial
endotoxin-free and are not to be re-sterilised or re-used.
They consist of a syringe barrel and a piston that may have
an elastomer sealing ring; they may be ﬁtted with a needle
that may be non-detachable. Each syringe is presented with
individual protection for maintaining sterility.
The barrel of the syringe is sufﬁciently transparent to permit
dosages to be read without difﬁculty and allow air bubbles and
foreign particles to be discerned.
The plastics and elastomer materials of which the barrel and
piston are made comply with appropriate speciﬁcations or
with requirements of the competent authority. The most
commonly used materials are polypropylene and polyethylene.
The syringes comply with current standards regarding
dimensions and performance.
Silicone oil (3.1.8) may be applied to the internal wall of
the barrel, in which case there remains no excess capable
of contaminating the contents at the time of use. The inks,
glues and adhesives for the marking on the syringe or on the
package and, where necessary, the assembly of the syringe and
its package, do not migrate across the walls.
TESTS
Solution S. Prepare the solution in a manner that avoids
contamination by foreign particles. Using a sufﬁcient number
of syringes to produce 50 mL of solution, ﬁll the syringes to
their nominal volume with water R and maintain at 37 °C
for 24 h. Combine the contents of the syringes in a suitable
borosilicate-glass container.
Appearance of solution. Solution S is clear (2.2.1) and
colourless (2.2.2, Method II) and is practically free from
foreign solid particles.
Acidity or alkalinity. To 20 mL of solution S add 0.1 mL
of bromothymol blue solution R1. Not more than 0.3 mL
of 0.01 M sodium hydroxide or 0.01 M hydrochloric acid is
required to change the colour of the indicator.
Absorbance (2.2.25): maximum 0.40, determined between
wavelengths of 220 nm and 360 nm on solution S.
Ethylene oxide. Head-space gas chromatography (2.2.28)
coupled with mass spectrometry (2.2.43). Prepare the reference
solutions immediately before use.
Test sample. Crush the sample into ﬁne particles. Weigh
0.10-3.00 g of the sample, depending on the amount of
ethylene oxide residue expected, into a 20 mL injection vial
and close the vial. For low ethylene-oxide-releasing plastic
materials (e.g. cyclo-oleﬁn polymers and copolymers), heat
the vial in an oven at 120 °C for at least 15 h (pre-thermal
extraction step) before the 1st injection.
Reference solution (a). Dilute 1.0 mL of ethylene oxide stock
solution R1 to 50.0 mL with anhydrous ethanol R (1000 μg of
ethylene oxide per millilitre). If the solution is prepared using
commercial ethylene oxide standard from a previously opened
container, it should be noted that some ethylene oxide may have
been lost owing to its high volatility.
Reference solution (b). Dilute 10 mL of reference solution (a)
to 20 mL with anhydrous ethanol R (500 μg of ethylene oxide
per millilitre).
Reference solution (c). Dilute 8.0 mL of reference solution (a)
to 20.0 mL with anhydrous ethanol R (400 μg of ethylene oxide
per millilitre). Transfer 20 μL of reference solution (c) into an
injection vial and close immediately.
Reference solution (d). Dilute 6.0 mL of reference solution (a)
to 20.0 mL with anhydrous ethanol R (300 μg of ethylene oxide
per millilitre). Transfer 20 μL of reference solution (d) into an
injection vial and close immediately.
Reference solution (e). Dilute 4.0 mL of reference solution (a)
to 20.0 mL with anhydrous ethanol R (200 μg of ethylene oxide
per millilitre). Transfer 20 μL of reference solution (e) into an
injection vial and close immediately.
Reference solution (f). Dilute 2.0 mL of reference solution (a)
to 20.0 mL with anhydrous ethanol R (100 μg of ethylene oxide
per millilitre). Transfer 20 μL of reference solution (f) into an
injection vial and close immediately.
Reference solution (g). Dilute 1.0 mL of reference solution (a)
to 20.0 mL with anhydrous ethanol R (50 μg of ethylene oxide
per millilitre). Transfer 20 μL of reference solution (g) into an
injection vial and close immediately.
Reference solution (h). Dilute 0.5 mL of reference solution (a)
to 20.0 mL with anhydrous ethanol R (25 μg of ethylene oxide
per millilitre). Transfer 20 μL of reference solution (h) into an
injection vial and close immediately.
Reference solution (i). Dilute 100 mg of acetaldehyde R to
100 mL with anhydrous ethanol R (1000 μg of acetaldehyde
per millilitre).
Reference solution (j). Transfer 10 μL of reference solution (i)
and 20 μL of reference solution (b) into an injection vial, mix
and close immediately.
Column:
– material: fused silica;
– size: l = 30 m, Ø = 0.32 mm;
– stationary phase: porous silica for chromatography R (ﬁlm
thickness 4 μm).
A particle trap may be used to prevent particles that are
dislodged from the column from damaging the detector.
Carrier gas: helium for chromatography R.
Flow rate: 1.0 mL/min.
Split ratio: 1:50.
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
503
3.3.8. Sterile single-use plastic syringes
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
Static head-space conditions that may be used:
– equilibration temperature: 80 °C for plasticised poly(vinyl
chloride); 120 °C for cyclo-oleﬁn polymers and copolymers,
and polyurethane; 160 °C for silicone;
– equilibration time: 60 min;
– transfer-line temperature: 130 °C;
– pressurisation time: 0.5 min;
– injection time: 3 min;
– shaking mode: high agitation.
Temperature:
Time
(min)
Temperature
(°C)
Column
0 - 2
100
2 - 8.25
100 →225
8.25 - 13.25
225
Injection port
160
Detector:
transfer line
260
source
230
analyser
150
Detection: mass spectrometer; the following settings have
been found to be suitable:
– quadrupole mass spectrometer equipped with an electron
impact ionisation mode (70 eV);
– acquisition system: single-ion monitoring (SIM) for
ethylene oxide quantiﬁcation and complete spectrum mode
(m/z = 10-350) for ethylene oxide identiﬁcation;
– mass spectrometer parameters for the fragmentometric
mode (SIM) set as follows: m/z = 44 as ethylene oxide
quantitation ion; m/z = 29 and m/z =15 as ethylene oxide
qualiﬁcation ions.
Injection: 1 mL of the test sample and reference solutions (c),
(d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and (j).
After injection of the test sample, remove the cap from the
vial in a fume cupboard, and purge the vial with dry nitrogen
for 30 s. Close the vial with the cap and a new septum and
repeat the heating and injection to exhaustion. Exhaustion is
achieved when the amount of ethylene oxide extracted is less
than 10 per cent of the 1st extraction or when no analytically
signiﬁcant increase in the cumulative residue levels is detected.
System suitability:
– resolution: minimum 1.5 between the peaks due to ethylene
oxide and acetaldehyde in the chromatogram obtained with
reference solution (j);
– signal-to-noise ratio: minimum 10 for the peak due
to ethylene oxide in the chromatogram obtained with
reference solution (h).
Verify the absence of peaks interfering with the peak due to
ethylene oxide by carrying out the test on an unsterilised
sample.
Calculation of content. Establish a calibration curve with
the mass of ethylene oxide in each reference solution as the
abscissa and the corresponding peak areas as the ordinate.
Limit: if the label states that ethylene oxide has been used for
sterilisation:
– ethylene oxide: maximum 10 ppm.
Silicone oil. Calculate the internal surface area of a syringe in
square centimetres using the following expression:
V π h
2
·
·
V
 =  nominal volume of the syringe, in cubic
centimetres;
h
 =  height of the graduation, in centimetres.
Take a sufﬁcient number of syringes to give an internal
surface area of 100 cm2 to 200 cm2. Aspirate into each syringe
a volume of methylene chloride R equal to half the nominal
volume and make up to the nominal volume with air. Rinse
the internal surface corresponding to the nominal volume
with the solvent by inverting the syringe 10 times in succession
with the needle ﬁtting closed by a ﬁnger covered by a plastic
ﬁlm inert to methylene chloride. Expel the extracts into a
tared dish and repeat the operation. Evaporate the combined
extracts to dryness on a water-bath. Dry at 100-105 °C for
1 h. The residue weighs not more than 0.25 mg per square
centimetre of internal surface area.
Examine the residue by infrared absorption spectrophotometry
(2.2.24).
Comparison: silicone oil CRS.
Reducing substances. To 20.0 mL of solution S add 1 mL
of dilute sulfuric acid R and 20.0 mL of 0.002 M potassium
permanganate. Boil under a reﬂux condenser for 3 min and
cool immediately. Add 1 g of potassium iodide R and titrate
immediately with 0.01 M sodium thiosulfate using 0.25 mL of
starch solution R as indicator. Carry out a blank titration using
20.0 mL of water R. The difference between the 2 titration
volumes is not greater than 3.0 mL.
Transparency. Fill a syringe with water R (blank) and
ﬁll another with a 10-fold dilution of primary opalescent
suspension (2.2.1). Use primary opalescent suspension that
has been allowed to stand at 20 ± 2 °C for 24 h before use.
Compare with the naked eye in diffused light against a dark
background. The opalescence of the suspension is detectable
when compared with the blank.
Sterility (2.6.1). Syringes stated to be sterile comply with the
test for sterility carried out as follows. Using aseptic technique,
open the package, withdraw the syringe, separate the
components and place each in a suitable container containing
sufﬁcient culture media to cover the part completely. Use both
the recommended media (2.6.1).
Syringes stated to be sterile only internally comply with the test
for sterility carried out as follows. Use 50 mL of inoculation
medium for each test syringe. Using aseptic technique,
remove the needle protector and submerge the needle in the
culture medium. Flush the syringe 5 times by withdrawing the
plunger to its fullest extent.
Bacterial endotoxins (2.6.14): less than 0.5 IU/mL,
determined on 10 syringes ﬁlled with an extraction volume
of 40 mL of water for BET, unless otherwise justiﬁed and
authorised.
LABELLING
The label states, where applicable, that the syringe has been
sterilised using ethylene oxide.
504
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
