Due to their importance and direct impact on manufacturing operations, the cleaning and disinfec-
tion programs have been and continue to be a focus during regulatory inspections. Key components 
of any cleaning and disinfection program, which are often reviewed during inspections, include the 
following:
r Qualification of suppliers and agents
r Cleaning and disinfection methodologies
r Decision to use ready-to-use vs. ready-to-
prepare chemical agents as well as the quality 
of water to be used (if needed) during their 
preparation
r Process used for sterile filtering of 
antimicrobial chemical agents
r Sterilization and storage of antimicrobial 
chemical agents used in aseptic processing areas
r Sterilization and storage of cleaning equipment 
(sprayers, buckets, mop heads, and mops)
r In-use expiration dating of antimicrobial 
chemical agents
r Rotation of agents 
r Training, qualifications, and responsibilities 
of personnel and supervisors
r Frequency of cleaning and disinfection
r Contact times (wetted period)
r Method for addressing residuals
r Documentation for cleaning and disinfection
r Hold times for cleaned and disinfected areas 
and equipment
r Hold times for soiled areas and equipment
r Cleaning and disinfection performed after a 
shutdown or an excursion
While the preceding list may not be complete, it serves as a basis for the program and for inspection 
readiness. 
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
8
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
Technical Report No. 70
5.0 Qualiﬁcation of New Suppliers and Agents
New suppliers and new antimicrobial chemical agents for use in the disinfection program should be 
qualified prior to use following established procedures. A satisfactory audit, qualification testing, and 
a clearly defined Certificate of Analysis (CoA) are important aspects to be considered as part of the 
qualification. If changes occur in the agent’s formulation, packaging, or manufacturing site, an evalu-
ation should be performed to determine if requalification is required. 
When choosing a new antimicrobial chemical agent from a supplier, evaluate the supplier’s: 
r Product literature/technical data
r Material compatibility
r Storage conditions
r Expiring dating
r Efficacy data
r Material safety information
r Compatibility information 
r Packaging presentations
r Disposal requirements
r Sterility and sterilization information (if the 
product is provided sterile)
In evaluating supplier information related to the efficacy of an antimicrobial chemical agent, it is im-
portant to understand the testing methodology and standards used. These often vary depending on 
where the agent was registered and the claims made regarding its use. See Appendices II–V for more 
information on this topic as well as safety-related information.
Depending on the specific use of the antimicrobial chemical agent and experience with the specific 
supplier, an audit may need to be performed. Extra attention should be given to the following during 
an audit:
r Environmental control and cleaning of 
the manufacturing or packaging area 
and equipment used to manufacture the 
antimicrobial chemical agent.
r Control and disinfection or sterilization of 
the antimicrobial chemical agent packaging 
containers.
r Documentation and review of antimicrobial 
chemical agent production processing 
activities.
r For aseptically filled agents, the environmental 
monitoring (EM) program data, including 
alert and action levels, trending, corrective 
actions taken, and the use of neutralizing 
agents for the EM media used.
r For agents labeled as sterile, sterility testing 
data and qualification of the sterilization 
process.
r Water systems and the quality of water used 
in the manufacturing process. 
r Package or container integrity studies. 
r For double- and triple-bagged containers, 
disinfection of filled container and 
overwrapping integrity. 
r For double- and triple-bagged containers 
where a claim of sterility is made for inner 
bags, qualification of the sterilization process 
used. 
r Handling and storage of finished product 
containers or work in progress.
r Study results to support label claim of agent.
r Documentation related to regulatory 
approval of agent.
r Change control: customer notification 
of ingredient changes or process changes 
that would affect the finished product—
for example, wrapping, irradiation, and 
sterilization.
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
9
Technical Report No. 70 
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.1 Qualiﬁcation Testing 
Qualification testing of a new antimicrobial chemical agent should include both laboratory and in-
situ testing. Chemical analysis of the actives and microbial efficacy testing should be performed. 
Chemical analysis of the actives may be provided by the vendor or, alternatively, performed in-house 
or by a qualified contract laboratory using the vendor’s method. Microbial efficacy testing, whether in 
suspension or in carrier studies, should be performed in-house or by a qualified contract testing labo-
ratory. The antimicrobials chemical agents used for testing should be close to or beyond their stated 
in-use expiration date (this should take into account a ready to use and/or a use dilution prepared 
from a concentrate expiry). Testing should be done in replicate on multiple lots of the antimicrobial 
chemical agent where applicable. It should be noted that significant registration testing on multiple 
lots of the agent is performed by the company registering the product to ensure product consistency 
between lots and stability throughout the stated shelf life. 
Additional qualification may be performed if changes in product formulation or packaging or site inves-
tigations deem it necessary. Information supporting the qualification includes the following seven areas:
r Description of packaging, label, and container type
r Description of ingredients and concentrations
r Lot or batch number
r Efficacy testing results
r Irradiation or other sterilization verification certification
r Safety data sheet information
r Disposal information
5.2 Efﬁcacy Testing 
The demonstration of antimicrobial chemical agents to provide their respective kills is a function of 
the concentration of microorganisms present, the type of microorganisms, the choice of agent, the 
concentration of the agent, the porosity or texture of the surface to be cleaned, the method of appli-
cation, and the contact time. Routinely, the agent used should be effective against the normal microbi-
al vegetative flora recovered from the facility. Many efficacy testing guidelines, such as the Association 
of Official Analytical Chemist (AOAC), suggest high microorganism inoculum levels requiring longer 
contact times to destroy the population of cells (see Appendix VI, Section 22.0). As the normal clean 
room bioburden level is very low, the inoculum levels for testing would ideally depict levels seen in the 
controlled area. As this would not be practical in a test environment a higher inoculum level should 
be used and should not exceed 105. The antimicrobial chemical agent used within the industry can be 
broken into three general areas: sanitizers, disinfectants, and sporicides.
tSanitizers
Sanitizers provide minimal reduction in thirty seconds to ten minutes and are often used for low 
levels of vegetative microorganisms. The type of sanitizer will dictate the appropriate contact time 
required. Alcohol is an example of a commonly used sanitizer. 
tDisinfectants
Disinfectants exhibit a higher level of efficacy than sanitizers, and their kill is dependent on the 
inoculums and the contact time. Disinfectants will typically kill vegetative microorganisms with 
the exception of spore-forming microorganisms. Examples include quaternary ammonium com-
pounds and phenolics. 
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
10
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
Technical Report No. 70
tSporicides
Sporicides provide up to a total kill depending on the inoculums and the wet contact time and will 
kill bacterial spore formers as well as mold. Products commonly used today include bleach, hydro-
gen peroxide, and a mixture of hydrogen peroxide and peracetic acid. 
In general, contact or dry times in qualification studies should not exceed 120 seconds for alcohols 
(70% isopropanol and 70% denatured ethanol) and 10 minutes for disinfectants and sporicides. Longer 
contact times may be required based on the specific chemical agents used.
Methods to demonstrate efficacy include in-suspension and surface carrier (coupon) studies. In gen-
eral, a total of three antimicrobial chemical agents (sanitizer, disinfectant, or sporicide) are all that 
would be qualified within the typical biopharmaceutical or pharmaceutical facility. While historically 
it was thought that a wide array of disinfectants were required to minimize the buildup of facility-
resistant microorganisms, this is no longer a widely held belief (see Section 11.0). 
5.2.1 In-Suspension Studies 
The in-suspension studies may be used to quickly screen various chemical agents to determine which 
may be the most effective. However, these types of studies should not be considered a replacement 
for carrier/coupon surface studies (discussed in Section 5.2.2) in determining antimicrobial chemical 
agent performance on clean room surfaces. The test may also be used, where applicable, to demon-
strate an agent’s efficacy in destroying suspended organisms in solutions (for tanks, holding vessels, 
bioreactors, etc.). 
For in-suspension studies, a panel of six to ten microorganisms, including bacteria, yeast, and mold, 
should be used. Selection of organisms should be based on the type of environmental isolates recov-
ered from the facility (environmental isolates are preferred); however, if facility isolates are not avail-
able ATCC cultures (or cultures from other recognized international culture collections) representing 
facility isolates are acceptable until facility isolates can be obtained. From the panel, the microorgan-
isms chosen for each study should correlate with the type of antimicrobial chemical agent being 
evaluated (sanitizer, disinfectant, or sporicide).
One method that may be used to complete the studies is described here: 
1. A fresh culture of each organism is prepared to a known CFU/ml concentration. 
2. For each organism, a small volume of the culture is transferred directly into a sterile preparation 
of the chemical agent and mixed. (An inoculum level of 103 to 104 is suggested.) 
3. The mixture is allowed to sit for a specified time to simulate the desired chemical agent contact 
(wetted) time. 
4. Once the desired time has been reached, the entire solution is filtered and rinsed three times with 
an appropriate neutralizing agent. The filter is subsequently plated to suitable media such as Tryp-
ticase Soy Agar (TSA) and incubated to assess the survival level of the microorganisms. Com-
monly used neutralization agents are provided in Table 5.2.1-1.
Alternatively, the solution can be subjected to a serial dilution, with the first dilution using the 
neutralizing agent and subsequent dilutions using a saline solution. Selected dilutions are then 
filtered and plated as described above. A pour plate or spread plate method can also be use used 
with this approach. 
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
11
Technical Report No. 70 
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5. A positive control to verify the inoculum concentration for each organism should be prepared as 
part of each test. For each positive control, the method used in the study should be followed with 
the exception that the chemical agent should be replaced with saline. Based on the concentration 
of the inoculums used, appropriate serial dilutions should be made to allow the recovery of be-
tween 10 and 300 CFU per plate.
6. A negative control should also be used to verify that appropriate aseptic technique was employed 
during the performance of the method. For the negative control, the method used in the study 
should be followed with the exception that no inoculum should be used. No CFUs should be re-
covered from the negative control.
7. After the completion of the study, the log reduction achieved against each organism should be 
determined based on the CFUs present in the inoculum (as determined in the positive controls) 
and the CFUs recovered from the inoculum exposed to the chemical agent. This level of reduc-
tion should be assessed against a set of pre-established criteria to determine if the chemical agent 
provided the level of reduction required. 
Table 5.2.1-1  
Commonly Used Neutralization Agents 
Antimicrobial Chemical Agent
Neutralizing Agent
Alcohols 
Dilution or polysorbate 80
Sodium hypochlorite 
Sodium thiosulfate
Quaternary ammonium compounds 
Polysorbate 80 and lecithin
Phenolic compounds 
Dilution or polysorbate 80 and lecithin
Hydrogen Peroxide/Peracetic Acid and Hydrogen 
Peroxide
Catalase
The methods used should be validated to ensure that the neutralizing agent selected does not prevent 
growth of the various organisms chosen for the studies yet is effective in neutralizing the chemical agent.
1. To validate the ability of the test organisms to grow in the presence of the neutralizing agent, the 
test organism (typically at a concentration of <100 microorganisms) and the neutralizing agent 
should be plated together using a standard pour plate technique and using the same media type 
that will be used in the studies. The number of CFUs recovered should be comparable with a posi-
tive control to which the neutralizing agent is not added.
2. To validate the ability of the neutralizing agent to neutralize the chemical agent, the study method 
should be performed as written with the exception that the inoculums (typically at a concentra-
tion of <100 microorganisms) should be added after the neutralization step has occurred. In the 
case of a method that uses membrane filtration, the inoculums should be added to the last rinse 
performed on the membrane before plating. If a pour plate technique is used, the inoculums 
should be added to the vessel containing the neutralizing and chemical agents. The number of 
CFUs recovered should be compared to a positive control in which no chemical or neutralizing 
agent has been added.
5.2.2 Carrier Surface Studies 
Carrier surface studies are performed to provide a verification of the ability of the antimicrobial 
chemical agent to reduce the microorganism levels that may be present on the types of material sur-
faces present within the facility. 
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
12
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
Technical Report No. 70
A variety of surfaces that are commonly found in the facility and represent a worst-case porosity or 
most difficult to clean due to their surface texture should be considered. These may include stainless 
steel, plastic, plastic bags, glass, vinyl curtains, polycarbonates, and various floor material, such as ter-
razzo, epoxy, vinyl, and laminate, and wall material, such as painted epoxy and polysubstrates. The 
number of facility surfaces selected should be based on the criticality of the surface and the risk of 
such surfaces to harbor contamination that may have an impact on the final product. An example of 
criticality would be stainless steel. While it is often not found to be the most difficult to clean it is often 
included due to its close proximity (criticality) to the manufacturing operation. 
The carrier surface used for testing should be made of the material surfaces selected. If coatings, such 
as clean room paints and epoxy, are selected, they should be coated on non-linting or absorbent sur-
faces that will not adversely affect test results. It is recommended that the carrier’s measurements not 
exceed 1.5 inches (38 mm) by 1.5 inches (38 mm) so as to avoid false positives during handling of the 
carrier. Carriers of this size and smaller will fit into a standard test tube without significant manipu-
lations. However, the size of the carrier will be dependent on the specific method being employed 
and larger carriers may be used. Prior to use all carriers should be cleaned if needed and properly 
decontaminated to remove any microorganisms present. Precautions should be taken to ensure that 
no residual antimicrobial chemical agents are present on the carriers prior to testing. Based on vari-
ability within the test methods multiple replicates should be performed, three (3) or more replicates 
are recommended.
As with the in-suspension studies, a panel of six to ten microorganisms that include bacteria, yeast, 
and mold should be used. The organisms chosen should be based on the type of environmental 
isolates recovered from the facility (environmental isolates are preferred); however, if facility isolates 
are not available, ATCC cultures (or cultures from other recognized international culture collections) 
representing facility isolates are acceptable until facility isolates can be obtained. 
Presented next are two methods that may be used to complete the studies. 
The first method is a total kill method and the second an enumeration method. The total kill method 
is as follows: 
1. A fresh culture of each organism is prepared to a known CFU/ml concentration. 
2. For each organism, a small volume of the culture is transferred onto the surface of the selected 
carrier. A sufficient number of microorganisms (103–105) are placed on the carrier to demonstrate 
a sufficient reduction of these organisms. 
3. The inoculum applied to the carrier is allowed to thoroughly air dry, after which either the an-
timicrobial agent is generously applied to the carrier by spraying or wiping or the carrier is sub-
merged within the antimicrobial solution. The chemical agent is then allowed to stay in contact 
with the carrier for a defined period of time (e.g., five to ten minutes).
4. After being in contact with the chemical agent for the specified time, the carrier is then sub-
merged in a vessel containing a neutralizing agent and appropriate growth medium such as Tryp-
ticase Say Broth (TSB) to neutralize the chemical agent. 
5.  After a set time, the carrier is placed within a second vessel containing the same growth medium 
without the neutralizing agent. 
6. Both of the vessels are incubated at the appropriate temperature for a suitable time. 
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
13
Technical Report No. 70 
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7. Using this method, a result of no growth is required in both containers to demonstrate that the re-
quired log reduction has been achieved. This level of reduction should be assessed against a set of 
pre-established criteria to determine if the chemical agent provided the level of reduction required. 
8. A positive control to verify the inoculum concentration for each organism should be performed 
as part of each test. For each positive control, carriers that have been prepared with those to be 
exposed to the chemical agent should be submerged in a vessel containing a known concentra-
tion of saline and gently sonicated or mechanically scrubbed to remove the microorganisms from 
the carrier. A serial dilution should then be performed from the vessel and plated using the same 
media type that was used in the test to allow the recovery of between 10 and 100 CFU per plate. 
For example, if TSB is used in the test, TSA should be used for the control. 
9. A negative control should also be used to verify that appropriate aseptic technique was conducted 
during the performance of the method. For the negative control, the method used in the study 
should be followed with the exception that a sterile carrier should be used. No CFUs should be 
recovered from the negative control.
10. After the completion of the study, the log reduction achieved against each organism should be 
determined based on the CFUs present in the inoculum (as determined in the positive controls). 
The level of reduction should be assessed against a set of pre-established criteria to determine if 
the chemical agent provided the level of reduction required. 
The total kill method should be validated to ensure that the neutralizing agent selected does not pre-
vent growth of the various organisms chosen for the studies yet is effective in neutralizing the chemi-
cal agent. The validation can consist of the following: 
1. To validate the ability of the test organisms to grow in the presence of the neutralizing agent, 
each of the test organisms (typically at a concentration of <100 microorganisms) and the neutral-
izing agent should be plated together using a standard pour plate technique and using the same 
media type that will be used in the studies. After appropriate incubation, the number of CFUs re-
covered should be comparable to a positive control to which the neutralizing agent is not added.
2. To validate the ability of the neutralizing agent to neutralize the chemical agent as used in the 
study, the study method should be performed as written with the exception that the inoculums 
(typically at a concentration of <100 microorganisms) should be added to the vessel containing 
the neutralizing agent and growth medium after the neutralization step has occurred. Both ves-
sels must show growth.
The second method is enumeration, and can be completed as follows: 
1. The carrier, after having been exposed to the antimicrobial chemical agent as described in meth-
od 1, is placed in a vessel containing the neutralizing solution and gently sonicated to remove any 
organisms. 
2. The entire solution is then filtered, with the filter subsequently plated to a suitable media such as 
TSA and incubated to assess the survival level of the microorganisms.
Alternatively, the solution can be subjected to a serial dilution using a saline solution. Selected dilu-
tions are then filtered and plated as described above. A pour plate or spread plate method can also be 
