 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
46 
gas system should be through filter validation, integrity testing, and sterilization of connecting lines 
downstream of the filter, not by means of the APS.  
A risk assessment should specifically describe the aerobic or anaerobic nature of the aseptic process. The 
risk assessment should also include data gathered from other sources that could indicate whether anaerobic 
microorganisms may be present in the process or filled containers, such as sterility failures from FTM, 
anaerobic EM results (where applicable), or failures from routine microbiological testing of inert gases or 
other raw materials (i.e., powder-based materials that remain in that state for filling). The performance of 
anaerobic APS should be based on the outcome and data gathered regarding the anaerobic conditions during 
the simulated aseptic process and the appropriateness for the inclusion and frequency of strict anaerobic 
APSs should be justified. 
7.5 Container-Closure Configuration  
The container-closure configuration (e.g., glass vials with stoppers and caps, prefilled syringes and 
cartridges with plunger stoppers and tip locks, plastic bottles with dropper tips and caps, siliconized stoppers 
and vials, intravenous bags) used in commercial production on a particular production line should be 
replicated in the APS.  
When given container-closure configurations are used on the same production line for different products 
(e.g., product formulations or fill volumes), the product/container combination posing the highest 
complexity in filling operations should be applied for the design of the APS (i.e., worst-case). After the 
initial qualification runs, it should not be necessary to repeat the APS for each product twice a year 
(approximately every six months), given that the worst-case design is still applied for the re-qualification. In 
those cases, worst-case and other combinations should be tested on a rotary basis. However, in most cases a 
single worst-case option will not exist. If the container-closure configuration for different products does 
involve different variables or levels of performance, interventions or activities, an assessment should be 
conducted to determine if those combinations require additional or separate APS studies. In these cases, a 
bracketing or matrix approach may be more appropriate. 
7.5.1 Inclusion of Multiple Container-Closure Sizes  
Where different sizes of containers and closures are used on a production line, a risk assessment that 
identifies the worst-case or the case that affords the best opportunity to uncover process weakness should be 
used to support the selection of the container-closure configuration(s) included in the APS study. This risk 
assessment should conclude that the container-closure evaluations, their related qualification studies, and 
resulting worst-case configuration APS study design addresses all relevant configuration related variables, 
including dimensional aspects, positioning, performance, handling, and fill-time of the container-closure. If 
it does not conclude this, then additional container-closure combinations should be included in the APS 
studies. 
Evaluating more than one set of containers and closures may be necessary if the components require 
different production-line equipment, parts, setups, interventions, activities, or assembly. If the containers 
and closures exhibit different levels of performance, then additional or separate APS studies may be needed 
to assess those process variables. Examples of containers and closures that may pose increased levels of risk 
are outlined in Table 7.5.1-1. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
47 
Table 7.5.1-1 Potential Risks Associated with Various Container-Closure Characteristics 
Container-Closure Characteristic 
Example of Potential Risk  
Containers with larger openings  
Greater potential for microorganism intrusion through the 
opening 
Containers with smaller openings  
Potential contact with the operator’s gloved hands in the case 
of ATMPs with a manual fill 
Larger containers  
Filling of a larger volume of product may take more time, 
increasing the chance that contamination may be introduced 
Smaller containers  
Filling small volumes of product may pose a risk if the product 
accumulates near the top of the vial, if the container opening is 
close to support tracks or rails, or if containers are run at a faster 
speed and/or are less stable and fall over more frequently 
leading to higher rate of interventions 
Containers and closures that exhibit 
higher levels of production process-
related rejects and/or tend to be 
more difficult or complex to run  
Potential for increased frequency of interventions to address 
container-closure handling issues 
7.5.1.1 Container and Closure Bracketing  
Where multiple container and closure sizes are used in manufacturing, bracketing may be an effective 
approach to determine the representative sizes of container-closure combinations, where process 
equivalence is scientifically justified. Some considerations for the use of a bracketing approach include: 
• 
Bracketing usually involves the selection of two or more combinations of container-closures, 
determined to represent worst-case conditions, based on upper and lower (or other identified 
process variable) configuration ranges, such as container size, container-opening diameter, closure 
size or diameter, fill volume, or line speed. The assumption is that by running the container-closure 
combinations at the higher and lower ends of the range during APS studies, all container-closure 
combinations that fall between those sizes may also be considered qualified if supported by a 
scientifically sound risk assessment and rationale.  
• 
The upper and lower bracket configurations are typically included in the total number of APS runs 
required to qualify a given container closure system. Configurations falling between these brackets 
are usually tested with a reduced number of APS runs. 
• 
Where an APS bracketing approach is used for initial container-closure qualification, it may be 
prudent to continue to capture the other container-closure combinations that fall between the 
bracketed sizes in other APS runs or future APS runs performed for routine requalification. This 
allows for the capture of process variables associated with those sizes that may have been missed in 
the initial assessment.  
• 
The use of a bracketing approach is not merely based on a calculation of container-size variables. 
The decision can be complex, and risk-based decision-making should be used to ensure that all 
process variables that could pose a risk to product sterility are addressed within the bracketed 
process conditions. The selection of bracketing sizes or configurations should be justified by risk 
assessment. Variables to consider include such process and component aspects as component 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
48 
material-of-construction, container height, proximity to transport rails, ease of transport, 
interventions required, fill-system setup, production yields, and rejection rates.  
• 
The applicability of bracketing, where containers with differing shapes or characteristics of 
construction will be included in the bracketing matrix (e.g., tubular glass vials and molded glass 
vials), largely depends on how the difference between the container shapes effects the filling 
process and whether the filling of those containers pose additional risk to product sterility. A risk-
based assessment should be used that considers if the containers are handled differently, are 
transported through the fill line differently, or are filled differently as well as if they require 
different types of fill-system setup or have different heights or other characteristics or conditions 
that may pose a risk to product sterility.  
• 
Information and evidence of worst-case conditions can be obtained from the following: 
scientifically sound risk assessments, production reports, batch records, room, equipment and 
maintenance records, reject levels and rates, production yields, aseptic process observations, process 
failures, excursion investigations, and interviews with various aseptic processing personnel 
(including operators, quality, and mechanics who perform line set-up and normal corrective 
interventions).  
• 
If worst-case container-closure configurations cannot be determined, there is uncertainty that a 
bracket approach will capture all relevant process variables, or there is doubt of which container–
closure configurations represent the most challenging case, then the full number of APS runs 
determined required to qualify a given container closure configuration should be performed for each 
container-closure configuration.  
• 
This approach cannot be used to justify performing APS simulations that do not represent all of the 
various types of aseptic processing operations performed. For example, an APS of a manual filling 
operation cannot be used to represent a semiautomated filling operation because manual operations 
represent the most challenging conditions. Semiautomated operations have unique equipment, 
processes, and challenges that are not represented in a manual operation and need to be challenged 
in an APS study. Similarly, a prefilled syringe APS cannot represent a vial filling process (or vice-
versa). 
7.5.2 Pigmented or Limited Observation Containers  
Pigmented containers (e.g., opaque, amber, some plastic) that do not readily allow for visual examination of 
filled media should be replaced with clear containers that are the same size and made of the same materials 
as the original finished-product containers for the APS. When it is necessary for containers of a similar size 
and dimension to be used as the substitute, it should be determined that the substituted container 
encompasses all relevant process variables associated with the production container and does not perform 
differently than the commercial production container. If this is not possible, another option could be to open 
each container at the end of the final incubation period and transfer the contents of the container into a clear 
container to permit visual inspection of the media for potential contamination (turbidity). For some 
translucent containers, a preliminary inspection of the incubated container should be performed prior to this 
transfer to determine if visible signs of potential of potential microbial contamination (including but not 
limited to turbidity or presence of pelicle, sedimentation or filaments) are detectable. Extreme caution 
should be used when considering and performing this approach, however; the emptying of media contents 
from one container into another increases the risk of contamination and, if not inspected immediately, can 
result in positive media-filled units that may be difficult to unequivocally attribute to the emptying activity, 
rather than to an aseptic process failure.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
49 
7.5.3 Components from Varying Suppliers and of Different Designs and Compositions 
An assessment should be conducted of containers and closures that have the same dimensions, but different 
internal design or composition (e.g., synthetic or natural rubber closures, coated or non-coated, tubular or 
molded glass vials, EU blow-back vials) or come from different suppliers, to ensure that these components 
do not exhibit different levels of performance. This might include aspects such as component transport, 
movement, insertion methods, equipment or equipment adjustments required, and performance, or if the 
components require additional or significantly different preparation or handling. Where it is found that 
differences in procedure or performance exist, these components may need to be assessed separately and 
possibly included in separate APS studies. It may also be necessary to perform additional assessment and 
container–closure integrity test qualification studies.  
7.6 Filling Speed  
In general, the fill speed to be used for most containers should be set at the production-filling speed range 
for that size container in commercial production. Where production-filling speeds on a line vary, if a higher 
or lower speed results in the potential for greater interventions or other adverse impacts (such as increased 
product exposure to the environment), that speed can be considered worst-case and should be considered 
when selecting process-simulation parameters. Where a clear justification does not exist supporting a single 
speed, multiple speeds should be integrated into one APS or more than one APS should be conducted.  
Where multiple speeds are used on a given production line, it may be possible to include running a segment 
of the APS at each of those speeds or bracketing the slowest and fastest speeds. If this is done, then the 
number of units filled at each of the speeds should be the requisite number of units required for an APS.  
7.7 Fill Volume  
A container need not be filled to its normal fill volume when conducting an APS. Regardless of the actual 
fill volume, the APS should include a fill weight/volume adjustment using methods identical to those 
employed during production.  
While the specific amount of medium used in a partial fill may not be critical:  
• 
There must be enough medium in the container to contact all the container−closure seal surfaces 
when the container is inverted and swirled. It should be confirmed that all interior surfaces are 
contacted.  
• 
There must be enough medium in the container to allow for the detection of microbial growth. If 
there is not enough media to detect growth, it may be necessary to fill more than the production-fill 
volume.  
• 
The maximum volume for each container must be defined, allowing sufficient air headspace 
volume in the container to permit microbial growth. This can be supported by performing a specific 
growth-promotion test in each container size sent for incubation where possible (see Section 7.17).  
• 
The full production-fill volume should be considered if the filling of full-production volume is 
assessed to add risk from such characteristics as splash or foaming.  
7.8 Interventions  
As a general rule, interventions (inherent and corrective) should be minimized during routine aseptic 
processing. Interventions that would represent an unreasonable risk of contamination should not be included 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
50 
in either APS or routine production. The choice of interventions to be included in an APS should be the 
result of a risk assessment. Where an intervention, even if rarely performed, poses a higher risk to the 
product or process due to its complexity and infrequent execution, the company may consider including the 
intervention at a higher-than-normal frequency in the APS to allow for qualification of more than one 
operator.  
Intervention assessments should include the activities that occur during an aseptic process, including 
material transfer, fill-system setup, filling, sealing, and other activities that may pose a risk to product 
sterility whether inherent interventions (e.g., weight adjustments and container–closure resupply) or 
permitted corrective interventions (e.g., equipment and container breakage, closure jams, misalignment, part 
replacement, post intervention critical area disinfection). See Section 4.1.3 for more details on the inclusion 
of interventions in the APS.  
7.9 Duration of Aseptic Process Simulations  
The duration of the APS should be sufficient to thoroughly challenge all relevant production activities 
involved in aseptic processing. This includes simulating routine production conditions to identify potential 
opportunities for microbial ingress. The duration and scope of the APS should be determined through risk 
assessment, focusing on factors that reflect operational complexity and contamination risks. The simulation 
should begin with the first operational activity, such as equipment and line setup, and conclude with the 
final step in the routine process, ensuring all critical and routine activities are included. At a minimum, the 
APS should incorporate the following activities between the start and completion of operations: 
• 
Equipment setup and preparation 
• 
Sufficient filling and sealing of a representative number of units  
• 
Adequate number, frequency, and types of interventions  
• 
Transfer and aseptic connection of any surge tanks  
• 
Maximum permitted hold times for products, components, and equipment  
• 
Execution of routine environmental and personnel monitoring sampling 
• 
Movement of personnel into and out of controlled environments (i.e., Grade B background for 
RABS) during shift changes (if applicable)  
• 
Transfer and replenishment of components and materials, including loading of the isolator  
• 
Replacement of filters during the aseptic process, if necessary 
• 
Cleaning and sanitization procedures  
• 
Visual inspection for glove integrity during use  
• 
Consideration of unique operations or process-specific variables  
• 
Simulation of campaign operations for extended durations  
When no risk-based duration effects are identified, and when longer durations do not provide additional 
scientific value, the APS duration need not exceed the maximum production duration for the specific 
process. For operations extending over multiple days, the APS should assess the ability to maintain aseptic 
conditions throughout the extended period, supported by scientific justification for additional activities and 
personnel or material movements. For operations supporting manual aseptic filling and sealing, which are 
heavily dependent on operator performance, the full process duration must be replicated without truncation. 
The APS should be carefully designed to account for variables unique to manual operations using tools and 
manipulations to ensure accurate simulation of real-world challenges. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
51 
7.9.1 Aseptic Process Validation Limitations 
It is equally important to understand the constraints placed upon the APS. An APS is not designed to 
establish or qualify the duration of aseptic processes itself, as contamination risks are more influenced by 
specific events rather than the total length of the process. As mentioned above, the duration of the aseptic 
process should be determined beforehand, and while APS runs may match or approach the routine process 
duration, they do not need to exceed it as long as all critical variables are captured effectively within a 
shorter timeframe. 
Additionally, the APS should not be used to qualify or establish holding times for sterilized materials, 
components, or equipment. These holding times should be independently qualified based on production 
requirements and environmental conditions. Once established, maximum holding times can then be 
periodically included in APS runs to confirm alignment with actual use conditions for routine production. 
An APS is an invaluable tool for evaluating aseptic operations; however, they have specific limitations in 
addressing factors such as human fatigue, environmental exposure, and the qualification of maximum hold 
times. These considerations require alternative methods to ensure comprehensive QRM and process 
validation.  
7.9.2 Human Performance and Fatigue 
The APS is not a suitable tool for assessing the maximum time personnel can remain in the cleanroom or the 
effects of fatigue on performance. Risks associated with human fatigue should be mitigated through 
measures such as ergonomic process design, adherence to aseptic techniques, effective training, operational 
experience, and appropriate scheduling of breaks or rest periods. Fatigue-related risks are better managed by 
focusing on human-factor assessments, rather than relying on longer-duration APS runs, which may not 
effectively simulate these variables. 
7.9.3 Environmental and Equipment Considerations 
The APS is not designed to establish maximum environmental exposure times or validate the maintenance 
of aseptic environmental conditions. Such conditions are better assured through robust environmental 
system design, real-time monitoring, and microbiological assessments, rather than through the simulation 
itself (18). Similarly, the APS is not intended to establish maximum equipment usage times. Equipment 
condition and performance should instead be verified through proper selection, qualification, cleaning 
validation, and preventive maintenance programs. 
7.9.4 Qualification of Maximum Hold Times 
Maximum hold times for sterilized or sterile materials should be established based on production 
requirements and supported by assessments of packaging integrity under expected conditions. Protective 
barriers such as wrappings, bags, or containers must be qualified to demonstrate their ability to maintain 
sterility throughout the maximum hold duration, while accommodating the handling, transfer, disinfection, 
and operational needs of the process. Periodically, the APS should include materials held for the maximum 
qualified time to ensure that no duration-related variables are overlooked (13); however, APS runs should 
not be used as the sole method to qualify maximum hold times. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
52 
7.10 Number of Units  
The number of units filled for an APS should be sufficient to adequately challenge the entire aseptic process. 
The number of units needed to assess aseptic process events, interventions, and activities can be based on an 
assessment of the relative risk of those aseptic process steps. Units should be filled with media following 
interventions and activities to assess the effect of variables and conditions resulting from those interventions 
and activities. Steps, events, activities, and interventions to be assessed for inclusion in the APS include 
those associated with, but not limited to:  
• 
Transfer, assembly, and setup of direct and indirect product-contact equipment and surfaces, such as 
filtration, filling, and sealing systems 
• 
Movement of personnel into and out of the aseptic processing area (APA), including the entry and 
use of operators’ hands in the critical area through fixed glove ports 
• 
Movement of materials into the supporting area, as well as the transfer and replenishment of 
containers, closures, or parts into the critical area 
• 
Sanitization, disinfection, and preparation of fixed parts and areas where interventions were 
performed or contacted critical surfaces 
• 
Performance of other aseptic process interventions, groups of interventions, or activities that occur 
in the critical zone and APA areas that are deemed to pose a risk to the microbiological quality of 
the product 
• 
Execution of all routine setup, in-process, and post- process environmental and personnel 
monitoring 
As noted in EU Annex 1, the number of units processed (filled) for APS should be sufficient to effectively 
simulate all activities that are representative of the aseptic manufacturing process (1). Justification for the 
number of units to be filled should be clearly captured in the CCS. Typically, a minimum of 5,000 to 10,000 
units are filled. For smaller production batch sizes (e.g., those under 5,000 units), the number of containers 
for APS should at least equal the size of the production batch. However, these minimum numbers may not 
be appropriate for all filling operations, technologies, and APS studies. Each company should determine the 
rationale and approaches applicable to determine the minimum number of units to be filled during their 
APS.  
7.11 Means to Achieve Full or Longer Duration APS Fills  
One challenge with running long-duration APS fills is the need to incubate and inspect a large number of 
filled units. This can present a burden to those performing the APS due to limitations of incubation space 
and the resources and time needed to inspect a large number of units. The scenarios listed below present the 
corresponding rationale and related concerns that longer-duration APS runs are specifically designed to 
address, highlighting process risks that may only emerge over extended operational periods. When 
determining the duration of the APS, the process variables selected to challenge the conditions should be 
clearly identified. The chosen method should ensure that these variables are captured with a scientifically 
valid approach and appropriate regulatory requirements taken into consideration. 
Scenario 1: Alternate Between Media-Filled Units and Idle Time  
The line first fills media intermittently throughout the run, alternating with periods of idle time. Planned 
interventions and other critical activities are performed during the media-filling portion only. Media is filled 
periodically throughout the process, including at the beginning and end of the routine process duration, as 
well as during and immediately after any planned interventions.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
53 
Rationale: Under this approach, the aseptic personnel, procedures, and processing environment continue to 
be evaluated, but the number of media-filled units produced is reduced.  
Caution: The time the machine remains idle does not present the same level of challenge (to the process, 
personnel, or environment) as the actual production. This option is of limited benefit because only 
interventions and critical activities are challenged during the media-filling portion. 
Scenario 2: Alternate Between Media-Filled and Empty Units  
The line first fills media for a portion of the run and empty units for another portion of the run or 
intermittently throughout the run. Planned interventions and other critical activities are performed during the 
media-filling portion only. Media is filled periodically throughout the process, including at the beginning 
and end of the routine process duration, as well as during and immediately after any planned interventions.  
Rationale: Interventions and critical activities are challenged during the media-filling portion. The line is 
allowed to run for a longer duration without the need to incubate and inspect a larger number of media-filled 
units. Under this approach, the aseptic personnel, procedures, and processing environment continue to be 
evaluated, but the number of media-filled units produced is reduced. The running of those units increases 
the vial-handling challenge for the machine and can lead to additional interventions and increased activity 
and personnel presence.  
Caution: This option is of limited benefit because the processing of empty units during an APS does not 
allow for the evaluation of those units for potential contamination. Therefore, any process variables, adverse 
events, or compromise of the aseptic process during the periods of time when the empty units are being 
processed will go undetected. The only units and period that can be evaluated will be the portion filled with 
media.  
Scenario 3: Alternate Between Water for Injection-Filled and Media-Filled Units  
This method is similar to the approach in Scenario 2, except units are filled with water for injection (WFI) 
when not filling with media.  
Rationale: Liquid media or WFI are filled, which may capture variables associated with actual filling 
otherwise missed by running empty units.  
Caution: This option is of limited benefit because the filling of units with WFI rather than media still does 
not allow for adequate evaluation of possible contamination happening during the filling of vials with WFI. 
Further, the impact of media dilution with WFI, which could alter the growth-promoting characteristics, 
must be considered. Adequate qualification of the growth-promoting characteristics of the media should be 
demonstrated when alternating with WFI.  
Scenario 4: End of Production-Fill Aseptic Process Simulations (or Piggyback 
Campaigns)  
In this case, the APS is run after a full- or longer-duration production fill in an identical configuration 
without intervening decontamination / sanitization of the APA. 
Rationale: This is an evaluation of units filled with media, occurring at the end of an aseptic processing 
operation of long duration. Therefore, variables associated with the length of the filling operation may be 
captured and evaluated in the APS, without the necessity of running, incubating, and inspecting a large 
number of media-filled units.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
54 
Caution: This option is of limited benefit because running an APS after a production lot will not necessarily 
capture all relevant process variables associated with process start-up, including such activities as certain 
material transfer, fill-system setup, equipment assembly, and others occurring during the early parts of the 
fill. Therefore, to capture those variables, this approach should be periodically coupled or alternated with 
simulation of the normal production setup, start-up, and commencement of filling. Scheduling and 
sequencing piggyback APS studies should be supported by risk assessment.  
In addition, the product fluid pathway should be flushed with a sufficient quantity of media to remove drug 
product that may dilute or otherwise affect the growth-promoting ability of the media. The flush volume 
should be specified and shown to result in adequate growth-promoting characteristics of the media. For 
inhibitory products, the product fluid pathway contact points should be changed with newly prepared and 
sterilized parts or equipment prior to conducting the APS. Where the process allows collection of flushed 
media, the flushed media should be collected and incubated for evaluation, unless it can be clearly 
demonstrated that this waste process would not impact the sterility of the product. Any contaminated flush 
material should be investigated.  
7.12 Campaign Operations  
The campaign approach is increasingly common with FFS, BFS, and isolation technology (primarily 
isolators). During a campaign, environmental conditions are essentially constant and are expected to be 
unchanged throughout the campaign duration. Decontamination of the isolator and disinfection of RABS 
and/or removal, cleaning, and sterilization of critical surfaces is not normally performed between batches 
within a campaign. However, clean-in-place or sterilize-in-place (CIP/SIP) of the direct product-contact 
parts and filter changes of the product pathway may be performed between production batches. In addition 
to other activities, the APS for campaigns should include, in addition to other activities, start-of-campaign 
and end-of-campaign studies in a manner similar to that described for large batches.  
In campaign modes, the following situations may be possible and supportable in an appropriately designed 
APS:  
• 
Manufacturing of multiple-product lots of the same formulation, product, or product family 
• 
Changing configurations or fill volumes  
• 
Campaign lengths substantially longer than one day 
• 
Changing product formulation and/or concentration if cleaning and re-sterilization of the delivery 
system are performed aseptically 
• 
Breaks such as days or shifts without production are acceptable (i.e., production may not need to be 
continuous over the campaign period)  
Initial and periodic demonstration of campaign duration (total time or batches) should be based on an 
assessment of the operational elements which is an appropriate activity for the application of QRM 
approaches (see Section 3.4).  
7.13 Pre-Incubation Container Inspection  
The normal product inspection process is qualified for the removal of nonintegral containers (e.g., missing 
or misaligned closures, cracks in glass, poor crimps, empty containers) due to the possible breach of product 
sterility, and other non-container integrity related defects (e.g., presence of particulate, fill volume, cake 
shape in lyophilized products, cosmetic defects). The routine inspection process should be maintained for 
APS-filled units, with only nonintegral APS units removed during the preincubation inspection. Alternative 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
55 
inspection processes may also be used as long as the inspectors have been appropriately qualified to remove 
only nonintegral units. The removal of nonintegral units is appropriate because the evaualtion of these units 
in the APS would yield no valuable scientific information. For the purpose of the APS, cosmetic, 
particulate, and fill-volume defects should be ignored, and such units should be incubated and included in 
the APS evaluation and contamination rate. The inspection should be conducted as soon as possible to 
prevent delay of incubation of the units. (See Section 4.1.3.4 for the handling of intervention-related units.)  
7.14 Incubation Conditions  
Prior to incubation, filled APS units should be inverted and manipulated to ensure contact of the medium 
with all internal surfaces of the closure system before they are incubated. APS units should be incubated for 
a minimum of 14 days unless supported by another qualified duration or method. 
The chosen temperature should be based on its ability to recover microorganisms normally found in the 
environment or in the product bioburden. Any incubation temperature or temperatures in the range of 20-
35 °C may be used if data is available to show the suitability of the selected incubation temperature to 
support growth, including recovery of facility isolates and/or molds (as indicated by EM data) (19). 
If multiple temperatures are selected, a minimum of 7 days of incubation must be done at each temperature 
(e.g., seven (7) days at 20-25 °C followed by another seven (7) days at 30-35 °C) (19). Data should be 
available to show the suitability of the selected incubation temperature to support growth, including 
recovery of molds. The selected temperature(s) should be controlled and monitored continuously throughout 
the incubation period. When more than one temperature is utilized, the lower temperature should be used 
first, and the time to ramp up to the second temperature should be determined and considered to allow for 
full incubation period at the second temperature. A maximum time limit should be considered to ensure that 
inspection occurs as close to completion of incubation as possible, so neither the detection of potential 
turbidity nor the ability to subculture the potentially contaminated unit is compromised. 
The conditions for incubation should be qualified, including the conditions, timing and activities, such as 
sample inversion, after the period of processing prior to and during incubation (1). Incubation of filled units 
should begin without undue delay following completion of the simulated batch, to ensure that any potential 
contamination can be detected under conditions that reflect the true state of the process. Where the visual 
inspection process entails a lengthy manual operation, it should be assessed to understand if it can be 
considered as part of the initial ambient temperature incubation (20-25oC) or not. 
7.15 Post-Incubation Inspection  
Firms may choose to do an additional inspection of units part-way through the incubation period (often 
referred to as an interim read). This can be performed either by lower manipulation of the units (looking for 
gross contamination) or with a full inspection. Regardless of whether or how it is performed, care must be 
taken in handling so as not to compromise the units under incubation, and time out of the incubator should 
be considered in the overall incubation time.  
At the end of the incubation period, visual inspection of all APS units for growth is performed to determine 
the outcome of the APS. The inspection process should be performed by qualified inspectors who have 
demonstrated the ability to detect both low- and high-level microbial-growth patterns. Oversight should be 
provided by personnel adequately trained in microbiology and quality assurance.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
