 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
30 
Table 4.2.5.4-1 On-Line Placebo Powder Fill Followed by On-Line Liquid Media Fill 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
• 
All processes are on-line, 
with no additional handling 
of containers. 
• 
A second filler will need to be set up and qualified. 
• 
The process subjects the open units to additional exposure time.  
• 
Additional processing or handling steps that are not part of 
regular process are added due to liquid filling which may add risks 
to the simulation that are not present in the production process. 
• 
Limited space in the container may result in media overfill or in 
splash collecting on the rim of the container and affecting the 
seal.  
• 
There is a potential for powder aspiration from the container 
when the liquid is filled last.  
• 
There may be an increased risk for particles impacting the 
inspection after incubation. 
4.2.5.5 Dry Media Filled as a Powder and Reconstituted to a Liquid Form After the Fill  
In this method, dry media is filled into the units using a powder filler. Sterile water is added under Grade A 
conditions; the main advantages and disadvantages of this are listed in Table 4.2.5.5-1.  
Table 4.2.5.5-1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Dry Media Filled as a Powder and 
Reconstituted to a Liquid Form After the Fill 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
• 
No additional 
equipment is 
needed.  
• 
Additional steps to add water are burdensome and will add significant, 
and potentially unacceptable, risk to the simulation, which is why this is 
not a recommended practice. 
4.2.6 Other Dosage Forms and Drug/Device Combinations  
Aseptic processing may be used for sterile drug dosage forms or healthcare products other than those 
addressed in Sections 4.2.1-4.2.5. These may include healthcare products such as inhalants, aerosols, –
drug/device combinations, implants, advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMPs), and other novel sterile 
drug or healthcare products manufactured using aseptic processing. The methods and approaches presented 
in this technical report apply to these products, with consideration and modification to accommodate unique 
features of the products or processes. The risks posed by steps used in and conditions present during the 
performance of manufacturing procedures should be assessed and, where feasible, the process should be 
designed or modified to reduce or eliminate those risks. Where process steps and conditions remain that 
pose a risk to product sterility, a means to simulate the exposure of sterile product or surfaces during those 
steps and conditions should be designed. Section 4.2.6 presents some of these features and considerations.  
4.2.6.1 Terminally Sterilized Products 
Products that are terminally sterilized or otherwise treated to destroy microbiological contamination after 
filling typically do not require APS because the process does not primarily rely on aseptic processing to 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
31 
ensure product sterility. While the use of APS may not be required for the terminal sterilization cycle, it may 
still be useful as a tool to evaluate the effectiveness in case any aseptic process steps are applied. 
4.2.6.2 Combination Products 
Sterile product combinations involving more than one aseptic process may require a separate APS for each 
aseptic process, as well as for the process of combining the products.  
4.2.6.3 Aseptic Packaging and Assembly Operations 
For products that are aseptically assembled and packaged, APSs may be required to evaluate the packaging 
and assembly processes and procedures. These simulations may include the immersion or placement of 
packaged or assembled products in media as part of the simulation.  
4.2.6.4 Propelled Inhalants and Aerosols 
These products often are packaged in metal containers that do not allow visual inspection for 
microbiological contamination. Unlike solutions for other liquid products, it may not be easy to completely 
empty the aerosol container or transfer the solution (or liquid) from the aerosol containers to a clear 
container. Propellants may also hamper the growth of microbiologic contamination. Growth-promotion 
testing and studies should be conducted to ensure that the filling conditions do not adversely affect the 
growth potential of the media. It may be necessary to modify the filling process and conditions, including 
the substitution or addition of sterilized air to the propellent to allow for adequate growth.  
4.2.6.5 Implants and Aseptically Formed Products 
Sterile products that are molded, created, or formed during an aseptic process may also require APS. The 
formation of these products may use solvents that hamper and adversely affect the microbiological growth 
of media. In this case, it may be necessary to substitute other surrogate materials for the formed materials to 
allow for simulation of the aseptic processes. The use of surrogate materials and processes should be shown 
not to inhibit the microbiological growth properties of the media or result in significantly less processing 
risk than the actual manufacturing process.  
4.2.6.6 Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products 
ATMPs are therapies that encompass gene therapy, somatic-cell therapy, and tissue-engineered products 
from animals and human origin. These products are often produced aseptically in small batch sizes. In many 
cases, ATMPs are prepared and filled in individual Grade A laminar flow units or biosafety cabinets (BSC) 
that are placed in a surrounding Grade B environments. The processes usually involve manual activities and 
certain processing steps may be performed in a barrier system such as an isolator. Certain closed-processing 
steps may be performed outside of the Grade A environment.  
APS is an important element in validation of the ATMP manufacturing process and associated aseptic 
processes. A risk assessment should be used to determine the steps, conditions, duration, personnel 
participation, and other aspects of the ATMP aseptic manufacturing process that pose a risk to product 
sterility and should be evaluated in the APS (15).  
The following are some of the key considerations for designing ATMP APS studies:  
• 
Unless otherwise justified, the design, performance, and evaluation of the APS should follow the 
same steps and principles for other drug product APS.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
32 
• 
The process simulation should be designed to resemble the routine manufacturing process 
associated with open-processing steps and any other steps and conditions that pose a risk to product 
sterility (including transfers through lower grade classified areas). However, not all process steps or 
duration may require evaluation in the APS.  
• 
Processing activities that are closed, such as incubation or centrifuge, do not need to be simulated 
provided there is no open manipulation, interventions, aseptic connections, or contact with sterile 
product or product-contact surfaces.  
• 
Aseptic connections to closed systems should be evaluated in the APS.  
• 
Open addition, manipulation, or withdrawal of sterile materials associated with the process should 
be evaluated in the APS.  
• 
If multiple operations are carried out together in a single room, the APS should include the worst-
case area occupancy and activity levels.  
• 
A risk assessment and approach should be used to determine the extent of operator participation in 
all aseptic interventions.  
• 
Where manual aseptic filling is performed, the principles and requirements for manual filling 
discussed in PDA’s Technical Report No. 62: Recommended Practices for Manual Aseptic 
Processes should be followed.  
• 
Placebo/growth promoting media should contact all sterile surfaces of materials and equipment used 
during the manufacturing process, including waste lines and collection containers.  
• 
The incubation of intermediate containers may be necessary if the APS is divided into sections to 
simulate the entire process.  
4.3 Aseptic Process Simulation Design Based on Aseptic Processing 
Technologies  
RABS, form-fill-seal (FFS), blow-fill-seal (BFS), isolation technology, and automated systems can provide 
a lower risk of contamination. Use of isolators and automated processes with lower-risk interventions during 
processing mitigate contamination risk and may allow for greater flexibility in APS design (e.g., number of 
vials needed, duration of fill, personnel participation, and accounting for multiple shift changes). Relative 
risk and unique aspects of these technologies should be taken into consideration when assessing the design 
of APS and the design of barrier-system studies. In general, the same criteria for a traditional APS are 
applicable for all aseptic filing technologies. However, the design and scope/range of the APS might be 
narrowed for restricted-access filling technologies based on the lower potential for contamination 
established by the CCS.  
4.3.1 Form-Fill-Seal and Blow-Fill-Seal  
FFS and BFS aseptic processes involve some unique process conditions, which should be considered in the 
design of the APS including:  
• 
Ability to view contamination in translucent or opaque plastic containers  
• 
Interventions or activities within the Grade A critical fill zone or activities in the lower classified 
space (Grade B or C) surrounding the critical fill zone and FFS/BFS machine Interventions 
involving manual manipulation in the forming, cutting, and adjustment/removal area, fill-nozzle 
exposure area, aseptic connections, and manipulations post-filtration  
• 
Foaming characteristics of media that could affect the sealing of containers  
• 
Fill volume, including lower-than-normal volume, that may affect the formation of the container  
• 
Media exposure to heat and open-container dwell time  
• 
Longer campaign (usually) 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
33 
• 
EM sampling within Grade A, if appropriate  
4.3.2 Restricted Access Barrier Systems  
For an APS involving a RABS, the same criteria must be applied as for other aseptic filling lines. The 
inherent advantage of using a RABS is to lower the risk of contamination due to the presence of physical 
barriers that functionally separate the product and process from operators. Opening the doors on a RABS 
unit should be conducted only when necessary (i.e., rare occurrence) and can only be allowed after 
confirmation (via airflow visualization studies) that the intervention is not allowing the intrusion of lower-
grade air into the RABS enclosure. All permitted interventions are required to be simulated in the APS and 
based on a risk assessment. The APS should not be used to justify frequent opening of the RABS doors e.g. 
due to ineffective equipment design, as this would add unnecessary risk. See PDA’s Points to Consider No. 
12: Restricted Access Barrier Systems document for more information. 
4.3.3 Isolator Technology  
Isolators eliminate direct access of personnel into the critical environment by defined mechanical and barrier 
systems and are intended to eliminate human-borne contamination within the aseptic environment where 
sterile products, containers, closures, and equipment are exposed. Whereas glove ports are still the most 
common design to reduce contamination risk during interventions, gloveless isolators eliminate risks 
associated with human interventions. Isolators are decontaminated and material entry is accomplished using 
validated transfer systems.  
Although the same principles of APS design apply for isolators, when evaluating worst-case conditions to 
simulate, the relative risk may vary, and this can lead to a different design. For example, because the aseptic 
process space is completely separated from the surrounding room and operators during filling, the maximum 
number of people allowed in the room where the isolator is located or the impact of activities occurring in 
those areas from operational shift changes are not relevant worst-case conditions. However, if multiple 
operators interact with the isolator simultaneously (using glove ports), it could represent a worst-case 
scenario related to pressure or air flow, for example.  
Also, while isolators should still maintain a semiannual APS frequency for the line, shift structure is not a 
consideration, because the maximum batch size is larger, and the total filling time is often much longer than 
in a traditional aseptic filling line. Additionally, due to an isolator’s advanced controls, it is possible to have 
a lower percentage of units filled with media, compared to what would be performed in a traditional aseptic 
line however, filling fewer than 10,000 filled integral units is not recommended, unless the commercial 
batch size is smaller. For small-batch sizes, the number of units should adequately represent the production 
run. For an APS of large commercial batches, it can be useful to periodically process empty vials through 
the system to more closely simulate the appropriate number of additions and the level of line activity. In this 
manner, the mechanical and environmental challenges to the isolator environment more closely resemble 
normal operations, and the ability to recover is not compromised, but the size of the APS (related to 
inspection, incubation, and reading) does not become excessive. 
If empty vials are deemed necessary, then:  
• 
Interventions that take place during the filling of empty vials should not count toward those required 
for simulation of the process during media-filled conditions. 
• 
Any interventions that take place during this period should be executed appropriately, documented, 
and assessed for impact to the process.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
34 
• 
Reconciliation of all units should clearly identify those filled with media and those that are empty.  
• 
Only the media-filled units count towards the total acceptance requirements of the APS.  
Processing empty vials occurs with isolators due to their larger campaign-style filling, but this is also 
applicable to other technologies or filling lines. All decisions to process empty vials during an APS should 
be justified. In recent years, the use of a “piggyback” APS (i.e., one conducted at the end of a fill or 
campaign) has become more widespread, and piggyback APS has gained popularity as the number of 
isolators has increased and campaigns have started to increase in size. Initially, piggyback APS were utilized 
to support the validation of an increase of campaign length in isolators. As an example, if a company had a 
campaign three lots in length and wanted to add a fourth, three campaigns would be conducted in which 
three product lots were filled, followed by a fourth lot where media would be filled instead. More recently, 
piggyback APS is used outside of isolators. In any case, a piggyback APS can only be considered as part of 
the APS strategy and not a standalone APS validation. The use of the piggyback model must be 
supplemented by other simulations capturing the beginning of the fill, the setup of the line, etc. (see 
Sections 7.9 and 7.11).  
See PDA’s Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators 
(2020) for additional information.  
4.3.4 Closed Systems  
Closed systems are more commonly used for manufacturing sterile bulk products, which is covered in TR 
28. Since this technology is not yet addressed by TR 28, however, and “closed systems” are defined in EU 
Annex 1, this section will address APS for closed systems. A closed system is a system designed to prevent 
exposure of the product to the surrounding environment by maintaining physical separation and ensuring 
microbiological integrity throughout its use. In bulk processing, this is achieved through the use of 
interconnected bulk product holders, such as tanks or bags, which are linked by pipes or tubing and remain 
closed throughout the process. In sterile manufacturing, closed systems are sterilized in place or while 
sealed using a validated procedure before use. They are constructed, installed, and qualified to maintain 
integrity across all operating conditions and the expected duration of use. Fluid transfers can occur within a 
closed system while maintaining asepsis, and connections to other closed systems can be made without 
compromising integrity through methods such as rapid transfer ports or steamed connections and other 
appropriate techniques. These systems are safeguarded by scheduled preventive maintenance and, where 
applicable, utilize sterilizing filters that are integrity tested and traceable to each product lot. By design, 
closed systems offer enhanced protection against contamination, and when sterile bulk pharmaceutical 
chemicals or biological products are processed entirely within them, the risk of contamination is negligible. 
The term "closed system" does not apply to RABS or isolators. 
Closed systems have an advantage in that aseptic processing is possible within a background of a lower-
classified environment, for example, Grade C environment. Precautions must be taken to ensure that the 
integrity of the closed system does not become compromised after the sterilization of product-contact 
surfaces is achieved. Appropriate system-integrity tests should be considered when there is a risk of 
compromising the integrity due to transportation, sterilization, assembly, or usage. To prevent any 
contamination of the interior of the sterile closed system by an ingress from the environment, closed 
connectors/disconnectors (e.g., rapid transfer ports (RTP)) and continuous controlled overpressure should be 
considered. The means by which this is achieved should be determined and captured in the CCS.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
35 
The APS in a closed system should simulate process flow and aseptic filling into sterile containers, either by 
using closed connectors (e.g., single-use system (SUS)) or by direct connections, when the containers are 
sterilized together with the closed system (e.g., a SUS manifold system with multiple bags or fixed vessels) 
and are filled afterwards. Instead of product, a solution tryptic soy broth (TSB) is filled and later incubated 
within the containers. As always, the design and worst-case conditions should be based on QRM.  
Note: Closed systems are also addressed in Section 1.4.1 of TR 28; however, that section of TR 28 should 
be considered different from Section 3.4.4 in this technical report, because no aseptic filling of bulk 
pharmaceutical chemicals from closed systems into connected containers is intended in TR 28. 
Consequently, rinsing the closed system with a sterile placebo liquid to demonstrate the interior sterility of 
the closed system (as described in TR 28) is not sufficient. The contamination risk of aseptic filling into 
connected containers within a lower-classified environment than Grade A is much higher than operating a 
closed and well-controlled, integrity-tested sterile bulk pharmaceutical chemical system (e.g., vacuum or 
filter driers).  
4.3.5 Single-Use Systems Technologies  
SUS technologies are being used more commonly within the industry because, depending on the type of 
technology and its application, they may offer several advantages, such as a reduced need for aseptic 
manipulations, sterilization of components, and prevention of product cross-contamination. SUS are 
typically integrity-tested and sterilized prior to use; however, the APS can be a useful exercise to 
demonstrate the suitability of the entire system, including the aseptic connections to one or multiple SUS 
systems utilized in the process (16).  
The same SUS should be used for the APS as those for the aseptic filling, except where a different system 
(e.g., a smaller size, different filter, etc.) is assessed and accepted through risk assessment.  
4.3.6 Pre-Use Post-Sterilization Integrity Test Assembly  
The objective of the APS is not to validate PUPSIT, as this is addressed within the filter Bacterial Challenge 
validation (refer to PDA’s Technical Report No. 26 (Revised 2025): Sterilizing Filtration of Liquids and the 
Points to Consider for Risks Associated with Sterilizing Grade Filters and Sterilizing Filtration (2020)). All 
aspects of the PUPSIT procedure occurring within the aseptic process downstream of the sterile filter 
connection (e.g., aseptic connections, valve manipulations, integrity test conditions) shall be performed as 
part of the APS (refer to PDA’s Points to Consider for Implementation of Pre-Use Post-Sterilization 
Integrity Testing (2020)). 
Processes involving materials that come into contact with product contact surfaces but are then discarded 
(e.g., product flushes) and should be simulated with nutrient media and incubated as part of the APS. This 
requirement may be waived only if it is clearly demonstrated that the waste process does not impact product 
sterility. 
4.3.7 Considerations for Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products 
Considerations for the design and execution of an APS for manufacturing processes that employ manual 
operations are provided within this section. Different types of products are manufactured utilizing manual 
aseptic operations including many of those defined and regulated as advanced therapy medicinal products 
(ATMPs) which is a broad class of therapies inclusive of somatic cell therapies, gene therapies, and tissue-
engineered medicinal products. While the considerations for manual operations discussed within this section 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
