Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
7 
Restricted Access Barrier System (RABS)  
System that provides an enclosed, but not fully 
sealed, environment meeting defined air quality 
conditions (for aseptic processing grade A), and 
using a rigid-wall enclosure and integrated 
gloves to separate its interior from the 
surrounding cleanroom environment. The inner 
surfaces of the RABS are disinfected and 
decontaminated with a sporicidal agent. 
Operators use gloves, half-suits, rapid transfer 
ports (RTPs), and other integrated transfer ports 
to perform manipulations or convey materials to 
the interior of the RABS. Depending on the 
design, doors are rarely opened, and only under 
strictly pre-defined conditions (1). 
Closed RABS (cRABS) 
A RABS for which the barrier prevents air 
exchange with the surrounding environment. 
Closed RABS uses a dedicated 
unidirectional air flow unit (UDAF) system 
for air supply. Unlike a closed isolator, a 
closed RABS typically has mouseholes and 
commonly has no automated 
biodecontamination system. 
Open RABS (oRABS) 
A RABS for which the barrier permits air 
exchange with the surrounding environment. 
Passive Open RABS uses the room HVAC 
for supply. Active Open RABS uses a 
dedicated unidirectional air flow (UDAF) 
system for air supply but exchanges the 
exhaust with the room. 
Note: Although Open RABS cannot be 
automatically be biodecontaminated, there 
are some installations where the cleanroom, 
and all the equipment it contains including 
the open RABS, is biodecontaminated, but 
this is a special case. 
Sampling Frequency  
Established period for collecting samples.  
Shift  
Scheduled periods of work, staffed by 
alternating groups of workers.  
Single-Use Systems (SUS) 
Systems in which product-contact components 
are used only once to replace reusable 
equipment such as stainless-steel transfer lines 
or bulk containers. SUS covered in this 
document are those that are used in the 
manufacturing processes of sterile products and 
are typically made up of disposable components 
such as bags, filters, tubing, connectors, storage 
bottles, and sensors.  
Sterile  
A condition of being free from living, viable 
microorganisms.  
Sterility Test  
Test performed to determine the presence or 
absence of viable microorganisms in a 
representative set of finished product samples.  
Sterilization  
A process used to render a system free of viable 
microorganisms with a specified probability (7). 
Worst-Case  
A set of conditions encompassing upper and 
lower processing limits and circumstances, 
within standard operating parameters, that pose 
the greatest chance of process or product failure 
(when compared with ideal conditions). Such 
conditions have the highest potential to, but do 
not necessarily always, result in product or 
process failure.
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
8 
2.1 Abbreviations 
APA 
 
Aseptic Processing Area 
APS 
 
Aseptic Processing Simulation 
ATMP  
Advanced Therapy Medicinal Product 
BFS 
 
Blow-Fill-Seal 
BSC 
 
Biosafety Cabinet 
CAPA  
Corrective and Preventive Actions 
CCS 
 
Contamination Control Strategy 
CIP 
 
Clean-in-Place 
EM 
 
Environmental Monitoring 
FFS 
 
Form-Fill-Seal 
HVAC  
Heating Ventilation and Air 
Conditioning 
 
OOS 
     Out-of-Specification 
QRM  
Quality Risk Management 
RABS  
Restricted Access Barrier System 
RTP 
 
Rapid Transfer Port 
SCDM* 
Soybean-Casein Digest Medium 
SIP 
 
Sterilize-in-Place 
SOP 
 
Standard Operating Procedure 
SUS 
 
Single Use Systems 
TSB*  
Tryptic Soy Broth 
WFI 
 
Water for Injection 
* Note: SCDM and TSB are equivalent. 
 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
9 
3.0 Aseptic Process Simulation Concepts and Principles  
The validation of an aseptic process should include simulation using a microbial growth media and where 
necessary the use of a surrogate/placebo in place of the product (e.g., for powder filling processes). An APS 
normally includes exposing the microbiological growth medium to product-contact surfaces of equipment, 
container–closure systems, critical areas, as well as process interventions and manufacturing environment to 
closely simulate the same exposure that the product itself will undergo. Results are then interpreted (i.e., 
whether the filled media after incubation indicate absence or presence of microbial growth). CCS should be 
developed and implemented before executing an APS. 
3.1 Prerequisites 
For a new facility or production process, APSs are performed as part of the overall validation activities. 
Initial APSs are generally conducted after completion of:  
• 
Equipment qualification  
• 
Facility, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC), and utilities qualification  
• 
Sterilization process validation  
• 
Implementation of environmental decontamination procedures (cleaning, disinfection and Isolator 
decontamination)  
• 
Personnel training and gowning certification  
• 
Environmental monitoring (EM) program should be established 
• 
Standard operating procedures (SOPs) are available and personnel is trained on the applicable 
procedures 
• 
Aseptic process and associated intervention risk assessment  
Prior to performing APS; engineering batches and/or water trials should be performed to understand any 
handling issues and the interventions required for the process. 
3.2 Number and Frequency of Simulations 
The number and frequency of APS performed should be based on an assessment of the risks posed by the 
process. The initial APS supports that a new facility, line, or process is operating under the desired state of 
control. There is a regulatory expectation that at least three consecutive successful APSs are performed 
when qualifying a new facility, filling line, or process (1, 4). Using quality risk management (QRM) risk-
based approaches is important as the exact number may depend on the complexity and variety of processes 
and may require more than 3.  
While it is allowed by regulations to combine dynamic environmental qualification with APS, this is not 
recommended for new facilities or in general when the reliability of the controls to ensure proper 
environmental conditions during operation is not yet known. APS (periodic requalification) should be 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
10 
repeated twice per year (approximately every six months) for each aseptic process, each filling line, and 
each shift. Each operator should participate in at least one successful APS annually. Consideration should be 
given to performing an APS after the last batch prior to shut down, before long periods of inactivity, or 
before decommissioning or relocation of a line (1, 4). Additional APSs may be required based on a risk 
assessment to help evaluate any major changes to procedures, practices, or equipment configuration. (See 
Section 11.0) Based on risk assessment, flexibility in APS design (e.g., duration, etc.) may be appropriate 
for barrier systems that offer robust separation (built in by design) and a consistently heightened level of 
product protection; however, the underlying principles for aseptic manufacturing remain the same. (See 
Section 4.3.3) 
For lines producing different container sizes, the total run number may be decided by risk assessment, 
bracketing, and matrix approaches. Care should be taken to make sure all container sizes and all container–
closure configurations are considered in the risk assessment. It is also required to have an equivalent process 
and the same container–closure configuration in order to apply bracketing or matrix approaches. (See 
Section 13.4). 
3.3 Worst-Case Scenarios 
The inclusion of "worst-case" situations within the APS is intended to provide assurance that sterile product 
will be produced when the permitted extremes of the routine process are present, specifically those 
conditions that pose the greatest contamination risk to the product. Examples include the maximum sterile 
hold times, the maximum permitted number of people present, etc. Worst-case does not include situations 
that should be the subject of process deviations such as equipment failure, or the inclusion of interventions 
that pose unacceptable risk to the process.  
Worst-case conditions vary depending on the operations or risk being considered. For example, executing 
the APS using the maximum number of personnel is often considered the worst-case, as personnel are the 
greatest source of microbial contamination in an aseptic process. However, in some situations, the worst-
case may include executing the process with fewer people if this results in excessive movement by the 
process operators, or if it complicates the process steps. Therefore, only the number of people used for the 
routine process should be considered for the APS for their longest duration of activities. 
The worst-case approach, if used, should be duly justified, and its rationale should be documented in the 
APS protocol or procedure. Other examples of worst-case practices may include (but not be limited to):  
• 
Using equipment of the longest permitted duration  
• 
Using the slowest fill speed for the largest container (maximum exposure of vial opening to the 
environment)  
• 
Using the highest fill speed for the most difficult to handle container 
The worst-case conditions selected for inclusion in an APS should be predefined based on characteristics of 
the operation. Operational experience from routine production can provide opportunities to utilize 
intervention rates from different configurations, components, etc. to identify the appropriate ‘worst-case’ 
conditions for selection of the periodic APS study. Identifying appropriate worst-case conditions should be 
done by assessing the APS covering the relevant variables and their microbiological impact on the process. 
Such assessments can benefit from the application of QRM principles. The assessment conclusion should 
outline the variables selected as worst-case and the considerations or rationale for their selection. The risk 
assessment may also identify CAPA for reducing the "worst-case" situation such as improved operability 
leading to less interventions. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
11 
Note: In cases where it may not be possible to define one or two worst-case scenarios, it may be necessary 
to include several (or even all) scenarios in the APS program. 
3.4 Risk Assessment for Aseptic Process Simulation Design  
Risk assessment is a systematic process of organizing information to support a risk decision to be made 
within a risk-management process. It consists of identifying hazards and analyzing and evaluating risks 
associated with exposure to them (8). In the context of this technical report, hazards or hazard situations 
associated with aseptic processing are any flaws, failures, or conditions that could compromise the sterility 
assurance of aseptically manufactured sterile products. 
The principles of risk assessment should be considered in designing the APS. A risk assessment should be 
performed to determine, identify, and evaluate hazards or hazardous situations associated with the aseptic 
process steps and interventions that may adversely affect product sterility (9-11). Container size, 
configuration, line speed, batch size, and operating conditions provide an important insight into APS design. 
Risk assessments can also be used to determine the worst-case manufacturing scenarios related to these 
elements. This will be tied to the CCS where hazards are identified and the residual risk either considered 
acceptable or the process modified to remove/reduce the risk. It is important to consider risk to product 
quality and patient safety when confirming the design of the APS study.  
The purpose of a risk assessment for an APS is to evaluate the process that the APS simulates and to inform 
the design of the resultant APS study. Only after hazards and risks associated with the aseptic process are 
evaluated can the APS design be deemed both representative and appropriate. Using a multifunctional team 
with a good knowledge of process, equipment and facility design, review the aseptic process in detail with 
respect to the potential for contamination ingress with attention to intervention frequency, proximity of any 
intervention to sterile materials and surfaces, and duration of the intervention as appropriate factors in the 
evaluation of aseptic risk. 
The outputs of the aseptic process risk assessment used to inform the APS design should answer the 
following questions:  
• 
Is your APS design appropriately representative of all stages of the manufacturing process 
(including assessing/providing justification as to where the APS begins) without masking any 
important risk factors (e.g., usage of inert gas during APS or freezing the media during 
lyophilization simulation might compromise the detection of contamination)?  
• 
Is the APS mimicking the complete manufacturing process including the handling of materials, 
handling of media-filled units, operating equipment, and aseptic interventions from one subprocess 
to another?  
• 
Is your APS design able to “challenge process capabilities” of an aseptic process and identify 
previously unaddressed variables?  
• 
Are your selected and simulated worst-case manufacturing scenarios related to container size, 
configuration, line speed, batch size, and operating conditions appropriate, and are they able to best 
represent the risk to the aseptic product without adding an unnecessary risk to the APS? 
• 
Is your APS design meeting regulatory and industry guidance requirements?  
A critical success factor for such an exercise is sponsorship by the senior management of the organization to 
support resource allocation, appropriate team formation, any financial needs for managing the risk-
assessment outcome and, most importantly, motivating the team towards the ultimate objective of protecting 
product quality and patient safety. It is important to note that this process can be jeopardized by individual 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
