 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
56 
The analysis of filled containers for visible particulates may be used to gauge overall process control for 
intrinsic and extrinsic particle contamination. However, the presence of visible particulate matter should not 
result in APS failure unless microbiological contamination is detected.   
Since the preincubation inspection is expected to remove any units with container–closure defects, if such a 
defect is detected during the post-incubation inspection, it must be appropriately investigated for cause and 
corrective action(s) taken. Unless the investigation concludes otherwise, any contaminated units are 
considered positive regardless of the absence of integrity post-incubation. 
7.16 Unit Accountability and Reconciliation  
As the target acceptance criterion for an APS study is zero contaminated units, a precise chain of custody for 
all APS units and accountability is necessary. Accurate counts (i.e., units rejected during filling process, 
filled integral units, filled nonintegral units rejected during inspection) should be performed at each major 
process step (i.e., media volume involved, filling, lyophilization, crimping), preincubation inspection, and 
post-incubation inspection. At the conclusion of the post-incubation inspection, filled units are recounted to 
verify pre- incubation and post-incubation accountability, with a target accountability of 100%. In the event 
of a discrepancy, an investigation should be performed to determine the source of the variance and the 
potential impact on the validity of the APS study.  
The reconciliation should include:  
• 
Filled units rejected at filling line (includes capping, if appropriate), including automatic rejections 
and manual rejections (must be categorized further, e.g., broken vials, empty, not stoppered, not 
capped, units removed as part of line clearance)  
• 
Filled, setup units (stoppered/integral) for incubation in APS  
• 
Quality control samples (destructive samples, not integral and not incubated)  
• 
Filled units (automatic counting – leaving the fill/capping machine)  
• 
Units counted at preincubation visual inspection  
• 
Units rejected at preincubation visual inspection (nonintegral)  
• 
Units with cosmetic defects at preincubation visual inspection (integral and inspected)  
• 
Units received and placed into incubation*  
• 
Inspected units after 7 days of incubation* 
• 
Inspected units after 14 days of incubation* 
*Note: It is critical that the number of units incubated remain identical for items in listing with a “*”.  
7.17 Growth Promotion/Positive Control 
The growth-promotion properties of the incubation media should be evaluated using pharmacopeial 
methods. The inclusion of tests for key environmental isolates or those isolated from sterility-test positives 
are recommended. Growth-promotion tests are commonly performed after 14 days of incubation using 
negative media-filled units.  
The growth medium selected for an APS must demonstrate that it can support the growth of such 
microorganisms such as bacteria, yeast, and molds should they be present in the manufacturing process or 
surrounding environment. The media must be formulated properly according to a batch record and include 
validated mixing times and temperatures to ensure that the media retains its ability to support growth. Media 
should be of appropriate quality; a vegetable-based medium is the standard because it has the advantage of 
being mycoplasma, BSE- and TSE-free.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
57 
7.17.1 Sample Collection  
Demonstration of the growth-promoting properties of the media used for APS should occur at meaningful 
steps throughout the study. Samples should be collected throughout the batch after the entire incubation 
period is complete. The samples should represent the batch by randomly selected containers and also 
include worst-case. This is typically achieved by taking samples from the beginning, middle and end of the 
APS run. The worst-case is typically considered to be at start and end:  
• 
Beginning of batch: filter may take more nutrients out at the beginning 
• 
End of batch: the duration of exposure may reduce ability to recover growth  
The number of units will depend on how much media is filled into each unit, but the sample volume should 
adequately represent the batch. This is performed to demonstrate that handling or processing has not 
compromised the media’s ability to support microbial growth. This is often referred to as a positive control. 
The sampling of media should be performed with care using appropriate aseptic techniques. Sample 
locations must be justified as appropriate to the specific process and may require additional sample locations 
and timing. For example, samples can be collected on the bulk-formulated media just prior to use and tested 
for growth promotion. This can be used to demonstrate that the media, as prepared, is suitable and to support 
potential contamination investigations. 
7.17.2 Method Criteria  
Whether compendial indicator microorganisms are sufficient or if facility isolates should be supplemented 
should be determined. Justification for the types of microorganisms used in the growth-promotion study 
should be provided, consideration should be given to the use of gram-positive, gram-negative, yeast, and 
mold samples. The decision to use isolates from EM, sterility-test failure, and/or other microbial recoveries 
from the process must be justified. The microorganisms should be the same for both the bulk sample and 
post-incubation test samples. Units should be inoculated with a <100 colony forming units (CFU) challenge 
for each and repeated for each of the microorganisms required (20).  
7.17.3 Acceptance Criteria  
Growth of the indicator microorganism must be visibly present in each of the media samples. If the growth-
promotion testing fails (i.e., growth is not demonstrated), the test fails, and the simulation is rendered 
invalid. If there is growth present other than the indicator microorganism, a lab investigation is required to 
determine the source of the microorganism and may require retesting. If the growth-promotion fails but 
contamination is found during the final inspection, the APS should be considered a failure (21). An 
investigation is required to determine the cause of any failure, corrective actions must be implemented, and 
the APS must be repeated.  
7.18 Post-Simulation Cleaning  
Defined procedures should be in place, and cleaning validation should account for the effective removal of 
residual media from direct and indirect product-contacting equipment surfaces. Procedures on how to handle 
spillage during filling should be in place to avoid media entering difficult to clean areas. Where it is not 
possible to clean surfaces that may have been contacted by media, such as for gaskets and seals, these 
should be replaced. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
58 
8.0 Personnel Qualification   
The qualification program should be risk-based and commensurate with the complexity and the level of 
personnel skill required for a specific role in the aseptic manufacturing process. Qualification of personnel 
for critical aseptic interventions (e.g., machine parts assembly, filling-nozzle adjustment, or manual aseptic 
compounding), might require the highest level of qualification efforts, starting with selection, training, 
supervised execution, demonstration and, finally, participation in a successful APS.  
A phased approach to qualification is useful in breaking down this complex qualification process into 
different stages, which allows the personnel to advance from lower-risk activities to higher-risk activities, 
based on meeting different levels of qualification criteria. The need for direct supervision should be 
commensurate with these levels, with more direct supervision required initially and, when competence is 
demonstrated, less supervision required as they progress through levels of qualification.  
A typical qualification program for beginners or new employees could include stages to qualify for entry 
into the aseptic cleanroom, followed by qualification for performing less-critical tasks under supervision 
and, finally, qualifying for critical interventions (see Figure 8.0-1). In every stage of qualification, there is a 
need for an appropriate mix of training, practicing, supervised execution, and final assessment of 
performance. For the existing employees in the organization, a mechanism should be established to reassess 
their performance at regular intervals to ensure their qualification status. This should be a formally 
documented qualification program to ensure that those personnel can perform their tasks effectively, 
reliably, using appropriate technique, methods, and behaviors that minimize the potential risk of 
microbiological contamination to product. Company-specific qualification acceptance criteria should be 
established in a phased qualification process.  
 
 
 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
59 
Figure 8.0-1 APS Personnel Qualification Criteria 
Note: The level of training and assessment may vary based on qualification, prior knowledge and 
experience, role to be played, and the technology in use. 
8.1 Qualification Level 1  
Qualification Level 1 (L-1) represents the initial stage of personnel qualification and grants access and entry 
into the cleanroom environment to new or entry-level. This foundational training is designed for persons 
new to the cleanroom and focuses on: 
• 
General health and hygiene 
• 
Basic Microbiology 
• 
Sterility assurance principles including contamination control (18) 
• 
Gowning 
• 
Cleanroom behaviors 
• 
First air principles (4) 
• 
Impact to patients from a potential contamination 
These critical topics are required for personnel operating in an aseptic environment, which is in alignment 
with current regulatory expectations. To ensure comprehension at this initial stage, the program should 
include theoretical instruction delivered in a classroom or computer-based immersive setting, followed by 
proficiency-based assessments. Then, gowning qualification should adhere to a structured procedure, 
beginning with a visual inspection of the individual’s ability to properly don sterile garments and concluding 
with a microbial assessment to verify compliance with aseptic standards. This comprehensive approach 
ensures personnel are adequately prepared for working in controlled environments while also meeting 
regulatory and operational requirements. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
60 
8.2 Qualification Level 2 
Qualification Level 2 (L-2) builds upon the foundational training of Qualification L-1, enabling personnel to 
perform less critical activities while still under supervision within the cleanroom environment. Training at 
this level includes role-specific on-the-job training (OJT) while working under direct supervision and with 
guided practice towards a specific set of technical skills, accompanied by performance feedback to ensure 
gradual skill development. Competency-based assessments focus on practical demonstrations of assigned 
activities, including water or media trials, and are designed to evaluate the trainee's ability to perform tasks 
accurately and consistently while maintaining proper aseptic technique. Additionally, gowning qualification 
is reassessed post-activity for further assurance of cleanliness and aseptic standards. This stage of 
qualification ensures that personnel can contribute to cleanroom operations under supervision while gaining 
the experience and competence required for more advanced responsibilities. 
8.3 Qualification Level 3 
Qualification Level 3 (L-3) represents the advanced stage of personnel training and qualification, preparing 
individuals to independently perform critical aseptic procedures and interventions with minimal supervision. 
This stage builds upon the foundational and intermediate qualification levels (Qualification L-1 and L-2) 
and focuses on mastering high-risk tasks that need specific skills to operate. Training at this level includes 
role-specific, hands-on activities designed to develop competence in executing critical interventions, such as 
aseptic connections, equipment setup, and/or manual aseptic manipulations. Personnel are required to 
participate in simulated trials, such as water fills, that mimic actual production conditions. These 
simulations, combined with regular feedback from supervisors, enable personnel to refine their technique 
and bolster confidence. The qualification process at this stage involves demonstrating consistent compliance 
with aseptic behavior, positive trends in personnel monitoring results, and finally successful participation in 
an APS run in which all personnel perform the same roles as required in routine production. Qualification  
L-3 ensures employees are fully equipped to operate independently in high-risk aseptic environments. 
8.4 Ongoing Qualification 
Ongoing Qualification (at least annually) is a critical component that confirms maintenance of competence 
and readiness of personnel working in aseptic environments. It ensures that aseptic processing personnel 
continue to meet the high standards required for contamination control and sterility assurance. Regular 
refresher training sessions are essential to reinforce fundamental aseptic techniques, contamination control 
principles, and current regulatory requirements. Additionally, ongoing performance evaluations and 
feedback from supervisors and aseptic observers help identify and address any skill gaps. The assessment 
component of ongoing qualification involves analyzing personnel monitoring trends to identify 
abnormalities, determining root causes, and implementing corrective actions, as well as regular participation 
in APSs to ensure continued proficiency in critical aseptic techniques under production conditions. A 
structured ongoing qualification program ensures that aseptic processing personnel remain proficient, 
reliable, and compliant and contribute to product quality and patient safety. 
 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
61 
9.0 Aseptic Processing Simulation Acceptance Criteria  
The acceptance criteria for the number of positives in any APS should be zero, regardless of the number of 
units filled during the APS. Meeting the acceptance criteria alone does not definitively validate the 
acceptability of the aseptic process: a comprehensive evaluation of the design of the process, the robustness 
of the controls, and its continuous monitoring are necessary to ensure the process suitability to prevent 
product contamination.  
Failure to meet the acceptance criteria requires a thorough documented investigation to determine the cause 
of the positive unit(s), and what steps should be taken to address the cause (see Section 10.0). However, if 
the outcome of the investigation concludes that the root cause is unrelated to the aseptic process being 
simulated, the result may be acceptable.  
Failure to identify the cause of the positive unit(s) does not mean that the aseptic process is acceptable; in 
this case, a most probable root cause(s) should be identified and addressed before repeating the APS run, 
with considerations for impact on the production batches manufactured prior to the APS (see Section 10.0 
for details).  
9.1 Recommendations  
In addition to the zero positive units acceptance criteria, several other factors should be taken into 
consideration when considering the overall suitability/success of an APS (25). These factors can include:  
• 
First consideration is product and patient safety. Hold all potentially impacted product and evaluate 
the need for a recall based on the outcome of the investigation. 
• 
Consideration should be given to the use of proper aseptic behavior and/or technique as part of the 
overall assessment of the suitability of the APS. 
• 
APS should run as intended and follow the requirements specified in the APS protocol or procedure 
and should simulate the process as closely as practical.  
• 
Aseptic process should run as intended, with any deviations and excursions investigated and 
resolved, including observation of unacceptable aseptic behavior or technique. 
• 
Media should be shown to support anticipated levels of microbiological growth.  
• 
Rationale for the APS study procedure, limits, and worst-case conditions should be justified, 
documented, and based on assessments of the relative risks to the aseptic process.  
• 
The investigation must determine one or more root or plausible causes of the positive unit(s). It is 
not sufficient to continue performing APS runs without determination and correction of the cause of 
the failed APS.  
• 
Following the investigation, corrective and preventive actions (CAPA) should be determined and 
implemented to eliminate the cause or potential causes.  
• 
The investigation, conclusion, and CAPAs required to eliminate the cause of the contamination 
should be supported by scientific evaluation and risk assessment.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
