I.  INTRODUCTION AND SCOPE 

This document provides guidance to industry and FDA Staff on the underlying principles of 
human factors (HF) studies during the development of combination products as defined under 21 
CFR Part 3.  This guidance describes Agency recommendations regarding HF information in a 
combination product investigational or marketing application and clarifies the different types of 
HF studies; the recommended timing and sequencing of HF studies; and how HF studies are part 
of the process to maximize the likelihood that the combination product user interface is safe and 
effective for use by the intended users, uses, and environments.  In addition, the guidance 
describes how HF studies relate to other clinical studies.  The guidance also provides process 
considerations for HF information in investigational or marketing applications to promote 
development and timely review of safe and effective combination products.   

This guidance focuses on HF issues related to combination products that are comprised of a drug 
or biological product and a device (also referred to in this guidance as medical device) for review 
in an investigational or marketing application submitted to the Center for Biologics Evaluation 
and Research (CBER), the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), or the Center 
for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER).  The application types include an investigational 
device exemption application (IDE), an investigational new drug application (IND), biologics 
license application (BLA), new drug application (NDA), or premarket approval application 
(PMA).  However, the principles and recommendations may be applicable to combination 
products reviewed under other types of applications (e.g., premarket notification (510(k)) or 
abbreviated new drug application (ANDA)) as appropriate.2    

1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Combination Products in the Office of Special Medical Programs 
in the Office of the Commissioner in association with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, the Center 
for Drug Evaluation and Research, and the Center for Devices and Radiologic Health. 
2 The applicability of HF studies for certain combination product design changes under the 510(k) or ANDA 
program are beyond the scope of this document.  Applicants who are considering whether the combination product 
design change would change the center assignment should contact the Office of Combination Products 
(combination@fda.gov) for questions on the center assignment.  For information on the application types within a 
center, contact the respective center jurisdiction officers at CDERproductjurisdiction@fda.hhs.gov , 
CDRHproductjurisction@fda.hhs.gov, or cberombusmana@fda.hhs.gov.  Applicants preparing to submit a 
combination product for review under an ANDA that may include HF studies should contact the CDER Office of 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 

37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 

Related information is available in the Agency Guidance Applying Human Factors and Usability 
Engineering to Optimize Medical Device Design3 and the Agency Draft Guidance Safety 
Considerations for Product Design to Minimize Medication Errors.4  Additionally, this guidance 
supplements other existing guidance documents developed by CBER, CDRH, CDER, and the 
Office of Combination Products (OCP) that describe other aspects of product development.  (See 
Section VI for a list of some additional guidance documents.) 

FDA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable 
responsibilities.  Instead, guidances describe the FDA’s current thinking on a topic and should be 
viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited.  
The use of the word should in FDA’s guidances means that something is suggested or 
recommended, but not required. 

II.  BACKGROUND 

Combination products, as described in 21 CFR Part 3, are comprised of any combination of a 
drug and a device; a device and a biological product; a biological product and a drug; or a drug, a 
device, and a biological product.5  The constituent parts of a combination product retain their 
regulatory status (as a drug, device, or biological product) after they are combined.  Accordingly, 
a combination product remains subject to the regulatory requirements associated with its 
constituent parts.   

Generally, HF studies are conducted to evaluate the user interface of a product.  FDA often 
receives requests to clarify how HF concepts apply to the development of a combination product 
when one of the constituent parts is a device.  Inquiries include: 

•  What types of HF studies might need to be conducted for the combination product? 
•  When is the appropriate time to perform HF Validation studies? 
•  What is the role of HF studies as compared to other types of clinical studies? 
•  Are additional HF studies necessary when the design of the combination product 

changes? 

Other general inquiries relate to regulatory considerations for combination products such as 
when a HF study is subject to review and approval by an institutional review board (IRB),6 and 
how HF studies are considered in User Fee determinations.7    

Generic Drugs at GenericDrugs@fda.hhs.gov regarding controlled correspondence subject to the Generic Drug User 
Fee Act (GDUFA) performance goals to discuss considerations related to HF studies.   
3 Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff, Applying Human Factors and Usability Engineering to Optimize Medical 
Device Design, accessible at 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/UCM259760.
pdf.    
4 Draft Guidance Safety Considerations for Product Design to Minimize Medication Errors, accessible at 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM331810.pdf.   
FDA’s draft guidance documents represent FDA’s proposed approach on the topics. 
5 For purposes of this document the term “drug” also refers to biological products unless otherwise indicated. 
6 Clinical studies regulated under 21 CFR Part 312 (IND requirements) or Part 812 (IDE requirements) and clinical 
studies intended to support an investigational or marketing application are subject to applicable requirements under 
21 CFR Parts 50 and 56.  See 21 CFR 50.1(a), 50.20, 56.101(a), and 56.103.  As used in this document, clinical 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 

For medical devices, the use of human factors and usability engineering (e.g., applying the 
knowledge of human behavior, abilities, and limitations to the design of a medical device) plays 
a key role in maximizing the likelihood that the device will be safe and effective for use by the 
intended users, for the intended uses, and for the intended use environments.  Under the medical 
device design control requirements described in 21 CFR 820.30, design validation must include a 
risk analysis where appropriate.  As part of the risk analysis, device manufacturers should 
identify and analyze potential use-related hazards, including lessons learned from reported errors 
with similar products, and as appropriate, incorporate and validate design features that mitigate 
or eliminate these hazards.  This assessment informs the device design development to eliminate 
or minimize use errors that could cause harm or compromise medical treatment. 

For a drug product, goals for reducing use-related hazards are reflected in the process and data 
that support selection of the drug formulation, assurance of product quality,8 drug risk 
management activities,9 and in pharmaceutical quality system principles.10  Drug development 
should take into account the user interface and factors that can reduce the risk for medication 
errors; i.e., features to enhance patient safety.  Such features include product appearance, 
identification markings (such as imprint codes on solid oral dosage forms), container closure, 
packaging configurations, labeling (including labels on containers and cartons), and 
nomenclature.11  The Prescription Drug User Fee Act IV (PDUFA IV)12 provides that one of the 
development goals is to ensure drug safety by prospectively designing a drug that minimizes the 
risk for errors made by intended end users.13   

72 
73 
74 
75 
76 
77 
78 
79 
80 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 

study has the same meaning as investigation or clinical investigation as defined in Parts 50, 56, 312, and 812, as 
applicable. 
7 For information on user fee assessment under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) for applications 
containing clinical studies, see FDA Guidance Submitting Separate Marketing Applications and Clinical Data for 
Purposes of Assessing User Fees accessible at 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM079320.pdf.  
As described in that document the term “clinical data, for purposes of assessing user fees, encompasses a broad 
range of studies that are purported to be adequate and well-controlled investigations submitted in support of 
approval.  This includes [1] study reports or literature of what are explicitly or implicitly represented by the 
applicant to be adequate and well-controlled trials for safety or effectiveness; or [2] reports of comparative activity 
(other than bioequivalence and bioavailability studies), immunogenicity, or efficacy, where those reports are 
necessary to support a claim of comparable clinical effect.  As applicable, FDA will determine whether a HF study 
would meet these criteria.   
8 See Guidance for Industry Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical Development accessible at 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidances/ucm073507.pdf 
9See Guidance for Industry Q9 Quality Risk Management accessible at 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM073511.pdf   .   
10 See Guidance for industry Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System accessible at 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM073517.pdf.  
11 As defined in FD&C Act section 201(m), “labeling” means “all labels and other written, printed, or graphic 
matters (1) upon any article or any of its containers or wrappers, or (2) accompanying such article.”  As defined in 
FD&C Act section 201(k), “label” means “a display of written, printed, or graphic matter upon the immediate 
container of any article.” 
12 See information under Item-IX accessible at 
http://www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/UserFees/PrescriptionDrugUserFee/ucm119243.htm. 
13 Measures for designing such a drug could address, among other things, concerns regarding:  look-alike and sound-
alike proprietary names; unclear label abbreviations, acronyms, and dose designations; and other label and 
packaging design that may lead to user error. 

4 

 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
122 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 

For a combination product that includes drug and device constituent parts, both the device design 
control requirements and drug development expectations apply to the entire combination 
product.14  Therefore, when evaluating a combination product, the design of the product user 
interface should be assessed in HF studies if needed to ensure that use-related hazards associated 
with the product are eliminated or mitigated to reduce patient adverse events and medication 
errors attributable to use-related errors.  This document focuses on human factors considerations 
for combination products to promote consistency in their design, development and review.   

