=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-Aug-2019
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-CCA5C969-17E6-47AE-A85B-1AE8ACB515C5_2_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99505_02_01
DOI Ref:
m9vj9
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈729〉 GLOBULE SIZE DISTRIBUTION IN LIPID INJECTABLE
EMULSIONS
INTRODUCTION
Lipid injectable emulsions for intravenous administration are sterile oil-in-water emulsions of soybean oil, used to provide an ample supply
of essential fatty acids, linoleic and linolenic, dispersed with the aid of an emulsifying agent in Water for Injection. Alternatively, soybean oil
can be mixed with other suitable oils (neutral triglycerides), such as sa®ower oil, medium-chain triglycerides (MCT) derived from coconut or
palm kernel oils, olive oil, or a marine oil, such as menhaden oil. The size of the lipid droplets is critical: because of mechanical «ltration,
larger-size fat globules (>5 µm) can be trapped in the lungs. The essential size characteristics of a lipid injectable emulsion for intravenous
use include the mean diameter of the lipid droplets and the range of the various droplet diameters distributed around the mean diameter,
expressed as the standard deviation. In par ticular, the amounts of fat globules comprising the large-diameter tail of the globule size
distribution are especially impor tant with respect to infusion safety. These two regions of the globule size distribution (mean droplet size and
large-diameter tail) must be controlled within speci«ed limits.
The two methods described below are used for determination of the mean lipid droplet diameter and the distribution of large-diameter
globule sizes in lipid injectable emulsions. Method I and Method II must be validated. The methods described below to assess the quality of
lipid injectable emulsions are to be performed in two stages.
Change to read:
METHOD I—▲
MEASUREMENT OF MEAN DROPLET DIAMETER BY DYNAMIC LIGHT SCATTERING OR CLASSICAL LIGHT
SCATTERING▲ (USP 1-AUG-2019)
For the determination of the mean droplet size of lipid injectable emulsions, either of two common light-scattering techniques may be
employed: (1) dynamic light scattering (DLS), also known as photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS), or (2) classical light scattering ▲
[laser
diffraction (LD)],▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
based on Mie scattering theory. The DLS, or PCS, technique is based on analyzing the rapid temporal
¬uctuations in the scattered light intensity that occur due to the random Brownian motion, or diffusion, of any par ticles, including lipid
droplets, suspended in liquid. The intensity is measured at a given angle (usually 90°) by a suitable detector (e.g., photomultiplier tube) able
to measure the rapidly ¬uctuating scattered light intensity produced by the suspended, diffusing droplets. These scattered intensity data are
typically used to calculate the intensity autocorrelation function, which is a simple decaying exponential function in time for droplets of
uniform size. A distribution of droplet sizes expresses itself by ▲
the superposition, or summation, of▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
exponential functions
of different decay times, ▲
each representative of a given droplet size.▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
The autocorrelation function generated by the
scattered intensity data obtained from a given emulsion can be “inver ted” by means of an appropriate deconvolution algorithm in order to
obtain the approximate distribution of intensity-weighted diffusion coe­cients. From the latter, the distribution of small-diameter droplets is
calculated, using the Stokes–Einstein equation and the rules of classical (Mie) light scattering.
By contrast, classical light scattering based on Mie theory analyzes the spatial ▲
(angular),▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
rather than temporal, variation
of the scattered light intensity by measuring the latter as a function of the scattering angle, typically over a large range of detected angles.
The temporal ¬uctuations in the scattering intensity due to Brownian motion are averaged out in time for each angular measurement. This
angular variation occurs as a consequence of the mutual interference of individual scattered waves arriving at the detector with different
phases from different points within ▲
each of the▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
lipid droplets, ▲
summed over all of the▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
different par ticles.
The extent of the angular variation is signi«cant whenever the droplet diameter is not small compared with the wavelength of the laser light
(typically ▲
633–▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
635 nm). Droplets of a given size and refractive index yield a unique curve of scattering intensity versus
angle. A distribution of droplet sizes gives rise to a «nal angular dependence that represents the superposition, or summation, of ▲
all of the▲
(USP 1-Aug-2019)
individual (different) intensity versus angle curves. The measured angular dependence of the scattering intensity obtained
from a given emulsion sample, ▲
in principle,▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
can be inver ted by means of an appropriate deconvolution algorithm ▲
in
combination with▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
Mie scattering theory in order to obtain the approximate droplet size distribution.
Thus, light scattering, using either dynamic light scattering (i.e., ▲
varying▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
temporal ¬uctuations due to droplet diffusion)
or classical light scattering/Mie theory (i.e., ▲
varying,▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
average intensity versus angle), can provide acceptable results for
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:16 PM
USP-NF 〈729〉 Globule Size Distribution in Lipid Injectable Emulsions


=== PAGE 2 ===
both the mean diameter and, ▲
to a lesser degree, the▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
standard deviation of the droplet size distribution. For purposes of
illustrating the method used in Method I, a dynamic light-scattering technique is described. For guidance regarding instruments employing
classical Mie-theory light scattering, see Light Diffraction Measurement of Par ticle Size 〈429〉.
Apparatus
A suitable DLS/PCS instrument with or without the capability of automatic sample dilution is controlled by validated software and is used
to perform the measurement, with the scattering angle typically set at 90°. The intensity-weighted results (mean diameter and standard
deviation) are repor ted, provided it is clearly stated which values are given and that the necessary parameter values required for all requisite
calculations are also given.
Water
Pass distilled water through a «lter of 0.2-µm pore size, and degas by sonication, or use Sterile Water for Injection stored in a glass
container.
Standard Preparation
To a pre-established volume of Water add an appropriate amount of concentrated suspension, containing National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST)-traceable polystyrene latex standard par ticles or other suitable nanospheres. Gently mix the ¬uids to achieve a
homogeneous suspension. The diluted suspension will be slightly turbid in appearance. If the DLS/PCS instrument is equipped with an
automatic dilution system, the star ting concentrated sample can be analyzed by injection directly into the instrument via a syringe, with
fur ther dilution occurring automatically to optimize the droplet concentration for analysis. Alternatively, the sample would require greater
manual dilution with Water (typically by at least a factor of 10 over the «rst dilution), and then this sample would be instilled into a “drop-in”
cuvette. The optimum dilution scheme that achieves the proper scattering intensity for the cuvette-based analysis will be determined by the
instrument speci«cations. Thus, the concentration of latex in the «nal sample must be optimized for the DLS/PCS instrument used. This
should be performed separately for three different size standards of approximately 100, 250, and 400 nm (triplicate analyses per size), and
the corresponding results of intensity-weighted mean diameter and standard deviation should coincide with the expected values within
acceptable errors.
Test Preparation
To a pre-established volume of Water add an appropriate volume of sample from the lipid injectable emulsion. Gently mix the ¬uids to
achieve a homogeneous suspension. The diluted suspension will be slightly turbid in appearance. If the DLS/PCS instrument is equipped
with an automatic dilution system, the star ting concentrated sample can be analyzed by injection directly into the instrument via a syringe.
Fur ther dilution of the sample then occurs automatically to optimize the droplet concentration for analysis, ensuring that it is not so high as
to cause ar tifacts due to multiple scattering or interdroplet interactions. Alternatively, the sample would require greater manual dilution with
Water (typically by at least a factor of 10 over the «rst dilution), and then this sample would be instilled into a “drop-in” cuvette. The optimum
dilution scheme that achieves the proper scattering intensity for the cuvette-based analysis will be determined by the instrument
speci«cations. Thus, the concentration of lipid injectable emulsion in the «nal sample must be optimized for the DLS/PCS instrument used.
▲
Testing should be done in triplicate or, as appropriate, based on method validation data.▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
System Suitability
Using the Standard Preparation, measure the intensity-weighted mean par ticle diameter and the corresponding standard deviation. The
system is suitable once the sample temperature has reached equilibration and the results have stabilized and triplicate mean droplet
diameter measurements are obtained. The coe­cient of variation (CV) should not exceed ▲
15% (see below)▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
of the NIST
-
traceable mean droplet diameter. A larger CV value indicates that the latex microspheres are not suitable as a standard because they either
inherently lack uniformity or have become agglomerated to an unacceptable extent. In this case, another standard latex suspension must be
selected and tested.
▲
[Note—The recommended 15% CV limit is increased here because of the differences in the way the mean droplet size is determined by DLS
versus classical light scattering.]▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
Procedure and Interpretation
If the DLS/PCS instrument is equipped with an automatic dilution system, use a disposable syringe to load the Standard preparation or Test
preparation. If no automatic dilution system is used, transfer the appropriately diluted preparation to a cuvette, and place the cuvette in the
▲
temperature-regulated sample holder of the instrument.▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
Allow the sample to equilibrate to a preset controlled temperature
close to ambient (between 20° and 25°, as in the USP de«nition found in Packaging and Storage Requirements 〈659〉). Set the instrument
scattering angle to 90°, and carry out the measurements. As long as the chi-square (χ
2
) goodness-of-«t parameter remains acceptably low
(per instrument speci«cations), the results for the Test preparation are acceptable. Excessive values of the χ
2
 parameter suggest that the
droplet distribution is not normal and may indicate an unstable emulsion. The intensity-weighted mean droplet diameter (MDD) for lipid
injectable emulsions must be less than 500 nm or 0.5 µm, irrespective of the concentration of the dispersed lipid phase.
▲
Submicron results from the DLS method and classical (Mie) light scattering method may vary due to the different physical principles of
the mechanism of testing and the different mathematical procedures used to analyze the underlying data.▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:16 PM
USP-NF 〈729〉 Globule Size Distribution in Lipid Injectable Emulsions


=== PAGE 3 ===
Change to read:
METHOD II—MEASUREMENT OF LARGE GLOBULE CONTENT BY LIGHT OBSCURATION OR EXTINCTION METHOD
For determination of the extent of the large-diameter droplet tail (>5 µm) of lipid injectable emulsions, a light obscuration (LO) or light
extinction (LE) method that employs a single-par ticle (globule) optical sizing (SPOS) technique is used. ▲
DLS methodology is effective only
for characterizing smaller par ticle sizes in the nominal size range of about 1–1000 nm; therefore, DLS is complimentary to LE and is
par ticularly effective in sizing droplets smaller than 500 nm. Impor tantly, DLS is only a sizing method and provides only semi-quantitative
information on the relative droplet size distribution. DLS does not count par ticles or droplets; thus, it is mainly a qualitative method. In
contrast, LE both sizes (1.3–400 µm) and counts fat globules providing “reliable” count values at a size threshold of 5 µm.▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
During application of the LE/SPOS technique, passage of a droplet through a thin optical sensing zone results in ▲
effective▲ (USP 1-Aug-
2019)
blockage of a por tion of the incident light beam, causing a momentary decrease in the light intensity reaching the ▲
distant▲ (USP 1-Aug-
2019)
“extinction” detector. The magnitude of this decrease in the signal is ▲
related▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
to the cross-sectional area of the droplet
(assumed smaller than the sensing zone thickness), i.e., to the square of the droplet diameter. ▲
The larger the droplet diameter, the larger the
height (voltage) of the signal pulse produced by the momentary decrease in the detected light intensity.▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
During optimization
of the LE/SPOS instrument for a given emulsion sample, a series of dilutions should be tested to achieve consistency between samples. The
goal is to identify a standard range of dilutions that yield consistent data and are most applicable to the formulation tested. Ideally, when
comparing different emulsions, the same approximate number of globules are sized each time, and once a standard is achieved, it should be
incorporated into the routine sampling plan for validation testing. As long as the fat globule concentration is below the “coincidence limit” of
the sensor (determined by the ¬ow cell and optical design, ▲
veri«ed experimentally),▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
only one globule at most will pass
through the sensing zone at any given time, allowing it to be counted and accurately sized (with less than 1% ▲
par ticle or globule▲ (USP 1-Aug-
2019)
coincidence events). Both the coincidence ▲
(concentration)▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
limit and the optimal ¬ow rate must be known for the
LE/SPOS sensor used. Fur thermore, it is prudent to perform the large-diameter measurements at a reduced emulsion concentration such
that the measurable droplet concentration ▲
from the▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
threshold of detection (e.g., >1.8 µm) to an ▲
appropriate▲ (USP 1-Aug-
2019)
upper ▲
size▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
limit (e.g., 50 µm) is only approximately one-third of the nominal coincidence limit for the sensor used.
The resulting single pulse heights are conver ted to droplet diameters using a standard calibration curve previously constructed from NIST
-
traceable monosized polystyrene microspheres of known diameters. For additional guidance in the use of the light obscuration methodology,
see Par ticulate Matter in Injections 〈788〉.
Apparatus
A suitable light obscuration instrument with or without the capability of automatic sample dilution and controlled by a personal computer
(PC) is used for the measurement. The number- and volume-weighted par ticle size distribution data are repor ted, provided that it is clearly
stated which values are given and that the necessary parameter values required for all necessary calculations are also given.
Water
Pass distilled water through a «lter of 0.2-µm pore size ▲
and degas by sonication,▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
or use Sterile Water for Injection stored
in a glass container.
Standard Preparation
To a pre-established volume of Water add an appropriate amount of concentrated suspension, containing NIST
-traceable polystyrene latex
standard par ticles or other suitable microspheres. Gently mix the ¬uids to achieve a homogeneous suspension. If the light obscuration
instrument is equipped with an automatic dilution system, the star ting concentrated sample can be analyzed by injection directly into the
instrument via a syringe or Te¬on sample line. Fur ther dilution of the sample then occurs automatically to optimize the par ticle concentration
for analysis. Alternatively, the sample would require greater manual dilution with water (typically by at least a factor of 10 over the «rst
dilution). The resulting diluted sample is then instilled in an appropriate, clean container, such as a sterile Type I glass container, before being
passed through the sensor. In either case the «nal par ticle concentration is caused to lie below the coincidence limit of the sensor. The sizing
and counting accuracy of the light obscuration instrument should be obtained using two different size standards of approximately 5 and 10
µm (triplicate analyses per size). For the standards after system calibration, set the instrument threshold of detection at 1.8 µm, extended to
an upper limit of 50 µm. The corresponding results for the mean diameter should coincide with the expected values, within 10% of the
relative standard deviation and 90%–110% size accuracy. In addition, the number of par ticle counts obtained per milliliter should also agree
within ±10% with the concentration values cer ti«ed in the documentation provided with each NIST
-traceable size standard.
Test Preparation
To a pre-established volume of Water add an appropriate volume of sample from the lipid injectable emulsion (triplicate analyses per
sample). Gently mix the ¬uids to achieve a homogeneous suspension. The diluted emulsion will be slightly turbid in appearance. If the light
obscuration instrument is equipped with an automatic dilution system, the star ting concentrated sample can be analyzed by injection directly
into the instrument via a syringe or nonreactive
1
 Te¬on sample line. Fur ther dilution then occurs automatically to optimize the
droplet/globule concentration for analysis. Alternatively, the sample would require greater manual dilution with water (typically by at least a
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:16 PM
USP-NF 〈729〉 Globule Size Distribution in Lipid Injectable Emulsions


=== PAGE 4 ===
factor of 10 over the «rst dilution). The resulting diluted sample is then instilled in an appropriate, clean container such as a sterile Type I
glass container. In either case the «nal droplet/globule concentration is caused to lie below the coincidence limit of the sensor.
System Suitability
Perform prior to the test procedure, using the Standard preparation of a 5- and 10-µm NIST
-traceable par ticle. Measure in triplicate the
number-weighted par ticle diameter and the counts/mL of the standard. The system is suitable when the triplicate mean number-weighted
par ticle diameter measurements are within 10% of the target value, both in terms of repeatability (CV) and closeness to the cer ti«ed size on
the label of the NIST
-traceable standard.
Procedure and Interpretation
If the light obscuration instrument is equipped with an automatic dilution system, use a disposable syringe or Te¬on sample line to load
the Standard Preparation or Test Preparation. If no automatic dilution system is used, transfer the sample to an appropriate large-volume,
clean container such as a sterile Type I glass vessel containing an appropriate volume of water. Allow the sample and water to mix
thoroughly to achieve a homogeneous suspension. Set the instrument threshold of detection at 1.8 µm, extended to an upper ▲
size▲ (USP 1-
Aug-2019)
limit of 50 µm, and vary the concentration and/or data collection times such that there is at least a factor of two in the difference of
the total number of globules that measure >5 µm between at least two sample runs. In any case, the number of globules that measure >5 µm
should be large enough so that it represents an adequate number of globules that are statistically representative of the large-diameter tail
population of the native emulsion. The volume-weighted, large-diameter fat globule limits of the dispersed phase, expressed as the
percentage of fat residing in globules larger than 5 µm (PF
AT5) for a given lipid injectable emulsion, must not exceed 0.05%. ▲
Most
commonly used instruments provide calculation in software (HIAC Royco, PSS AccuSizer, Klotz). However, the general equation applied is
based on the sum of the number of droplets per milliliter of sample per channel multiplied by the volume of a sphere of the geometric mean
of each channel, i.e., Σ(#/mL/channel) (π D3/6).▲ (USP 1-Aug-2019)
1
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) with diethylhexylphthalate (DEHP) has been shown to induce breakdown of lipid injectable emulsions (Drug Product
Problem Repor ting System. USP File Access No. 11173, May 15, 1991).
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
We apologize for the inconvenience. The exact auxiliary information for this Documentary Standard is currently unavailable. Please contact Documentary Standards Suppor t
(stdsmonographs@usp.org) for assistance during this time.
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. PF 44(2)
Current DocID: GUID-CCA5C969-17E6-47AE-A85B-1AE8ACB515C5_2_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99505_02_01
DOI ref: m9vj9
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:16 PM
USP-NF 〈729〉 Globule Size Distribution in Lipid Injectable Emulsions
