Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
76 
Q 6.3. What approaches are recommended for transferring stoppers into a restricted 
access barrier system (RABS)? 
Recommendation 
There are different ways of transferring stoppers into RABS. Aseptic transfer systems (e.g., RTP) have a 
lower-risk profile compared to manual transfer systems. New RABS systems preferably should be designed 
using aseptic transfer systems.  
Aseptic Transfer Systems  
For sterile ready-to-use stoppers, the stopper transfer can be done by aseptic connector systems using RTPs. 
To enable this, the RABS will need to be designed with an applicable transfer system close to the stopper 
hopper. An example of this can be seen in Figure 6.3-1.   
Stoppers can then be directly sterilized in the transfer port containers (or as ready-to-use packaging material 
that has been presterilized by the supplier) and aseptically transferred into the RABS by a closed-door 
intervention. (The RABS design should facilitate opening the transfer door without overreaching any 
indirect product-contact parts with the RABS gloves.) The integrity of those rapid transfer bags (e.g., by 
visual inspection for breaches or defects) or rigid containers (e.g., by regular integrity-testing of the vent 
filters) need to be assured.  
Figure 6.3-1 Rapid Transfer Port (RTP) for Stopper Loading 
For processes or facilities where stopper sterilization is undertaken, for instance, in a stopper processor, 
where stopper sterilization cycles are qualified in a closed stopper pod, stopper transfer can be achieved via 
a docking mechanism that involves docking of the stopper pod to a stopper transfer chute. The sterilization 
of the stopper transfer chute and bottom of the stopper pod must be demonstrated, therein providing a sterile 
passage of the sterilized stoppers directly to the sterilized stopper hopper located in the RABS. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
77 
Manual Transfer Systems 
Other more manual surface-disinfection systems may be used for transferring stoppers into RABS as well. 
For example, where the double-wrapped stopper bag is first transferred from Grade B into a Grade A hatch 
by removal of the outer wrap, the hatch can be closed and then operated by built-in RABS gloves, loading 
the stoppers via a second hatch and chute into the stopper hopper. Figure 6.3-2 provides a schematic 
drawing of such a system, detailing the use of a UDAF transfer box to access the inside of the RABS; 
Figure 6.3-3 provides an example of this system.  
Figure 6.3-2 Manual Stopper Transfer System Schematic 
Figure 6.3-3 Example of Manual Stopper Transfer System 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
78 
Open-door interventions, where the RABS door is to be opened for stopper loading, preferably would be 
avoided by design.  
Rationale 
Design requirements must be considered for new RABS projects to optimize the aseptic stopper transfer. 
Aseptic transfer systems are recommended over manual transfer systems to improve contamination control 
and minimize the risk to sterility assurance.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
79 
Q 6.4. How should bulk containers (e.g., vials) or ready-to-use containers (e.g., syringes, 
vials, cartridges) be transferred into the restricted access barrier system (RABS)? 
Recommendation 
Vials are typically washed and introduced into the RABS via a depyrogenation tunnel, which is similar in 
concept to isolator lines. In contrast to isolator systems, which are placed in a Grade C background where all 
the equipment might be placed in one room, the washing and tunnel system for RABS are placed in a 
separate room of a lower classification than the Grade B RABS background and connected through the wall 
(1, 4).   
For ready-to-use packaging material, for example, syringes, vials, and pre-crimped cartridges, there are 
different technologies that can be used for their introduction into the RABS. Electronic beam (e-beam) 
technology (Figure 6.4-1) or VPHP (Figure 6.4-2) can be used for a complete-surface decontamination, or 
a no-touch-transfer (NTT) system (Figure 6.4-3) with multiple overwrap removal, followed by a de-
lidding/de-lining process, can be employed.  
Figure 6.4-1 E-beam Technology for Introduction of Ready-to-Use Packaging Material 
Figure 6.4-2 Vapor Phase Hydrogen Peroxide (VPHP) Technology for Introduction of Ready-
to-Use Packaging Material 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
80 
Figure 6.4-3 No-Touch-Transfer (NTT) Technology for Introduction of Ready-to-Use Packaging 
Material  
NTT applies to double-bagged (secondary packaging) removal via successive debagging steps for the 
transfer of nested tubs of containers in a sterile barrier into Grade A filling lines without any manual 
disinfection applied in material transfer. “No touch” denotes there is no physical contact with the contents 
ejected from the packaging through to the next higher-grade zone, with debagging (cutting a bag open and 
ejecting the contents) applied as a semi-automated or automated process to reduce operator interventions 
(19).  
Rationale 
The transfer of bulk containers must ensure that the open containers are rendered sterile (or remain sterile) 
and that introduction into the RABS does not lead to contamination of the Grade A environment. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 12 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
81 
Q 6.5. How should equipment, accessories, ancillary items and sterile tools (e.g., 
forceps) be transferred into a restricted access barrier system (RABS)? 
Recommendation 
As a general concept, the transfer of all materials and equipment into the Grade B and, finally, the Grade A 
RABS should be a unidirectional process, separated from the path for removal of those items. Material and 
equipment introduced, whenever possible, should be wrapped and sterilized, when necessary.   
The principles discussed below are based on the criticality of the item regarding product contact. 
Direct Product Contact Parts  
Direct product-contact parts (e.g., vials, stoppers, piping, single-use systems (SUSs), connectors or 
components), which have come into direct contact with the product, must be sterilized (1, 4). This is 
founded on two basic principles:   
•
If the filling equipment has CIP and SIP functionality, then the parts can either remain in the RABS
or parts of it can be assembled, followed by a validated SIP process, rendering the equipment and
filter (where applicable) sterile. (See PDA Technical Report No. 61: Steam in Place for additional
information.)
•
If the filling equipment needs to be manually assembled and has no SIP functionality, either
presterilized (e.g., gamma-irradiated) single-use assemblies are used, or alternatively, if the filling
equipment is sterilized by wrapping the clean items in suitable semipermeable packaging material
and sterilized in a moist-heat autoclave, followed by aseptic assembly inside the RABS. If items can
be directly unloaded into the cRABS (e.g., via RTP) or an aseptic transfer from the autoclave to the
RABS is guaranteed (e.g., via Grade A continuity, typically a process requiring rigorous controls),
different means of wrapping and/or dry-heat sterilization of the indirect product-contact items may
be applied. Where presterilized, the equipment should be fully assembled (as far as possible) to
minimize the need for aseptic connections.
Indirect Product Contact Parts  
Indirect product-contact parts (e.g., stopper bowls, hoppers, tweezers), which have come into indirect 
contact with the product , are to be sterilized and handled in a similar way to direct product-contact parts (1). 
(See Question 6.1 for more detail.)  
Machine Items that Break First Air  
Machine items that break First Air (e.g., sensors, holders, brackets at the filling line or rotary table) should 
be avoided where possible. This must be part of the initial design considerations for a RABS. Where a First 
Air interruption is not avoidable, machine items should be moist-heat sterilizable. Where this is not 
technically possible, sporicidal disinfection and a risk assessment of each individual part should be carried 
out and included in the CCS (1). These parts should have both the highest-possible level of cleanability 
(preferably with sporicidal agents) and the lowest-possible air interruption (e.g., fewer gaps/holes, be as 
small as possible, ergonomically shaped). Inclusion in the EM program (e.g., surface sampling at the end of 
manufacture) needs to be considered.  
Miscellaneous Items that Break First Air 
Miscellaneous items that potentially break First Air (e.g., forceps for removing stuck stoppers) must be 
sterile and remain sterile during their intended use inside the RABS. Those items preferably can be sterilized 
by moist heat and wrapped in semi-permeable packaging, or by dry heat in stainless-steel boxes (care should 
be applied on appropriate closure of those boxes). Each individual unit should not contain more items than 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
