22
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
J. Systems
Comments
1.	 What systems platforms and warehouse management 
system does the warehouse have?
2.	 What interfaces would be required to release orders and 
confirm shipments?
3.	 Does the system provide for lot-controlled storage?
4.	 Does the storage, picking and distribution system control 
using the lot number?
5.	 Does the system have a list/lot/customer ship to, and 
quantity in the event of lot recalls?
6.	 Does the system provide for QA holds by lot number with 
allocation and picking and shipping blocks?
7.	 Can the system handle differing label codes of the same lot?
8.	 Can the system identify short dated product?
9.	 Can the system pick based on first expiration dates?
10.	Can the system pick based on lot number specific I.D.?
11.	Can the system specify one lot per customer?
12.	Does the system provide for put away logic with fast 
moves near the shipping zones?
13.	Does the system handle returned goods?
14.	Does the system have security for QA hold release?
15.	Will the system recognize temperature-controlled product and 
provide for systems directed put away in cool room area?
16.	Does the same logic apply for hazardous materials?
17.	Does the system support cycle counting?
18.	Does the system provide for one lot/list number per 
location?
19.	Does the system provide for bar-coding applications?
20.	Does the warehouse have RF technology and scanning 
capabilities?
21.	Have there been any break-ins, thefts or products diverted 
in the last year? Provide details and actions taken as the 
result of such events.
22.	Is there active monitoring for suspicious orders of 
controlled substances per DEA regulations?
23.	Does the system have a disaster recovery program?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
23
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
K. Insulated Shipping Systems (ISS) Transportation 
Temperature Controls
Comments
1.	 How were insulated shipping systems chosen?
2.	 How were the systems challenged?
3.	 How were temperature profiles developed?
4.	 Were they tested against seasonal extremes?
5.	 Were they tested against various modes of transport?
6.	 Were they tested against routing supply chain routes?
7.	 Are shipments monitored during transport?
8.	 Are the insulated shipping containers periodically tested to 
evaluate performance during actual shipments?
9.	 How were conditioning times determined for refrigerants?
10.	Are there written specifications for the components used in 
temperature controlled shipments (passive and active)?
11.	Are components inspected at receipt?
12.	How are changes to the components managed?
13.	Are there written procedures documented and followed 
that detail the assembly and position of product, 
refrigerant, monitors and cushioning?
14.	How were the allowable quantities or volumes per 
container established?
15.	How were the protective requirements (i.e. shock & 
vibration) tested? 
16.	What type of consumable coolant do your shippers use 
(dry ice, phase change material, etc)?
17.	What is the process for managing dry ice in the facility? 
18.	How long can dry ice be stored prior to use?
19.	How is the storage of dry ice prior to use controlled?
20.	How is dry ice replenished during transit?
21.	What is the contingency plan if issues occur during transit?
22.	How is the process controlled during transit (with handoffs 
and partners)?
23.	Are there measures in place to minimize exposure to 
ambient conditions outside of the container specifications?
24.	Are time limits in place and tracked for transportation 
to ensure established hold times of insulated shipping 
systems are not exceeded?
25.	After insulated shippers are qualified is there a monitoring 
program to verify temperatures?
26.	Have there been any failures of the qualified insulated 
shipping system? If yes, provide details on how failures 
were addressed to include RCA and CAPA.
27.	Are transportation routes documented and controlled?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
24
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
L. Carrier Transportation Temperature Controls
Comments
1.	 Are Service Agreements in place with each of the carriers 
that detail specific service requirements and transportation 
routes and carriers?
2.	 Have the carriers been audited and assessed for their 
ability to provide services required?
3.	 Are sufficient controls in place to assure that the supply 
chain is safe and secure?
4.	 Are there processes in place to allow for accurate 
communication between the carrier and the driver?
5.	 Are transportation vendors evaluated and certified by a 
documented process to permit them to be used as a carrier?
6.	 Are transportation routes certified? If so by who? How 
are temperatures for a particular carrier, lane, mode and 
service level verified? (e.g. temperature mapping, or other 
method?)
7.	 Does the vehicle possess continuous temperature 
monitoring equipment?
8.	 Are subcontractors used to transport product?
9.	 How are subcontractors advised of the requirements and 
how are they monitored for compliance?
10.	Have the transport vehicles been temperature mapped?
11.	Do temperature monitors accompany each shipment 
during transit?
12.	If monitors are not used how is temperature compliance 
assured?
13.	Are vehicles preconditioned to temperature prior to the 
start of loading?
14.	Are vehicle temperatures checked upon receipt?
15.	Are the cooling/heating devices on the trailer calibrated?
16.	Are the temperature monitoring devices on the trailer 
calibrated?
17.	Are alarm settings used to alert the driver or central 
station of a deviation or excursion?
18.	Is the vehicle equipped with a pre-trip diagnostic test at 
start up?
19.	Are seals used to secure the trailer?
20.	Are seal numbers recorded, documented on shipping 
documents and verified at end of trip?
21.	Are trailers equipped with global positioning devices for 
active, real time, location and temperature tracking?
22.	Are security and notification procedures in place in the 
event of product diversion or theft? 
23.	Are vehicles inspected prior to loading to assure that no prior 
material or opportunities for contamination are present?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
25
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
24.	Are procedures in place to manage product requirements 
in the event of an equipment failure or excursion?
25.	Are loading patterns defined and documented?
26.	Are written procedures in place that specify the location 
and placement of monitors during transport?
27.	Are vehicles required to be fueled to a level sufficient to 
permit transport to destination prior to loading?
28.	Are procedures in place to assure that drivers’ credentials 
are adequately checked and verified to be agents of the 
transportation company prior to loading?
29.	Are team or solo drivers used to transport high value, 
temperature sensitive loads?
30.	Are procedures in place to maintain proper custody and 
security at stopping points during transport?
31.	How are temperature and handling requirements 
communicated?
M. Customer Returns
Comments
1.	 Are all customer returns inspected by the appropriate 
Quality Assurance unit?
2.	 Does the Quality Assurance procedure include inspection of 
product to confirm it is in its original condition, there is no 
visible damage, correct quantity is present, no broken seals, 
no foreign matter or defective containers, case seals are 
present, and temperature maintained during distribution?
3.	 What criteria are used for placing returns back into stock? 
Please specify if criteria includes (a) verifying chain of 
custody, (b) environmental conditions products may 
have been exposed to and (c) any restrictions in place for 
material that has left your chain of custody and control 
(ex. Material placed into stock by a customer) 
4.	 Are customer returns physically segregated from approved 
warehouse stock to prevent mix-up?
5.	 Are returns reconciled to the sale of the product to the 
original customer, and proper credit given?
6.	 Is there a documented system in place to assure Quality 
Assurance review and approval of redressing, restock or 
destruction of finished goods?
L. Carrier Transportation Temperature Controls (continued)
Comments
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
26
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
N. Complaints
Comments
1.	 Are there separate procedures (details) for addressing 
complaints for distribution or the product/product 
packaging?
2.	 Are there separate procedures for addressing customer 
complaints related to temperature excursions?
3.	 Are complaints documented, tracked, trended and 
investigated?
4.	 Is there an escalation process in place for complaints 
identified as a significant issue or trend?
5.	 Is corrective action, preventive action performed and 
verified effective as appropriate?
O. Counterfeit & Tampering
Comments
1.	 Are there procedures addressing counterfeit and 
tampering or suspect counterfeit products?
2.	 Are suspect counterfeit and tampered products isolated 
and distinguished from other pharmaceutical products?
3.	 Do procedures outline a process for notifying the 
marketing authorization holder and regulatory authorities?
4.	 Do procedures outline the return or destruction of 
confirmed counterfeited or tampered pharmaceutical 
products?
5.	 Is there a process in place for identifying suspicious orders 
(unusual quantities or order patterns)?
P. Material/Product Description
Comments
1.	 Are materials/products for destruction (e.g., damaged, 
outdated, expired) handled and destroyed in compliance 
with local and country regulations?
2.	 How is destruction handled (e.g., third-party or in-house)?
2a.	If third-party, have they been audited?
2b.	If third-party, are records available for review?
2c.	If third-party, has a periodic review occurred to 
evaluate and demonstrate a proper chain of custody 
and audit trail?
2d.	Are records of the destruction maintained?
3.	 Is there periodic and timely purging of material to be 
destroyed (e.g., not stockpiled)?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
27
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
II. PRODUCT CONTROL
Q. General
Comments
1.	 Is there a program for employees to maintain a good 
standard of personal hygiene?
2.	 Are personnel under control of competent supervisor/
managers who understand GDP and GMP requirements?
3.	 Are there designated eating and food storage areas 
separate from operations?
4.	 Is access to areas limited and restricted to prevent entry 
by unauthorized personnel?
5.	 Are pre-employment background checks conducted?
6.	 Are employees required to pass drug testing prior to hire?
7.	 Are employees in a random drug testing program?
R. Training
Comments
1.	 Is there a documented training record for each employee?
2.	 Does the training program include the training of contract/
temporary personnel, where applicable?
3.	 Have personnel received the training necessary to perform 
their assigned duties and responsibilities?
4.	 Are training records available for all applicable personnel 
(including contract/ temporary personnel, if applicable)?
5.	 Is there a requalification program for personnel? Is the 
program maintained on an annual basis?
6.	 Do employees receive retraining on revised documents? 
How is it documented?
7.	 Are employees trained on how to review environmental 
monitoring? (Security, Operations, Maintenance) ?
8.	 Are employees trained to identify atypical events or 
temperature excursions?
9.	 Are employees trained on how to properly respond to 
alarms (Security, Operations, and Maintenance) ?
10.	Is there ongoing periodic cGMP training in place and 
documented?
11.	Is there a training curriculum for each position and each 
employee?
12.	How are trainers qualified to train on subjects?
13.	Are training records readily available/retrievable?
14.	Do associates have knowledge and are they able to 
regularly review training requirements in order to remain 
current and up to date in their training?
15.	Are contractors or subcontractors required to complete 
the same training as regular staff?
16.	How is contractor training documented and maintained?
17.	Are there positions or tasks that require certification (i.e. 
safe fork truck driving) prior to performing the task? If so, 
what are they?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
28
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
S. Safety
Comments
1.	 Is there a Safety Program and Manager associated with 
the site?
2.	 Does the site have any governmental safety inspections 
and licenses?
3.	 Does the site have adequate sprinkler or fire water 
reserves, i.e.. Fire hydrants and portable extinguishers?
4.	 Are the Fire extinguishers tested per manufacturer’s specs 
every six months regarding use?
5.	 Are employees trained on fire prevention and procedures?
6.	 What is the accident rate of the warehouse?
7.	 What are the requirements to drive a fork truck or use 
material handling equipment?
8.	 Describe your safety program?
9.	 How are accident rates monitored?
10.	How are accident rates communicated to employees?
11.	What incentives are offered associated with safety metric 
outcomes?
12.	What is the course of action if a fork truck or driver has an 
accident?
13.	Is there a requalification or recertification program if a 
driver has an accident?
14.	Is there a hazardous spill team at the site?
15.	How are hazardous spills managed?
16.	Is there a first aid or first responder team on site?
17.	Is there a lock out/tag out program on site
18.	Who is trained in lock out/tag out procedures?
19.	How is safety training handled for contractors?
20.	What is your OSHA recordable and lost work day (LWD) rate?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
29
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
30
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
NOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Site Evaluation
Approved: 
Date Recieved: 
Summary Report of Findings– Date available (30 days from audit date): 
Signed: 		
	
	
	
	
	
	
 Date: 
Signed: 		
	
	
	
	
	
	
 Date: 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
31
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.0 Additional Reading
5.1 	 Selected Global Laws and Regulations
Annex 5, Good Distribution Practices (GDP) for Pharmaceutical Products, World Health 
1.	
Organization, 2005.
Guidelines for Temperature Control of Drug Products during Storage and Transportation 
2.	
(GUIDE-0069), Health Canada, 2005.
Guide to Control and Monitoring of Storage and Transportation Temperature Conditions for 
3.	
Medicinal Products and Active Substances, Irish Medicines Board, 2006.
Guidelines on Good Distribution Practice of Medicinal Products for Human Use (94/C 63/03), 
4.	
European Union, 1994.
Quality Guideline Q8: 
5.	
Pharmaceutical Development; International Conference on Harmonisation: 
2006.
Quality Guideline Q9: 
6.	
Quality Risk Management; International Conference on Harmonisation: 
2006.
Quality Guideline Q10: 
7.	
Pharmaceutical Quality System; International Conference on 
Harmonisation: 2007.
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. Chapter V: Drug and Devices, Subchapter A, Sec 501 
8.	
(a)(2)(B).
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. Chapter III: Prohibitive Acts and Penalties, Subchapter A, 
9.	
Sec 301 (a)(b)(c).
Food and Drugs. 
10.	
Code of  Federal Regulations, Part 211.
Perishable Cargo Regulation. International Air Transport Association (IATA), 2009
11.	
5.2	 Selected Publications
Seevers, Robert H. et al. The Use of Mean Kinetic Temperature (MKT) in the Handling, 
1.	
Storage, and Distribution of Temperature Sensitive Pharmaceuticals. Pharmaceutical Outsourcing. 
2009, May/June, 30-35.
2.	 Technical Report No 39 (Revised 2007): Guidance for Temperature Controlled Medicinal Products: 
Maintaining the Quality of  Temperature Sensitive Medicinal Products through the Transportation 
Environment; Parenteral Drug Association: Bethesda, MD, 2007.
3.	 Technical Report No. 46: Last Mile: Guidance for Good Distribution Practices for Pharmaceutical 
Products to the End User; Parenteral Drug Association: Bethesda, MD: 2009.
4.	 Technical Report No. 53: Guidance for Industry: Stability Testing to Support Distribution of New Drug 
Products; Parenteral Drug Association: Bethesda, MD, 2011.
5.3	 Selected Regulatory Authority Websites
The International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration 
1.	
of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) www.who.int/en
The World Health Organization (WHO) www.who.int/en
2.	
The European Medicines Agency (EMA) www.ema.europa.eu
3.	
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) www.fda.gov
4.	
Health Canada www.hc-sc.gc.ca
5.	
U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency www.justice.gov/dea
6.	
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
