4
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
Good Distribution Practices (GDPs) should include written procedures describing the different 
operations that may affect the quality of products and/or distribution activity. Refer to the pillars 
table, presented in Section 1.1.
3.1	
Stability
Data from Stability studies is used to determine the temperature conditions required for product 
storage and transportation.
3.1.1	 Storage Temperatures 
When specific temperature conditions are required, storage or cargo areas should be equipped 
to maintain the appropriate temperature. Temperature should be monitored with calibrated 
temperature recorders or other devices that will indicate when the specific temperature range has 
not been maintained and for how long. Control and monitoring should be adequate to maintain all 
parts of the relevant area within the specified temperature range. Monitoring of temperature should 
be present in at least one of the following forms and should result in a disposition-based review of 
temperature data:
Continuous monitoring 
• 
Active, qualified monitoring system with automated alarming mechanisms to notify of 
• 
temperature excursions as they occur. 
A contingency plan between the manufacturer or distribution center and approved carrier should be 
implemented and documented to provide a consistent, effective response to foreseeable events.
Equipment used for monitoring should be calibrated at defined intervals. 
All records should be made at the time each operation is done and in such a way that all significant 
activities or events are traceable.
3.1.2	 Shipping Temperatures 
Pharmaceutical products must be transported in a manner that ensures products will be maintained 
within an acceptable temperature range. Temperature should be monitored with calibrated recorders 
unless it is demonstrated through temperature mapping or use of qualified packaging containers 
that shipping conditions will not expose product to conditions outside of the shipping requirement. 
The acceptable temperature range may differ from the conditions specified for long-term storage 
and is determined by performing product temperature-excursion studies. These products may be 
shipped outside of their respective label storage conditions provided stability data or scientific/
technical justification exists demonstrating that the product quality is not affected and that the data 
or justification meets the applicable national and international requirements. Note: some companies 
may choose to include shipping conditions on product labeling. 
Appropriate stability data must be generated to prove that excursion temperatures have no negative 
impact on product quality. This data can be generated by accelerated and long term stability studies, 
forced degradation studies, or temperature cycle freeze-thaw studies. Stability data should be 
allocated into the various supply chain segments to support cumulative temperature excursions. 
If degradation profiles established from stability data meet the profiles predicted by the Arrhenius 
equation at established minimum and maximum temperatures (supported by actual stability data), 
then Mean Kinetic Temperature (MKT) may be an acceptable method for evaluating product impact. 
Note: it is necessary to ensure that the local regulatory agency allows the use of MKT. 
3.0 Requirements
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
For products that are monitored during transportation, if temperature excursions occur outside of 
the labeled storage conditions or established shipping ranges, an investigation must take place to 
determine:
the root cause of the temperature excursion
• 
any necessary corrective actions (if warranted)
• 
any potential product impact (must be documented)
• 
Product impact should be addressed and documented for any temperature excursion and cumulative 
excursion impact during storage and distribution. Unplanned temperature excursions and planned 
system deviations should be properly documented and approved by the quality function.
3.1.3	 Stability Testing to Support Distribution
Packaging should ensure protection against mechanical impact (damage) on product during handling 
and transport. The transportation modes and destination should be considered in determining the 
necessary packaging materials. 
When specific temperature conditions are required, packaging used to control temperature 
should maintain the appropriate temperature range during handling, storage, transportation and 
distribution, and must be qualified. The methods used for qualifying packaging systems should be 
based on risk and the product’s sensitivity to temperature change and must be documented (e.g., 
validation master plan). The result of the risk assessment will provide the rationale for the extent of 
testing and the need for ongoing temperature monitoring. 
Each packaging/pack-out operation throughout distribution should be conducted under monitored 
conditions that are supported by stability data. Timelines for situations like Time Out of 
Refrigeration (TOR) should be defined, controlled and justified through appropriate stability data 
and in accordance with appropriate Service Level or Quality Agreements. Data must be available to 
support timeframes outside of labeled temperature and/or humidity.
3.2	 Distribution Control Management
Distribution control management encompasses the processes and controls necessary to ensure 
product integrity and traceability are maintained from the point of receipt through product 
distribution.
3.2.1	 Qualification and Training of Personnel
Procedures and conditions of employment, including background checks, should be designed and 
implemented to minimize the possibility of product diversion. SOPs should be in place for all job 
functions. An adequate number of warehouse and shipping personnel should be trained in the 
procedures for proper storage and distribution of each product type (hazardous, narcotic, etc.), and 
in the safe handling of product spills and other emergency procedures. A training program that 
includes both initial and ongoing training should be developed for each job function. The completion 
of training should be documented and training records should be maintained for each associate. 
3.2.2	 Premises and Equipment
Premises and equipment should be qualified as adequate to ensure proper management and 
distribution of products. A warehouse should be:
Secure with controlled access and features to protect against invasion, adulteration and theft
• 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
