13
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.1	 Good Storage and Shipping Practices Checklist
The following is an assessment tool that may be used in the evaluation of pharmaceutical and/or 
biotech distribution centers, wholesalers, 3rd party distributors, related vendors, service providers, 
etc. This checklist is intended to facilitate assessments and/or audits in the area of Good Distribution 
Practices.
Company Name
Facility Address: 
Facility Board of Pharmacy Registry Number (BoP): 
Facility Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) Registry Number (as applicable): 
Person (s) Answering Questionnaire and Position (Site): 
Auditor (s): 
(circle one)
The site is a: Distributor/Wholesaler or 3rd Party Distributor/Vendor or Service Provider
A. Accreditation and Licensure
Comments
1.	 What accreditations/licenses are held (ISO, cGMP, GDP, 
BoP, VAWD, etc.)
2.	 By whom and when were the last external Inspections or 
Audits conducted (by BoP, Customer, FDA, DEA, etc)
3.	 What system is used to maintain licensure?	
4.0 Appendix
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
14
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
B. Quality System Comments
Comments
1.	 Do you have a separate and distinct independent Quality 
organization?
2.	 Does your organization employ quality by design and 
product development?
3.	 Does your organization have a formal review process for:
quality policy and objectives 
• 
results of audits and other assessments 
• 
customer feedback and complaints
• 
analysis of data trending results
• 
status review of actions taken to correct or prevent 
• 
problems from reoccurring (CAPA)
follow-ups from the previous management review 
• 
meeting
changes in the business that may impact quality 
• 
systems
product characteristics or business processes 
• 
meeting customers’ needs
• 
4.	 Are the organization and resources sufficient to support 
the business and quality systems?
5.	 Are outsourced operations used and how are they 
qualified to perform their service?
6.	 Do you have written procedures that provide control and 
maintain operations?
7.	 Do you have a calibration program?
8.	 How are allowable shipping ranges established?
9.	 Do you have a qualification program?
10.	Do you have a deviation and investigation program?
11.	Do you have a corrective and preventative action (CAPA) 
program?
12.	Do you have a formalized, documented training program?
13.	Do you have an audit program?
14.	Do you have a periodic assessment of your temperature-
controlled processes?
15.	Do you have a change control program?
16.	Do you have management controls in place?
17.	Do you have tracing, tracking and proper audit trails such 
that faulty product could be recalled?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
15
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
I. FACILITIES
C. Building and Housekeeping
Comments
1.	 Is there a scheduled housekeeping program?
2.	 Is the storage area maintained free of dust, debris, or 
extraneous material?
3.	 Are the floors sealed to minimize dust and facilitate 
cleaning?
4.	 Are there written procedures describing cleaning 
frequency, methods, and materials to be used in cleaning 
the building?
5.	 Are there cleaning logs maintained in which cleaning 
activities are documented per cGMP standards?
6.	 Are the cleaning supplies and equipment identified and 
segregated from products and commodities?
7.	 Are there written procedures that define special handling 
precautions for the storage and handling of hazardous 
materials and substances?
8.	 Are the washrooms or locker areas clean and properly 
maintained?
9.	 Are there indications of roof or sprinkler system leaks?
10.	Is the height of the floor and drainage above any 
reasonable potential flood level?
11.	Is lighting sufficient to allow all operations (e.g., stock 
picking) to be accurately and safely conducted?
12.	Are doors designed to provide security for the product and 
restrict entry of vermin?
13.	Are skylights or trap doors lockable to prevent theft or 
unauthorized entry?
14.	Are there adequate washrooms or locker areas that are 
isolated from the main storage areas?
15.	Is there a segregated area for the holding and storage of 
returned/rejected goods?
16.	Is there a separated, designated area for the repackaging 
of finished goods?
17.	Is there back-up power in the event of a power failure?
18.	How long does the back-up power last?
19.	Are the back-up generators on a regular maintenance and 
testing schedule?
20.	Is the perimeter of the site fenced and fully enclosed to 
limit unauthorized access?
21.	Is there an automated alarm system to a central station 
in the event that environmental conditions are not being 
met?
22.	Is the maintenance performed by in-house staff?
23.	How are maintenance requirements managed and 
scheduled?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
16
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
D. Pest Control
Comments
1.	 Is there a regular pest control and rodenticide program?
2.	 Are written service records available?
3.	 Is there a written pest control procedure?
4.	 Is there evidence of rodent, bird, or insect infestation?
5.	 Are the pesticides used on the EPA/OSHA/USDA approved 
list?	
6.	 Are bait boxes used within the facility?
7.	 Are electronic flying insect killers present?
8.	 Are bait boxes and/or electronic flying insect killers inspected 
and cleaned on a routine basis (at least once a month)?
9.	 Are the inspections/cleanings (bait boxes and/or electronic 
flying insect killers) documented?
10.	Is a diagram maintained and available at the facility that 
shows the location of bait boxes and/or electronic flying 
insect killers to ensure that all are serviced, cleaned, and 
inspected per schedule?
11.	Is action taken to prevent entry of birds?
II. PRODUCT CONTROL
E. Product Storage
Comments
1.	 Are products stored off the floor on pallets/racks?
2.	 Are the products stored along the outer walls of the 
facility maintaining a separation from the wall of 6” to 18” 
(Inspection Perimeter)?
3.	 Are chemicals/hazardous materials stored in approved 
storage cabinets and separated from product storage?
4.	 Are products subject to insect infestation stored 
separately from general product storage area, i.e., bagged 
foods such as flour, peanuts, grain, etc.?
5.	 Does the system assure that stock cannot be inadvertently 
transferred to other companies using the facility?
6.	 Are products and bulk materials properly stacked on 
pallets to avoid damage, i.e., where pallets are stacked are 
corrugate interleaves used to protect the product?
7.	 Are products physically segregated to prevent mixing of 
separate products and/or batch numbers?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
17
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
8.	 Are outdated and damaged products removed from 
general storage and segregated?
9.	 Are controlled drugs stored in the facility?
10.	If the response to item 9 above is yes, is a separated and 
secured area of the facility provided for controlled drug 
storage and control?
11.	Has the Facility been inspected for DEA compliance if 
applicable?
12.	Are there written instructions describing storage 
procedures, materials handling and documentation 
requirements?
13.	Are there written procedures indicating recommended 
storage conditions, precautions to be observed, and shelf 
life for each stored product?
14.	Upon receipt, is the supplier’s documentation checked 
against purchase order to verify the correct label 
description, product number, quantity, batch number, and 
physical condition?
15.	Are the records of each delivery retained? Do they include 
the description of the products, presentation, quantity, 
supplier, supplier’s lot number, date of receipt, expiration 
date and any temperature requirements during transport?
16.	If controlled drugs or high value products/goods are 
stored in the warehouse, are there special procedures 
available defining product handling, authorized personnel, 
identification requirements and access to the secured 
areas?
17.	Are there systems in place to ensure that temperature 
sensitive products are received, transported, and stored 
under the appropriate temperature conditions? Is there 
documented evidence to support the actual storage 
conditions?
18.	Is access to the storage areas limited to only authorized 
personnel?
E. Product Storage (continued)
Comments
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
18
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
F. Temperature Control/Calibration Storage
Comments
1.	 Is the general warehouse temperature controlled within a 
range to meet label claim? (i.e. 15°C to 25°C)
2.	 Are products requiring lower temperature conditions 
stored in a suitable storage area (cool room or 
refrigerator)?
3.	 Are all controlled temperature storage areas equipped with 
calibrated recorders/devices that indicate when required 
temperature or relative humidity ranges have not been 
maintained?
4.	 Are temperature-recording devices calibrated (at least 
once a year) against acceptable standards? (i.e. NIST or 
ISO/IEC 17205)?
5.	 Are calibration records available for each temperature-
recording device?
6.	 Are recorders in ambient, cold chain and freezer storage 
units furnished with low/high temperature alarms?
7.	 Are the alarms set such that it would permit timely 
corrective action in the event temperatures were trending 
out of range?
8.	 Is the temperature in each controlled temperature storage 
area monitored on a regular basis?
9.	 Are temperature records maintained and are they signed 
and dated?
10.	Is there a written procedure describing the action(s) to be 
taken when there is a temperature excursion?
11.	Have controlled temperature areas been temperature 
mapped to determine high and low temperature areas 
within the storage area during seasonal extremes?
12.	Were the temperature mapping studies conducted during 
the height of business activities for a sufficient period of 
time (at least 3 days)?
13.	Is there a program in place to review temperature mapping 
as part of your validation plan every three years to identify 
if re-mapping is necessary?
14.	Is there a regular preventative maintenance (PM) schedule 
in place to maintain equipment?
15.	Is there a documented notification process if equipment is 
found to be out of calibration?
16.	Are systems maintained in the event of a power failure?
17.	Are there written procedures that describe how 
temperature records are to be maintained for all of 
the temperature controlled areas (operation and 
maintenance)?
18.	Has Mean Kinetic Temperature (MKT) been determined for 
each of the storage areas?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
19
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
19.	Are a suitable number of recording devices installed to 
record temperatures?
20.	Are alarms tested for functionality on a regular and 
documented basis?
21.	Is there a contingency plan in place in the event of 
catastrophic failure of equipment or emergency (i.e. 
Business Continuity Plan)
22.	Is there a pallet management program in place to ensure 
appropriate handling and treatment of wood pallets? (It is 
recommended that appropriate moisture specification be 
in place.)
G. Temperature Control Distribution
Comments
1.	 Is for each temperature-recording device a calibration 
certificate or validation certificate supported with 
manufacturer’s data available?
2.	 Are systems and process in place to assure the correct 
setting and configuration of the temperature-recording 
devices?
3.	 Are a suitable number of recording devices installed to 
record temperatures at hot/cold spots of the used shipping 
container/carrier?
4.	 Are data-loggers equipped with downloading capabilities 
(i.e. USB interface, pdf-datalogger) and/or are all recipients 
trained and equipped to download, handle and interpret 
devices?
5.	 Are systems and processes in place to prevent 
manipulation of temperature records?
6.	 Are automated processes and/or systems in place to 
interpret the collected data against the available stability 
data (i.e. multi-level-alarm zones) or is a manual evaluation 
process established?
7.	 In case of deviation, are tools and processes available to 
return data safely to the investigating department in order 
to assure a timely analysis of the raw data.
8.	 Is a CAPA system in place which involves all relevant 
parties including the supplier of the temperature-recording 
devices?
9.	 For multiple-use devices is a regular maintenance and 
calibration program and/or an exit calibration installed?
F. Temperature Control/Calibration Storage (continued)
Comments
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
20
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
H. Inventory Control
Comments
1.	 Is there a first expiration, first out (FEFO) stock system?
2.	 Are there written procedures that define the responsibilities 
for the preparation, communication, and implementation 
of QA Hold (Nonconforming product) directives and 
dispositions?
3.	 Is nonconforming product marked or systemically 
segregated as blocked or unavailable?
4.	 Is the disposition of nonconforming product documented 
and traceable to destruction?
5.	 Are all materials under a stock control system?
6.	 Does the stock control system record batch or lot numbers 
and expiration dates, where required?
7.	 Are computer based stock control systems that affect lot 
traceability validated?
8.	 Are periodic cycle counts conducted and discrepancies 
noted and investigated?
9.	 What threshold is used for conducting an investigation 
into a cycle count discrepancy?
10.	Are cycle counts performed daily for all pick-from locations 
within your warehouse? If no, please identify frequency 
and schedule followed for conducting cycle counts.
11.	Is the stock periodically inspected for obsolete, expired 
and damaged materials?
12.	Are precautions taken to prevent the issue of outdated 
or short dated stock? Is the data in inventory system 
challenged or audited for accuracy against inventory on 
the shop floor?
13.	Are distribution and recall records readily accessible and 
maintained? Are procedures in place to prevent restock of 
recalled materials?
14.	For temperature-controlled products, is inventory moved 
from receiving docks to their manufacturer-designated 
storage environment as quickly as possible? Is the put-
away process proceduralized and supported by stability 
data?
15.	For temperature-controlled products, is any time spent 
in uncontrolled environments limited to ensure product 
integrity?
16.	In the event that a deviation has been observed by the 
storage site upon receipt, is the product in question placed 
in quarantine status?
17.	Is there a documented procedure which defines 
subsequent actions, related to #16 above?
18.	Are procedures in place to prevent distribution of products 
returned due to customer complaints?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
21
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
I. Product Distribution
Comments
1.	 Are stock distribution records maintained by lot number?
2.	 Are there written procedures for dispatch and preparation 
of shipping orders? 
3.	 Do procedures include instruction for shipping the different 
types of temperature sensitive products?
4.	 Are the shipping containers adequate to provide product 
protection? 
5.	 Where temperature control is needed, have the shipping 
containers been validated for temperature and time?
6.	 Are containers used for shipment of temperature, moisture 
or light sensitive products properly labeled to indicate 
handling, storage and transport requirements?
7.	 For temperature controlled products, are the vehicles used 
for distribution suitably equipped to ensure products are 
maintained at the correct temperature? 
8.	 Have the temperature-controlled vehicles been qualified 
for the temperature range(s) or is continuous temperature 
monitoring of every shipment applied? Provide details 
on how vehicles are qualified or on how the continuous 
monitoring system is validated.
9.	 If shipping of unreleased product is part of the quality 
system are controls in place to ensure product is not 
distributed (e.g. QA Hold) until final QA testing is complete?
10.	Are distribution records maintained that will permit prompt 
recall, market withdrawal/correction, or lot withdrawal, if 
required?
11.	Are there written procedures in place to comply with in the 
event of a quality-related product action (e.g., recall, market 
withdrawal/correction, lot withdrawal)?
12.	What steps are taken to assure that receiving locations are 
made aware of special handling and storage specifications?
13.	Is the distribution of medical samples and promotional 
materials done according to the same control procedures 
and GMP & GDP principles which are applicable to the 
distribution of commercial product presentations?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
