[PDF PAGE 6 / Report page 1]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
1.0 Introduction
A primary responsibility of pharmaceutical manufacturers is to provide safe and efficacious products
of appropriate quality to patients and consumers by assuring decisions are based on accurate, reliable,
truthful, and complete data. Data integrity is a mandatory requirement and key concern of health
authorities. At the time of this writing, data integrity citations, especially those related to computer-
ized systems in laboratory and manufacturing environments, have resulted in a number of significant,
well-publicized enforcement actions from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and other
regulatory authorities, including the United Kingdom Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency (MHRA), and European Medicines Agency (EMA). These enforcement actions have taken
the form of warning letters, import alerts, statements of GMP noncompliance, notices of concern,
and refusals to accept and/or approve applications. Many of these actions involve failing to docu-
ment or report alterations, deletions, fabrications, and/or misrepresentations of data in quality control
laboratories. The range of data integrity findings spans the spectrum from unintentional errors in data
reporting and lack of controls necessary to ensure data authenticity to intentional acts involving failure
to report data and/or falsification of records.
The spike in enforcement actions, in part, is linked to improved detection capabilities, which have
become more prevalent as technological enhancements have extended the level of automation in both
pharmaceutical quality control and microbiology laboratories. The extensive use of computer systems
and digital media for product testing, as well as in ancillary support systems, provides more visibility
to data integrity gaps than was evident with static paper records.
The consequences of failing to uncover data integrity problems through self-discovery or internal
audit programs before they are found by regulatory agency inspectors can impact the outcome of
the inspection in ways that could be very damaging to a business. Similarly, the business impact on
contract manufacturers, contract laboratories, and suppliers can be very serious if they fail to uncover
and disclose data integrity problems before regulators or their customers’ auditors do. One of the
responsibilities of regulatory agency investigators is to verify the accuracy, reliability, and integrity of
data submitted in written form or other media prior to, during, or after an inspection, or as part of a
drug submission for market authorization, annual report, mandatory quality defect report (e.g., Field
Alert), or Adverse Event Report. The regulatory investigators (also referred to as inspectors in some
regulatory regions) may detect and document inconsistencies between the information provided and
available for review that may suggest data integrity problems that the company will need to correct.
Such inconsistencies can be used by the health authority as the basis for a regulatory action or formal
written communication. From the regulators’ perspective, noncompliance with good data integrity
practices is not based solely on the intent to mislead authorities to believe that all laboratory activi-
ties are performed according to current good manufacturing practices (CGMP) when they are not.
Requirements for appropriate laboratory records and documentation began with the first GMP regula-
tions and expectations have been clarified in other publications such as the FDA Guide to Inspections
of Pharmaceutical Quality Control Laboratories published in 1993 (1).
In some instances, a regulatory agency may decide to ban products from entering its jurisdiction and
order or recommend that the potentially affected product be removed from the market.1 Regula-
tory agencies and organizations that oversee a manufacturing site’s adherence to CGMPs have made
significant efforts to communicate their expectations to both industry and their inspectorates about
managing data and ensuring its integrity. Some of these expectations can be found in the U.S. FDA
Draft Guidance for Industry on Data Integrity and Compliance with CGMP (April 2016), World Health
Organization (WHO) Guidance on Good Data and Record Management Practices (May 2016), Draft
PIC/S Guidance Good Practices for Data Management and Integrity in Regulated GMP/GDP Environ-
ments (August 2016), MHRA GXP Data Integrity Definitions and Guidance (March 2018), Guidance
for Industry, Part 11, Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures—Scope and Application (August 2003),
1 Some regulatory agencies have the legal authority to order product removal from the market, while others can
only recommend such actions.
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 1

[PDF PAGE 7 / Report page 2]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
and EU Annex 11: Computerised Systems (June 2011) (2–8). Even older health authority publications
on traditional audit practices may also be helpful in identifying and preventing data integrity issues in
laboratories. Some examples include: FDA Guide to Inspections of Pharmaceutical Quality Control
Laboratories (1) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) Questions and Answers: Good Manu-
facturing Practice–Data Integrity (9).
This increased focus on data integrity by health authority investigators has resulted in the need for
firms to modify and harmonize strategies to address data integrity gaps in a manner that promotes
transparency, accuracy, and reliability of data as well as detection of data integrity breaches.
Industry can use technology shifts, along with the new awareness that stems from recent regulatory
sanctions, to enhance their efforts to improve processes and establish mechanisms for detection and
mitigation of gaps that impact data integrity in paper, hybrid, and computerized systems. The overall
goal of ensuring data reliability is to protect patients as well as provide competitive sustainability.
1.1 Purpose
This technical report, developed by subject matter experts from the global pharmaceutical industry
and regulatory agencies, summarizes data integrity risks and the best practices, including audit ap-
proaches, that can be utilized to develop a robust data integrity management system for laboratory
settings with both manual and electronic processes that firms can follow to achieve compliance and
mitigate risks. Current regulatory trends indicate breaches in data integrity and a need for additional
guidance regarding the regulatory expectations. The intent of this report is to outline regulatory re-
quirements and expectations, along with best industry practices to ensure data integrity, to highlight
common gaps in laboratory data management practices, and to recommend methods of remediation.
For the purpose of this report, the term “data integrity” means the degree to which data are complete,
consistent, accurate, trustworthy, and reliable and that these characteristics of the data are maintained
(3) to support the quality of drug products throughout their lifecycle from the point of development
through commercialization. The reliability of such data is necessary to support clinical trials, product
development, manufacturing, testing, and regulatory reporting requirements, all of which are depen-
dent on the processes and controls in place from the point of data creation to ensure data cannot be
altered, deleted, omitted, or in any way modified to misrepresent what actually occurred. Data integ-
rity is the cornerstone of establishing and maintaining confidence in the reliability of data.
1.2 Scope
This technical report focuses on the management of data integrity within pharmaceutical quality con-
trol analytical and microbiology laboratories and is also applicable to analytical development and
R&D laboratories. It provides the framework and tools necessary to establish a robust data integrity
management system to ensure data integrity for paper, hybrid, and computerized systems within the
laboratory.
2 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 8 / Report page 3]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2.0 Glossary of Terms
Many of the terms used in this report are defined by multiple regulatory bodies. Because regulatory
definitions can form the basis of enforcement actions and, in the United States, prosecutions, regula-
tory definitions from the MHRA, WHO, FFIEC, and FDA are provided, when available. In the ab-
sence of a regulatory definition, the technical report team selected a definition either from an existing
PDA technical report, another reputable source, or one reached by consensus of the team.
Archival MHRA: A copy of current (editable) data,
MHRA (Archive): A designated secure area or metadata and system configuration settings
facility (e.g., cabinet, room, building or com- maintained for recovery including disaster re-
puterised system) for the long-term retention covery (5).
of data and metadata for the purposes of verifi-
WHO: A copy of one or more electronic files
cation of the process or activity (5).
created as an alternative in case the original
WHO: The process of protecting records from
data or system are lost or become unusable.
the possibility of being further altered or delet-
Backup differs from archival in that back-up
ed, and storing these records under the control
copies of electronic records are typically only
of independent data management personnel
temporarily stored for the purposes of disaster
throughout the required retention period (3).
recovery and may be periodically overwritten.
Audit Trail Such temporary back-up copies should not be
relied upon as an archival mechanism (3).
FDA: A secure, computer-generated, time-
stamped electronic record that allows for recon- CGMP Record
struction of the course of events relating to the
FDA: When generated to satisfy a CGMP re-
creation, modification, or deletion of an elec-
quirement, all data become a CGMP record.
tronic record. An audit trail is a chronology of
You must document, or save, the data at the
the “who, what, when, and why” of a record (2).
time of performance to create a record in com-
MHRA: Metadata containing information associ- pliance with CGMP requirements, includ-
ated with actions that relate to the creation, modi- ing, but not limited to, §§ 211.100(b) and
fication or deletion of GXP records. An audit trail 211.160(a). FDA expects processes to be de-
provides for secure recording of life-cycle details signed so that quality data is created and main-
such as creation, additions, deletions or altera- tained and cannot be modified (2).
tions of information in a record, either paper or
Complete Data
electronic, without obscuring or overwriting the
FDA: FDA requires complete data in labora-
original record. An audit trail facilitates the recon-
tory records, which includes raw data, graphs,
struction of the history of such events relating to
charts, and spectra from laboratory instruments
the record regardless of its medium, including the
and associated metadata. (§§ 211.194(a) and
“who, what, when and why” of the action (5).
212.60(g)(3) (2). A complete record of all data
WHO: The audit trail is a form of metadata that
secured in the course of each test, including
contains information associated with actions that
date and time the test was conducted and all
relate to the creation, modification or deletion of
graphs, charts, and spectra from laboratory in-
GXP records. An audit trail provides for secure
strumentation, properly identified to show the
recording of life-cycle details such as creation, ad-
specific component, drug product container,
ditions, deletions, or alterations of information in
closure, in-process material, or drug product,
a record, either paper or electronic, without ob-
and lot tested (2).
scuring or overwriting the original record (3).
Corruption (Data)
Backup
FFIEC: Errors in computer data that occur
FDA: A true copy of the original data that is
during writing, reading, storage, transmission,
maintained securely throughout the records re-
or processing, which introduce unintended
tention period. The backup file should contain
changes to the original data (10).
the data (which includes associated metadata)
and should be in the original format or in a for-
mat compatible with the original format (2).
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 3

[PDF PAGE 9 / Report page 4]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Data Data Lifecycle
MHRA: Facts, figures and statistics collected to- MHRA: All phases in the life of the data (in-
gether for reference or analysis. All original re- cluding raw data) from initial generation and
cords and true copies of original records, includ- recording through processing (including trans-
ing source data and metadata and all subsequent formation or migration), use, data retention,
transformations and reports of these data, that archive/retrieval and destruction (5).
are generated or recorded at the time of the GXP
WHO: All phases of the process by which data
activity and allow full and complete reconstruc-
is created, processed, reviewed, analyzed and
tion and evaluation of the GXP activity (5).
reported, transferred, stored and retrieved and
WHO: Data means all original records and true monitored until retirement or disposal. There
copies of original records, including source data should be a planned approach to assessing,
and metadata and all subsequent transforma- monitoring and managing the data and the
tions and reports of this data, which are gener- risks to those data in a manner commensurate
ated or recorded at the time of the GXP activ- with potential impact on patient safety, prod-
ity and allow full and complete reconstruction uct quality and/or the reliability of the deci-
and evaluation of the GXP activity. Data should sions made throughout all phases of the data
be accurately recorded by permanent means at life cycle (3).
the time of the activity. Data may be contained
Dynamic Record Format
in paper records (such as worksheets and log-
FDA: The record format allows interaction be-
books), electronic records and audit trails, pho-
tween the user and the record content (2).
tographs, microfilm or microfiche, audio- or
video-files or any other media whereby infor- MHRA: An electronic record which the user/
mation related to GXP activities is recorded (3). reviewer can interact with (5).
Data Integrity WHO: Records, such as electronic records, that
FDA: Refers to the completeness, consistency, allow for an interactive relationship between
the user and the record content (3).
and accuracy of data. Complete, consistent,
and accurate data should be attributable, leg-
GXP
ible, contemporaneously recorded, original or
WHO: Acronym for the good practice guides
a true copy, and accurate (ALCOA) (2).
governing the preclinical, clinical, manufac-
MHRA: The degree to which data are complete, turing, testing, storage, distribution and post-
consistent, accurate, trustworthy, reliable and that market activities for regulated pharmaceuti-
these characteristics of the data are maintained cals, biologicals, and medical devices, such
throughout the data life cycle. The data should as good laboratory practices, good clinical
be collected and maintained in a secure manner, practices, good manufacturing practices, good
so that they are attributable, legible, contempo- pharmacovigilance practices and good distri-
raneously recorded, original (or a true copy) and bution practices (3).
accurate. Assuring data integrity requires appro-
Human Factors
priate quality and risk management systems, in-
A science discipline that examines human psy-
cluding adherence to sound scientific principles
and good documentation practices (5). chological, social, physical, and biological char-
acteristics to evaluate the design, operation, or
WHO: The degree to which data are complete,
use of products or systems for optimizing human
consistent, accurate, trustworthy and reliable and
performance, health, safety, and/or habitability
that these characteristics of the data are main-
(11).
tained throughout the data life cycle. The data
should be collected and maintained in a secure Hybrid Approach
manner, such that they are attributable, legible, WHO: The use of a computerized system in
contemporaneously recorded, original or a true which there is a combination of original elec-
copy and accurate. Assuring data integrity re- tronic records and paper records that comprise
quires appropriate quality and risk management the total record set that should be reviewed
systems, including adherence to sound scientific and retained (3).
principles and good documentation practices (3).
4 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 10 / Report page 5]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Manual Integration Raw Data
Process used by a person to modify the integra- FDA: Any laboratory worksheets, records,
tion of peak area by modifying the baseline, split- memoranda, notes, or exact copies thereof
ting peaks, or dropping a baseline as assigned by that are the result of original observations and
the chromatography software to overrule the activities of a nonclinical laboratory study and
pre-established integration parameters within are necessary for the reconstruction and evalu-
the chromatographic software. ation of the report of that study. Raw data may
include photographs, microfilm or microfiche
Metadata
copies, computer printouts, magnetic media,
FDA: The contextual information required to
including dictated observations, and recorded
understand data. A data value is by itself mean-
data from automated instruments (13).
ingless without additional information about
MHRA: The original record (data) which can
the data. Metadata is often described as data
be described as the first-capture of informa-
about data. Metadata is structured information
tion, whether recorded on paper or electroni-
that describes, explains, or otherwise makes it
cally. Information that is originally captured in
easier to retrieve, use, or manage data (2).
a dynamic state should remain available in that
MHRA: Metadata is data that describe the at-
state (5).
tributes of other data and provide context and
meaning. Typically, these are data that describe Static Record Format
the structure, data elements, inter-relation- FDA: A fixed-data document such as a paper
ships and other characteristics of data. It also record or an electronic image (2).
permits data to be attributable to an individual
MHRA: A “fixed” record such as paper or pdf (5).
(or if automatically generated, to the original
WHO: A static record format, such as a paper
data source) (5).
or pdf record, is one that is fixed and allows
WHO: Metadata are data about data that pro-
little or no interaction between the user and
vide the contextual information required to
the record content (3).
understand those data. These include structur-
al and descriptive metadata. Such data describe Systems (in computer or related
the structure, data elements, interrelationships systems)
and other characteristics of data. They also per- FDA (attributed to ANSI): People, ma-
mit data to be attributable to an individual (3). chines, and methods organized to accomplish
a set of specific functions. Computer or re-
Original Record
lated systems can refer to computer hardware,
MHRA: The first or source capture of data
software, peripheral devices, networks, cloud
or information, e.g., original paper record of
infrastructure, operators, and associated docu-
manual observation or electronic raw data
ments (e.g., user manuals and standard operat-
file from a computerised system, and all sub-
ing procedures) (2,14).
sequent data required to fully reconstruct the
WHO: A computerized system collectively
conduct of the GXP activity. Original records
controls the performance of one or more auto-
can be static or dynamic (5).
mated processes and/or functions. It includes
Peak Integration computer hardware, software, peripheral de-
Process used to by a chromatographic system to vices, networks and documentation, e.g., man-
determine the peak area (based on height and uals and standard operating procedures, as well
width) and obtain the quantitation of the peak as the personnel interfacing with the hardware
of interest. The measurement is based on the in- and software, e.g., users and information tech-
tegral technique of splitting the peak into a large nology support personnel (3).
number of rectangles, which are then summed
to provide an estimate of the total area under the
peak (12).
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 5

[PDF PAGE 11 / Report page 6]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
True Copy MHRA: A copy (irrespective of the type of me-
FDA: 21 CFR 211.180(d) requires records to dia used) of the original record that has been ver-
be retained “either as original records or true ified (i.e., by a dated signature or by generation
copies such as photocopies, microfilm, micro- through a validated process) to have the same in-
fiche, or other accurate reproductions of the formation, including data that describe the con-
original records” (8). Electronic copies can be text, content, and structure as the original (5).
used as true copies of paper or electronic re-
WHO: A true copy is a copy of an original re-
cords, provided the copies preserve the content
cording of data that has been verified and certi-
and meaning of the original or raw data, which
fied to confirm it is an exact and complete copy
includes associated metadata and the static or
that preserves the entire content and meaning
dynamic nature of the original records (2).
of the original record including, in the case of
electronic data, all essential metadata and the
original record format as appropriate (3).
2.1 Acronyms
ALCOA Accurate, Legible, Contemporaneous, ICH International Conference on
Original and Attributable Harmonisation
ALCS Analytical Laboratory Computerized LIMS Laboratory Information Management
Systems System
COTS Commercial Off-The-Shelf (software) PQS Pharmaceutical Quality System
CPC Critical Process Control QA Quality Assurance
CQA Critical Quality Attribute QC Quality Control
CGMP Current Good Manufacturing Practice QU Quality Unit
CSV Comma Separated Values USP United States Pharmacopeia
EDC Electronic Data Capture
GXP Inclusive of Good Laboratory
Practice, Good Clinical Practice,
Good Manufacturing Practice, Good
Distribution Practice and Good
Pharmacovigilance Practice
6 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 12 / Report page 7]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
3.0 Regulatory Trends for Data Integrity Issues in
Pharmaceutical Laboratories
Regulations and guidelines require analytical and microbiological laboratories to have the appropriate controls
and procedures, governed by a robust and reliable Quality Unit organization, to ensure paper documentation
and electronic data are properly managed (15–17). Laboratory management and personnel must be properly
trained on CGMPs on a regular basis, including on good data management practices, and have the neces-
sary resources to maintain a sustainable CGMP environment. Regulations specifically require each person
engaged in a CGMP-related function to be properly trained in the operations they perform and in CGMPs
(18). A review of recent inspection findings and regulatory actions initiated by various health authorities dem-
onstrates that these expectations have not been attained consistently, though the regulations have remained
largely unchanged for the past 30 years. The breaches in data integrity found during inspections in recent years
have triggered the need to publish additional guidance documents describing more clearly the regulatory ex-
pectations in CGMP-related systems (e.g., laboratory, quality, production, utilities, packaging, and facilities/
equipment). These guidances emphasize the importance of good laboratory and manufacturing documenta-
tion practices and greater collaboration among regulatory agencies around the world and across the industry.
The common trends identified in regulatory observations between 2012 and 2017 are similar for both
analytical and microbiological laboratories and include the following:
• Failure to perform required testing: Citations have been issued for sterility testing of finished
product, in-process, active pharmaceutical ingredient (API), environmental monitoring, water,
and media fills where the required sampling, incubation, and/or testing were not performed, while
records were generated as if the sampling or testing had been performed. Regulators have cited
firms for failing to perform testing of in-process and finished drug products, while COAs indicate
that the final testing had been conducted.
• Falsification of critical data: Citations have been issued for falsification of sampling informa-
tion or test result data in worksheets/logbooks/test reports, including fabricated results for samples
not attained and/or incubated, and for reporting failing results as passing.
• Deletion of data: Citations have been issued for deletion or overwriting of electronic data gen-
erated in the laboratory. A review of many systems’ audit trails shows the deletion of chromato-
graphic injections or critical test data information.
• Deficiencies in deviation reports and investigations of data integrity issues: Citations
have been issued for deficiencies such as inadequate root cause (e.g., did not address data manipu-
lation and falsification), failure to expand the scope of the investigation to assess potential impact
of poor data integrity practices on other functional areas, lack of an action plan describing how
corporate management and the Quality Unit will prevent data manipulation, lack of a compre-
hensive assessment of all products manufactured, and lack of data to support applications.
• Falsification of CGMP records: Citations have been issued for evidence of falsification of
CGMP records, including modification of records, omissions, or reporting inaccurate results. In
order to provide more specific context, an analysis of individual citations listed in recent FDA
Warning Letters was completed and indicates five common data integrity trends found during the
inspection of quality control laboratories. See references (19–24). For example, in a 2013 criminal
plea agreement, the defendant pled guilty to the introduction into interstate commerce of adulter-
ated drugs, with intent to defraud or mislead, failure to file timely required reports, making false
statements (25).
• Failure to ensure that laboratory records included complete data: derived from all tests nec-
essary to ensure compliance with established specifications and standards. Regulators have found that
laboratories fail to maintain critical test result data pertaining to products tested (which may include in-
coming raw material, in-process testing, released test results, stability results, or data generated during the
testing of exhibit batches). This deficiency is often cited during API inspections as “Failure to maintain
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 7

[PDF PAGE 13 / Report page 8]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
complete data derived from all laboratory tests conducted.” Investigators find that out-of-specification
(OOS) test results are excluded, not reported, or not investigated. Unexplained missing or deleted chro-
matographic data also have been reported under this category. During the review of FDA Warning
Letters published between 2012 and 2017, unexplained deletions of laboratory test results often were
associated with repeated test analysis with no justification nor explanation. Incomplete data sets should
be detectable through audit trails which are reviewed on a routine basis. Failure to ensure that laboratory
records be complete is not a new issue. A case filed in 2012 in a federal district court, shows the U.S.
Government and a regulated pharma firm entering an agreement that listed, among other violations
found by the government a failure to include in laboratory records a complete record of all data secured
in the course of each test, including all graphs, charts and spectra from laboratory instrumentation (26).
• Failure to configure computerized systems to meet the requirements for the security
and control of data, in particular, permitting unauthorized system access, allowing for the dele-
tion of electronic and printed raw data (including information related to undesirable or failing
results), and/or failing to configure and/or enable audit trails. This category of citations was ref-
erenced in more than 15 FDA Warning Letters between 2012 and 2017, primarily spotlighting
the failure to properly configure laboratory systems used for high performance liquid chromatog-
raphy (HPLC), gas chromatography (GC), and ultraviolet (UV) and infrared (IR) analysis that
leaves them vulnerable to data manipulation. In some cases, an actual breach in data integrity was
described, while in others, only the failure to properly secure and configure the system was cited.
Regulators have found electronic data manipulated or computerized systems misused primarily
due to limited or inappropriate controls in place. For example, analysts performed “pre-analysis,
sample trial injections, unauthorized or unofficial” HPLC or GC injections and modified or al-
tered a computer’s time-and-date stamp of the “official sample” to make it seem as if the “official
sample” was tested at the time the pre-analysis, sample trial, unauthorized, or unofficial injections
were performed. Trial sample analyses of samples under test are never acceptable. Standard, blank,
and placebo trial analyses may be required for equilibration or system verification purposes. These
analyses must be labeled appropriately, included with the sample of data set, and distinguishable
from the sample analyses.
These modifications or alterations may go undetected by the Quality Unit. One common root
cause may be that the Quality Unit does not have adequate procedures, training, and understand-
ing of how to review original electronic data and metadata, such as audit trails, that track these
actions. A poorly configured computerized system includes, but is not limited to, systems where
laboratory staff or managers may have administrator-level access that allows them to eliminate
failing, atypical, and unsatisfactory results; alter peak areas; change system settings (e.g., date,
time, etc.); or eliminate injection sequences. System configuration to ensure data security should
be challenged during system validation.
• Failure to document laboratory records contemporaneously and/or deliberate falsifi-
cation of manual records: Regulators have found inconsistencies when comparing laboratory
documentation records against the electronic data files (e.g., dates recorded on sample-receiving
records are inconsistent with the date stamped on the HPLC chromatograms) as well as failure to
document sample/weights, dilutions, standard lot numbers, etc. (21).
• Performing unreported sample test injections: This deficiency was cited specifically in four
FDA Warning Letters, based on unauthorized testing of chromatography samples outside the
quality system. Trial analyses and deletion of data were found to be closely related; specifically, the
deletion of data or the failure to configure systems to detect the deletion of data.
• Failure to validate analytical methods: This deficiency was cited in two FDA Warning Letters,
calling into question the accuracy of any data collected using a test method that had not been validated.
Title 21 CFR 11.10(f) requires that systems enforce the sequencing of steps and events, i.e., each step
should be recorded before the next step or event occurs. Complying with this requirement would re-
8 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 14 / Report page 9]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
sult in system design (technical and/or procedural) that forces users to record the data for the step (e.g.,
of processing lab data) prior to the next step (e.g., of processing the lab data again to obtain a second
result). Despite this requirement, consultants have found the following examples where processing of
data is being performed in temporary memory or data is being buffered and then selectively sent to
the database for “permanent recording” after the data set has been sanitized as example issues (27):
• Some standalone instruments (i.e., instruments that are connected to a local computer but not to
a network), also sometimes referred to as locally-managed laboratory instrument systems, allow
the entire analysis of a sample through to result generation in temporary memory prior to record-
ing (i.e., saving the data into permanent memory). Enabling audit trails (system and method audit
trails) should detect these issues, which is discussed in more detail in Section 6.4.
• Certain data flows are not being correctly designed in that multiple inputs to LIMS (e.g., weights
from balances, KF moisture readings, etc.) are incorrectly entered into LIMS in temporary memo-
ry where the user can edit values prior to committing the data to the LIMS database. For example,
this would allow persons to alter the weights that would, in turn, alter the moisture results. In the
absence of contemporaneous corroborating source data, such as printouts from the balance and
KF, this data integrity issue may not be detectable. The data flow should instead be designed to en-
force the recording of the weight in the LIMS at the time of the weighing, and prior to the second
step of the generation of the moisture reading, etc. Further discussion of the indirect measures to
aid in detecting this is included in Section 6.2.
These examples are not all-inclusive but are representative of issues uncovered by regulatory agencies
during recent inspections and found by consultants during remediation efforts.
4.0 General Considerations for the Control of Data Integrity
in the Laboratory
Laboratory data is generated, processed, recorded, and maintained in electronic (also referred to as
digital), paper, or manual systems or in a combination of these (hybrid). The following general prin-
ciples are foundational to establishing robust data integrity:
• Controls should be established to cover the entire data lifecycle from data collection to use in GXP
reports and archiving.
• The data lifecycle extends through retention, archival/retrieval, and destruction.
• The data lifecycle should be re-evaluated for risk and the appropriateness of risk mitigation con-
trols every time the laboratory evolves from a manual to a hybrid and/or electronic instrument or
experiences a change in the data capture process or the workflow in the laboratory.
4.1 Original Records
Original records include source data and all metadata needed to be “complete” and to allow for full
reconstruction of conduct of the GXP activity. Original records for most laboratory systems include
source electronic data and any subsets that are printed. Some equipment, such as pH meters and bal-
ances, may create a paper printout or static image of electronic reading during data acquisition as the
original record. However, electronic records from certain types of laboratory instruments are dynamic
records, and a printout or a static record does not preserve the dynamic format that is part of the com-
plete original record (2). A firm must justify the choice of record (paper or electronic) based on whether
the data is static or dynamic. In the case of dynamic data, it is required to maintain electronic records.
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 9

[PDF PAGE 15 / Report page 10]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Original records include source data and all metadata and must be recorded contemporaneously with
the GXP step or event, whether the process and data are manual/paper or automated/electronic. Spe-
cific attention should be given to implementing controls that prevent and detect the alteration, cor-
ruption, or deletion of the data in temporary memory or transient locations, including proper security
and verification of the complete data flow. When reviewing microbiological analysis, it should be un-
derstood that the original physical petri plates, contact plates, test tubes, agar strips, and items of these
types used during product or environmental testing are not considered the analytical records because
the initial results can change over time even during post-analysis storage (even under refrigeration).
The visual analytical data after the prescribed time of incubation should be observed (retrieved) from
these materials and recorded either manually onto a paper document or into a digital system (e.g.,
LIMS) without alteration or corruption.
4.2 Human Factors
The reliability of laboratory results can be influenced by the personal and professional background of
the microbiologists, analysts, and laboratory technicians who perform these analyses. PDA uses the
following definition of human factors: A science discipline that examines human psychological, social,
physical, and biological characteristics to evaluate the design, operation, or use of products or sys-
tems for optimizing human performance, health, safety, and/or habitability (11). A full human-factor
analysis or explanation of why people intentionally or unintentionally falsify documentation or omit
information is not the focus of this technical report, but human factors should not be ruled out when
trying to determine the root cause of a breach in the integrity of data or questionable practices that
may affect the quality of pharmaceutical drugs produced.
The psychological subset of human factors which may include attitude, perception or reality, religious
background, socioeconomic factors, coercion, and fear of persons in positions of authority, etc. are
especially challenging to discern in the workplace (28). A person’s developmental history and past life
experiences, as well as current/recent stressful events or scenarios, may affect or influence its behavior
and decisions. For example, a person experiencing a stressful family situation, loss of a significant one,
illness (e.g., depression, anxiety), or undergoing social economic challenges may not have the correct
mindset or mental stability to make basic sound decisions. These factors could trigger or pressure a
person to engage in inappropriate behaviors or cause careless errors. Therefore, every organization
should have the appropriate controls and systems in place that will allow early detection of behaviors
or patterns that are not within the expected norm and that may affect the quality of pharmaceutical
drugs produced.
One of the roles of regulatory investigators is to determine if a facility is operating in a state of control
and in compliance with required regulations. This is done by verifying the integrity of data generated
by a firm. Regulators and independent company auditors both evaluate pharmaceutical laboratory
practices, among other CGMP aspects, and document data anomalies. However, it would be unrea-
sonable to expect that regulators and auditors will detect all possible forms of data integrity practices
that may be occurring in a pharmaceutical laboratory. Breaches in the integrity of data is not limited
to one system or area. A review of the literature calls attention to a variety of data integrity problems
that have been documented in several pharmaceutical analytical and microbiology laboratories located
around the world (29). In addition to the examples discussed in this report, these published observa-
tions can serve as a point of reference and a training tool to assist in identifying where to look when
performing a regulatory inspection or an internal audit.
10 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80