[PDF PAGE 47 / Report page 42]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
– Retesting samples, deleting OOS results, and reporting passing results during stability or to
release batches
– Data deletions
– Data manipulations, such as changing integration, date and time, or method parameters
– Data not archived
– Data archived on unreadable discs
– Reviewers unable to detect the problems due to lack of understanding fields
– Aborted sequences
– Inhibition of peaks/disregarding peaks without proper scientific justification
6.4 Other Laboratory Equipment
Due to the increasing number of citations about HPLC and GC instruments that have led to FDA Warn-
ing Letters, laboratory management may underestimate the importance of other equipment (e.g., UV,
FTIR) being in compliance with 21 CFR Part 11. Because not all laboratory equipment is available in
both a hybrid-system and a computer operated system (e.g., UV spectrophotometer, Fourier transform in-
frared spectrometer (FTIR), atomic absorption spectrometer, X-ray spectrometer, or titrator), there could
be a mix of formats in the laboratory. As a result, some laboratories have adopted “scientific data manage-
ment systems,” which can capture data from all instruments that generate signals and are equipped with
RS 232 or local area network ports. If used, this scientific data management system needs to be qualified
as laboratory data management software and should be compliant with 21 CFR Part 11 requirements.
Although the software supplied for UV and FTIR instruments may not have the same applications as
HPLC or GC software, similar observations have been listed as deficiencies in audits and FDA Warn-
ing Letters, for example: (55)
• Lack of audit trails
• No unique user IDs and passwords
• Data can be deleted
• Data files can be saved as new data files using “save as” function
• Not all changes to data captured in audit trails
• Processing parameters not saved or not captured as metadata
• Not enabling, reviewing, or printing/publishing audit trails
• All user IDs and passwords treated as “administrator” for the majority of stand-alone systems
• Failure to establish and exercise adequate controls over computers to prevent unauthorized ac-
cess, changes to, or omission of electronic data
• Failure to maintain complete electronic raw data for instruments, Malvern particle-size analyzer,
and UV spectrophotometer, e.g., instruments were connected to stand-alone computers that
stored the data, which could be deleted at any time
Laboratory management should ensure that the following procedures and system design, where pos-
sible, are put in place for UV and FTIR instruments:
• Audit trail feature enabled at all times
• System audit trails review, including scope and how to conduct
• Data protection and archival
• Individual user logins
• Qualification of software
42 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 48 / Report page 43]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6.5 Laboratory Data Management Software
Some analytical laboratories manage laboratory data using commercial software like LIMS or scientific
data management systems. Whether the software is validated at the site, either by the vendor or by
the user, the user is responsible for assuring its compliance with 21 CFR Part 11. The Quality Unit
should understand completely the functionality, features, and capability of the software. All automatic
equipment used in pharmaceutical manufacturing environment, including computers used to test
drug products, must also comply with 21 CFR Part 211.68. Regulatory expectations for computerized
systems used in the manufacture of API are found in the ICH Q7 Guidance for Industry (6,8,43).
Browser-enabled user logins from multiple computers pose a potential risk. Login functionality is recommend-
ed to be properly challenged, mitigated, and verified. An additional layer of security should be embedded in the
software that allows only user logins that have been verified by specific, permitted IP addresses as filter logins.
Laboratory data management software typically is validated using the following steps (not necessarily
in this order):
• Document the software name and version number
• Define the period for software updates
• Check and validate e-signatures
• Validate the software for its intended use
• Determine capability of meeting 21 CFR Part 11 requirements in terms of audit trail and controls
• Test the software on the network for data transmission
• Set up controls and traceability of printouts and define number of printouts allowed
• Check data and security of offshore and Cloud data
• Validate Cloud-based data management system for security and possibility of compromise
• Establish quality service agreement and contingency plan for Cloud-based systems and deter-
mine exact physical location of servers
• Verify record and logic behind the algorithms used in calculations
• Calculate manually the common statistical computations used by software (such as mean, stan-
dard deviation, percentage of relative standard deviation to complex math like potency content,
similarity factor (F2) values for dissolution analysis, and coefficient of variation for uniformity of
dosage) and compare with software values
• Check data transmission and losses from instruments to attached computer
• Check data transmission to computer, server, and interfaces in between, and validate for intended
functionality of analysis, data acquisition, processing, reporting, tracking, and security
• Ensure PDFs of any converted data files are not editable and bear a date-and-time stamp
• Confirm that intended software is compatible with COTS software for any laboratory instrument
(e.g., HPLC, GC, and PSD).
6.5.1 Controls
The following are the minimum controls needed to validate laboratory data management software:
• Identify the person responsible for updates and maximum possible software updates to be per-
formed by the software vendor and in-house IT personnel
• Address any changes to software through change history
• Establish secure unique user login identifications and periodic change of passwords
• Restrict permission to delete data to administrator or IT personnel
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 43

[PDF PAGE 49 / Report page 44]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• Maintain copies of older versions of software whenever version is updated (recommended) and
ensure that backed-up data from previous versions can still be accessed
• Check software integrity on a periodic basis
• Maintain detailed list of roles, responsibilities, and privileges for all staff who use the laboratory
data management software
6.5.2 Common Deficiencies that May Lead to Data Compromise
• Browser-based interface enabling simultaneous logins with the same IDs without sufficient con-
trols to prevent redundant data activity
• Not investigating qualification errors or shortfalls according to nonconformance procedure
• Not enabling, reviewing, or publishing audit trails
• Installing features without complete understanding, leading to data compromise
• Lapses in training, e.g., lack of training or inadequate training for tasks being performed
6.5.3 Spreadsheet Validation
Many laboratories use customized spreadsheets for calculations. To avoid possible data breaches, the
Quality Unit should validate the customized spreadsheet template for its intended use and protect it
by restricting permissions to alter the template or delete data.
Typically, customized spreadsheets are validated by customizing them to the intended use with a stan-
dardized formula in the USP or another valid source, comparing the manual calculations against the
spreadsheet calculations, and testing boundaries and functions.
6.5.3.1 Spreadsheet Controls
The following are the minimum controls to be put in place for customized spreadsheets, which are
recommended to be captured in the SOPs:
• Encrypt with password protection
• Restrict editing (set to “Read only”) so previous data is not retained in the template
• Save spreadsheets to a designated location on the server and capture the file location on each spreadsheet
• Change passwords and revalidate customized spreadsheets periodically per established SOPs
Figure 6.5.3.1-1 represents a typical template for a validated, protected, tamper-resistant spreadsheet.
Figure 6.5.3.1-1 Example of Validated, Protected Spreadsheet
44 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 50 / Report page 45]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6.5.3.2 Common Deficiencies in Spreadsheets
The following are commonly seen deficiencies in spreadsheets that may lead to data compromise and
risk of data integrity problems:
• Spreadsheets not validated
• Accidental or deliberate formula changes made in unprotected spreadsheets (e.g., in Figure
6.5.3.2-1, data was manipulated; the failing value of 96.30 was replaced with a passing value of
98.23, which was entered manually on the unprotected sheet)
• Entering passing results in unprotected spreadsheets (Figure 6.5.3.2-2)
• Lack of controls on spreadsheet access and lack of training of staff to respect password control
Figure 6.5.3.2-1 Validated Spreadsheet: API Assay Failure (Failure Result is 96.30)
Figure 6.5.3.2-2 Modified Standard Average Change Value in Spreadsheet for Assay Preparation 1
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 45

[PDF PAGE 51 / Report page 46]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6.6 Electronic Data Governance
In the current analytical laboratory environment, the key factors, discussed in this section, need to be
considered for data governance. Analytical equipment controlled by firmware may not be able to publish
audit trails. If not, the Quality Unit should implement a procedure to check for data compromises on
any equipment for which this is the case. Controls should be similar for all equipment and data integrity
should be ensured on all equipment. A logbook for data backup and deletion should also be maintained.
A high-level diagram of electronic data governance in an analytical laboratory is presented in Figure 6.6-1.
6.6.1 Data Backup and Storage
The Quality Unit should develop a procedure for data backup and determine at what intervals it will
be performed. Hybrid systems have temporary electronic storage that is overwritten (e.g., calibration
curves on pH meters); this printed/published record is the primary data source. This electronic infor-
mation is not intended for backup or long-term retention. Analytical equipment on which electronic
data is generated should be included in the data backup. Copying data onto discs as a backup is recom-
mended to protect against the potential failure of the server or Cloud. The data copied onto the discs
should be checked for completeness and accuracy. To ensure the safety of the data, common industry
practice is to maintain two copies of the data at different locations. Any Cloud-based storage service
should be GXP-compliant (5). Wherever possible, a risk-based cold backup (a scheduled backup
without any manual intervention) should be planned to avoid surprises and regulatory complications.
It is strongly recommended that electronic signatures, if adopted, comply with 21 CFR Part 11 re-
quirements and include date and time stamps.
The laboratory data governance manual is useful for consolidating current information about labora-
tory equipment and data procedures and may contain sections such as those listed below. Table 6.6.1-1
represents a model table from a laboratory data governance manual. Preparing this manual and keeping
it current is a good practice, one that makes a laboratory audit more efficient.
• Details of all laboratory equipment
• Details of all equipment software, including version information
• Laboratory equipment procedure numbers
Cloud Server
Server Server LIMS LIMS
Computer Computer Computer Computer Computer
Printer Printer
Balance HPLC GC UV IR PSD Titrator
Hybrid system Instruments on server-1 Instruments on server-2 Instruments on stand-alone system-2
Figure 6.6-1 Typical Analytical Laboratory Data Mapping
46 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 52 / Report page 47]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• Data handling procedures, list of audit trails published or reviewed, each analysis, and typical
information captured
• List of all users of all software and their roles
• Server(s) details
• Data backup frequency
• Risk analysis and mitigation plan
• Names and contact information of key personnel and vendors
Table 6.6.1-1 Example of a Table in a Laboratory Manual
Data Frequency
Procedure Part 11 Audit Trails
Instrument Software Version
Reference Compliant Reviewed
Backup Reconciliation
HPLC Important R 1 SOP 34, 36, 45 Yes Yes 3 M 30 days
GC Important R 1 SOP 34, 39, 45 Yes Yes 3 M 30 days
PSD Super V 5 SOP 34, 48, 56 Yes Yes 3 M 60 days
Balance N/A N/A SOP 15 N/A N/A N/A N/A
LIMS Excel V 4.2 SOP 98, 89, 105 Yes Yes 1 M N/A
6.6.2 Routine Checks of Data and Multiple Equipment in the Laboratory
The Quality Unit should schedule regular data reconciliation to detect data compromises early. Creat-
ing a data flow of the entire laboratory from the top down will provide an excellent overview of where
mistakes or breaches might occur. Random checks of employee shifts or timing logs against equipment
use should be performed to check data integrity. Synchronization of raw data across the instruments
can be verified to expose data manipulation by random checks, such as checking the injection time and
balance printout/PDF time for sample weighing and reconciling data periodically on instruments, as
represented in Figure 6.6.2-1.
HPLC
Number of injec2ons made
vs. number processes\ or
reported
XRD/GC/NMR/UV PCA-­‐based Titrator
Number of total scans vs. Standardiza2on errors
number of reports or Review of system log or
processes results unreported results.
LIMS Systems IR Spectrophotometer
Workbook print 2me vs. Compare spectrums for any
balance print 2me trend of data breaches
Audit trail review Review of audit trail
Figure 6.6.2-1 Typical Data Reconciliation Exercise
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 47

[PDF PAGE 53 / Report page 48]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Examples of what to look for on some instruments are:
• Titrator: Data stored on the internal memory vs. number of records in the instrument logbook
• HPLC: Number of injections vs. number of logbook entries or number of results
• UV, IR: Number of data files vs. number of logbook entries.
6.6.3 Communications with Chromatographic Software Vendors
Since instrumental software may have some exceptional behavior, firms should document the com-
munications with software vendors regarding clarification/remediation of error messages, warning
messages, software bugs, and other issues that may be identified in audit trails, or other operations
that need support from the vendor. These issues, communicated over the phone or via email, should
be documented and will serve as a basis for change of procedures or initiation of new controls. Often
vendor call centers or tech support groups allot a ticket number or tag number that can be referenced.
In addition, there may be issues or restrictions in the software that a vendor would identify and com-
municate to all users through website notification or email communication. Firms should assess and
document how those communications will be evaluated and how a determination is made regarding
the effect on GMP operations. Recordings of audit trails and other critical data are recommended
to be checked on a periodic basis to have better control and understanding of software issues. If any
anomalies are observed they should be investigated immediately, and if they are suspected as software
issues they should be communicated to the vendor for next steps of investigation.
6.6.4 Presenting Data on Request in Electronic Format for Audits and Inspections
Auditors and health authority inspectors may request that electronic data be copied onto portable media
(such as a USB or portable hard drive) or in a readable format (such as PDF, Microsoft Excel, or text) for
their review evidence. Copying data from a validated system compliant with 21 CFR Part 11 or EU GMP
Annex 11 onto media or into a readable format that does not maintain the original metadata should be
avoided if possible. If data is transferred onto media or into a readable format, verification that the data and
metadata are a true copy is recommended. Uncontrolled use of the copy-and-paste function can be prone to
error and give the impression that original data has been altered or falsified. Establishing an SOP that gov-
erns how to copy and save data from laboratory systems is highly recommended. The SOP should describe
the standard queries and reports that can be generated for audit and inspection purposes and the controls in
place to ensure the accuracy of non-routine reports. Printing or exporting injection logs with all the details,
such as injection time and sample name, may not be readily possible on some chromatographic software.
7.0 Risk Management of Data Governance Systems
Data integrity controls should be based on quality risk management principles such as ICH Q9 (37),
that is, the level of controls, verification, and oversight should be commensurate with the criticality of
the data to patient safety and with the risk to data accuracy, completeness, fabrication, or falsification.
7.1 Risk Assessment
Conducting a risk assessment is a recommended method to assess and challenge processes, systems,
controls, and practices in place for the generation, review, and archival of paper and electronic data.
Risk assessments may be performed as part of the selection, commissioning, and validation of com-
puterized systems. Testing of system functions and user privileges should be performed to ensure ap-
propriate controls are in place that prevent or track changes to data, including any mechanism or role
that allows data to be altered, overwritten, not saved, or deleted.
48 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80