[PDF PAGE 28 / Report page 23]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
In addition, any computer system attached to analytical equipment should not be accessible for general
purposes, such as generating SOPs or checking email. Personal mobile devices also should not be permit-
ted to be connected to analytical equipment to avoid infecting the computer with a virus and causing it to
crash. Figure 6.3-1 illustrates one example of a typical data flow and configuration which includes a re-
mote data center. In a smaller laboratory setting, the configuration could be much simpler with a desktop
connected directly to the chromatography instruments. Some configurations do not use temporary storage
but send raw data directly to the data center/file server. The system configuration will determine how audit
trails are established and reviewed, which is discussed in greater detail in Section 6.3.9.
6.3.1 Qualification of Computer Server and/or Virtual System
Software verification provides objective evidence that the design output of a specific phase of a software
development lifecycle will meet all the requirements for that phase of the application’s development.
Software verification looks for consistency, completeness, and correctness of the software and its sup-
porting documentation.
Typically, an ALCS is designed to run on a local computer or, often, several ALCS could be connected
to a centralized server. That server could be hosted from another building, from a remote site, or from
a third-party hosting site, often referred to as a virtual system or “Cloud” system. Whether the server is
housed locally or in the Cloud, the requirement exists that the server must be qualified to demonstrate
that it is fit for use and able to support the software in a compliant environment related to all appli-
cable regulations. Testing this premise of control is an expectation from all major health authorities.
The intended functionality of the server must be qualified to ensure data transmitted, processed, and
maintained is as accurate as the originally generated data, and that the audit trail capabilities remain
enabled to ensure authenticity and integrity of the electronic data. Network mapping, fitness for in-
tended use, and functional testing are basic criteria for any server qualification. The levels of control
Laboratory Data Center
Interface
Meta Data & Instrument
Control Parameters File server
Review system audit trails
periodically as per firm’s
Chromatography procedures.
Instruments
Interface
Raw
Data
R
a
o
t
e
r
t
v
a
h
i
p
e
e
p
w
e
r o
n
a
p
d
u
r
d
o
ia
i
f
t
t
s
e
t
e
r
i
a
q
n
il
u
t
s
e
e
o
r
n
v
n
c
a
c
e
l
e
s .
(
T
in
e
s
m
om
po
e
r
c
a
o
r
n
y
fi g
s
u
to
ra
r
t
a
io
g
n
e
s)
Results
and
associated
data
C
al
e
t
n
er
t
n
ra
a
l
t
S
iv
e
e
r v
fo
er
r
s
d
a
a
r
t
e
a
o
b
n
a
e
c kup.
Desktop
Review results audit
trails before batch
release.
Site QA Central Servers
Figure 6.3-1 Sample Data Flow and Audit Trail Points in an ALCS
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 23

[PDF PAGE 29 / Report page 24]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
should be the same as those for computer system qualification. The following are recommended com-
ponents of server qualification:
• Assign the system a unique identification • Qualify the server for its intended use and
number controls that prevent misuse
• Locate the server in a secured environment • Map the network and perform functional
testing
• Restrict access to the physical location of
server • Define the periods to update applications,
operating system, and antivirus software
• Document the operating system details and
version number • Control remote access appropriately (e.g.,
maintenance or system upgrades)
As a result of Cloud technology, software-as-a-service (SaaS) is becoming a common offering by soft-
ware vendors. An SaaS environment offers pharmaceutical companies many benefits; however, they
must understand that, ultimately, as the end user, the pharmaceutical company is responsible for the
appropriate use and the control of this technology. Consequently, a detailed service level agreement
(SLA) between the SaaS hosting company and the end user is needed to clearly define the roles and
responsibilities of each party particularly to satisfy each regulatory requirement. Such an agreement
details information about the vendor, the physical and logistical security of the facility, and the secu-
rity of the firewall and firewall monitoring for possible cyberattack. It should also include any other
elements to ensure the environment is well controlled for the application’s use, including data back-
ups, application response times, and support response times. Appropriate metrics that can be used to
monitor the SaaS hosting company’s ability to meet the established expectations of the SLA should
be maintained. Both companies should devise a contingency plan to ensure against loss of data in the
event of network outage, hardware failure, or a cyber event and conduct a routine and detailed audit
of the SaaS application and the hosting environment at a frequency determined based on risk. The ul-
timate responsibility remains with the pharmaceutical laboratory, including the review of audit trails,
backup logs, change controls, and system administration controls to assure that only appropriate users
are accessing the system.
A clear advantage for the use of SaaS applications is that, typically, the buyer can use much of the
vendor’s documentation for installation qualification (IQ) and operational qualification (OQ) and the
vendor provides test scripts for the standard out-of-the-box functionality. This may reduce the docu-
mentation required by the company buying the services to test unique features or user-defined con-
figurations. When the application is ready for use, the end-user company performs the user acceptance
testing that certifies the system meets the agreed-upon requirements and is fit for use in the company
environment. It is important to note that this approach does not alleviate the regulatory requirement
for the end user to assure a compliant use of the system.
Pharma companies (end users) can also host the company-owned regulated systems in a third party’s
Cloud environment. This scenario allows a third party to run a company’s application in a virtualized
server in the third party’s data center. The regulated company must still assure compliance in the third
party’s environment, but this allows the regulated company to focus more on its own core business
rather than staffing the complex environment of a regulated data center.
As with an SaaS system, a detailed SLA must be established with the third party’s data center detailing
information about the vendor, the physical and logistical security of the facility, and the security of
the firewall and firewall monitoring for possible cyberattack. The agreement should include any other
elements that ensure the environment is well controlled for the application’s use. The end-user com-
pany should devise a contingency plan to ensure against loss of data in the event of network outage or
hardware failure and conduct a detailed audit of a Cloud system and application vendor at least once
a year. As with SaaS, the end-user company should perform user acceptance testing of the vendor’s
application hosted in the vendor’s Cloud to certify that the application is fit for use in the company’s
environment (7).
24 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 30 / Report page 25]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Additional information on Cloud and SaaS qualification can be found in the Control Objectives for Information and Related Technologies (COBIT) framework
created by the international professional association ISACA as a good practice for information technology (IT) management and IT governance (40) and in ITIL®
(Information Technology Infrastructure Library) books, a set of widely accepted best practices for IT service management for business (41).
Several different health authorities have published guidances and regulations that set out their expectations for system qualification and software validation. Consen-
sus standards are also available in some areas. Table 6.3.1-1 provides a cross-reference of key terms related to automated systems and the regulations, guidances, or
standards that specify the expectations.
Table 6.3.1-1 Key Terms and References for Automated Systems Requirements
GAMP 5 and IT MHRA ‘GXP’ Data
WHO DI (Draft) ISO 13485:2016 COBIT 5
Reference Term FDA Part 11 (6) FDA Part 820 (42)EU Annex 11 (7) ICH Q7 (43) GAMP 5 (45) Infrastructure Integrity Guidance
(3) (44) Reference (40)
and Control (45) and Definitions (5)
Audit Trail Part 11.10(e) Section No. 9 5.43 5.4; 13.7; 6.6 BAI07 6.13
Change and Appendix 6.16; 6.17.2; 6.19
Configuration Part 11.10(k) 820.70(i) Section No. 10 5.43; 5.47 8.6; 13.6 4.1.6 6.1 BAI06
M8 and O6
Management
5.4; 11.2; 13.3;
Data Backup Part 11.10(c) 820.180 Section No. 7.2 5.48 Appendix O9 DSS04 6.17; 6.17.2
13.7
Data Encryption DSS05
Part 11.10(h)
Data Exchange Section No. 4.8 Appendix D7 BAI07
Device checks
Disaster Recovery 3.2; 13.11 Appendix O10 BAI07 DSS04
Electronic Media
14.2 DSS06
Management
Incident and
Problem 5.46 11.2; 13.12 Appendix O4 DSS02, DSS03
Management
Infrastructure 6.11
6.3 DSS01
Monitoring Appendix10
Network
DSS01
Connectivity
Part 11.300(b) &
Periodic Review Section No. 11 12.60 13.12 7.2.2 Appendix O8 Appendix 4 MEA01 6.2; 6.15; 6.17.1
(c); Part 11.10(k)
6.3.2 Commercial Off-the-Shelf Software Validation for HPLC, GC, and other Instrument Operations
Most commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) software includes formal, structural testing and a compliance certificate from the vendor, who has the proprietary source code. Once the
system is installed, the purchasing laboratory must configure the equipment, define roles and responsibilities, and confirm operation in its environment. Validation must be com-
pleted on-site for the intended use. Part of the validation may include verification and/or audits that the vendor has performed adequate testing prior to shipping the software.
25 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 31 / Report page 26]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Software validation is often referred to by regulators as “confirmation by examination and provision
of objective evidence that software specifications conform to user needs and intended uses, and that
the particular requirements implemented through software can be consistently fulfilled” (46). In prac-
tice, software validation activities may occur both during and at the end of the software development
lifecycle to ensure that all requirements have been fulfilled. A conclusion that software is validated is
highly dependent upon comprehensive software testing, inspections, analyses, and other verification
tasks performed at each stage of the software development lifecycle.
Validation documentation should include evidence of verification by the system owner, or Quality Unit,
of the following:
• Vendor has performed adequate testing prior to shipping the software
• Intended functionality of software in terms of analysis, data acquisition, processing, reporting,
tracking, and security
• Software name, configuration, and version number
• Compliance of audit trail(s) that meets 21 CFR Part 11 requirements
• Logic/basis for the algorithms used in calculations (e.g., USP tailing, ASTM peak integration)
• Common statistical calculations used by the software (such as mean, standard deviation, and
% relative standard deviation), as well as complex statistics (such as residual error, regression, and
slope) calculated manually and compared with software values
• Data transmission checks of the computer, the server, and the interfaces between the two (to verify
what happens with the server, network unavailability, and local PC unavailability) are essential to en-
sure data transmitted has not been manipulated, altered, or corrupted during the transmission phase.
The compatibility of COTS software with the laboratory data management software being used, such
as laboratory information management system (LIMS), electronic laboratory notebooks (ELN), and
enterprise resource planning (ERP), is also important to ensure the integrity of the electronic data.
Additional details on validation planning and lifecycle management can be found in Validation of
Chromatography Data Systems by Robert McDowall (47).
6.3.2.1 Controls for COTS Software for HPLC, GC, and Other Instrument Operations
The following are the minimal controls needed to safeguard COTS software and secure its use:
• Identifying the person(s) responsible for installing updates
• Addressing any changes to software through change control procedure with risk assessment
• Setting up secure individual user log-ins and periodic change of passwords
• Disabling data modification, deletion, or copying by anyone other than the administrator
• Restricting data deletion to only the authorized system administrator following established proce-
dures, with oversight by the Quality Unit
• Maintaining a detailed, QA-approved list of roles and responsibilities and copies of previous versions
of software when updating to allow reviewing, processing, audit trail review, backup/restore testing,
and reporting of older reports in case of regulatory requirements and investigations (recommended)
• Establishing periodic review of control effectiveness based on the risk posed, paying attention to
software upgrades and patches, and taking appropriate remediation and/or mitigation actions
• Maintaining a detailed list of roles, responsibilities, and access privileges for all the software in the laboratory
6.3.3 Laboratory Instrument Functionality and Qualification
Risk assessments to be executed during the initial qualification of laboratory instruments should iden-
tify various controls to manage risks, including data risks, at an acceptable level and should be chal-
lenged upfront. Necessary periodic checks and/or system controls would be identified at the same time.
26 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 32 / Report page 27]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Qualification of laboratory instruments and any features or functionality that may compromise data
should be verified, for example:
• Date and time stamp function should be enabled either in the instrument or on the computer
attached to the instrument, but analysts should not have the option of modifying the date and
time stamp functionality
• Analysts should not have the authority or capability to disable the audit trail feature
• Some instruments are manufactured with built-in memory and a computer that can also be con-
nected to an external computer; the system owner should clearly define the role of such computers
without compromising the data generated on those instruments
6.3.4 Data Governance — Generating, Processing, Reporting, and Archiving
Any features or functionalities that will enable data generation should be checked for how they func-
tion without connecting to computer (e.g., samples injected prior to the official test). Analysts should
not have the authority to conduct independent trial or pre-sample injections, and system suitability/
equilibration procedures should be defined in method validation/procedures. FDA Warning Letters
have cited companies for performing these types of testing prior to the official test. As per USP <621>,
no sample analysis is acceptable unless the suitability of the system has been demonstrated (48). If
the system suitability test fails, the results should be documented and handled according to the firm’s
SOPs; in this case, adjustments can be made, and a system suitability test can be repeated. Procedures
should be designed, however, to prevent trial injections in quality control analysis. FDA has found trial
injections of official samples included in a few company SOPs and has determined that the practice is
not acceptable. Regulators have also found trial injections conducted with samples masked or identi-
fied as standards, that when reexamined, were found to be samples and not standards.
Regulatory authorities prohibit pre-testing samples with the goal of obtaining a favorable or specific re-
sult prior to testing the official or reportable sample, or to overcome an unexpected/unacceptable result
(e.g., testing different samples until the desired passing result is obtained). This practice, also referred
to as “testing into compliance,” is not consistent with CGMP. In some situations, actual samples have
been used to perform system suitability testing as a means of testing into compliance. Regulatory au-
thorities consider the practice of using an actual sample in test, prep, or equilibration runs as a means
of disguising testing into compliance and deem it a violation (47).
Modern chromatographic software has the capability of acquiring data until the point a chromato-
graphic run is intentionally or unintentionally interrupted. Any such instances that are cited as “system
crash/equipment unplugged” or “miscommunication” without documented justification may not be
accepted by regulatory agencies. These instances should be properly investigated and documented.
Companies should evaluate this software capability as a part of qualification of new equipment. It is
also recommended to evaluate this for existing analytical equipment where available.
6.3.5 Data Generation
The Quality Unit should have clear procedures and qualified personnel to meticulously define data
governance in the organization. Appropriate written procedures should be in place and should be
followed to ensure all data generated by the laboratory is reliable and accurate. The moment an injec-
tion is made, or signal processing starts, the data file is deemed to be generated. The following are the
criteria or characteristics that define a data file:
• Analyst’s name • Date and time stamp
• Name of product • Method parameters (wave length, flow,
injection volume, and run time, at a
• Description of sample
minimum)
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 27

[PDF PAGE 33 / Report page 28]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 6.3.5-1 depicts the typical data flow in chromatographic analysis. The following conditions
should be defined in the laboratory procedures and any deviations investigated:
• When the data file can be treated as raw data • What to do if power is lost between
chromatographic runs
• What to do if a run aborts before
completion • Protocol for renaming of data file after
signal acquisition
• How to handle transmission loss from
analytical equipment to connected • How to identify willful acts to compromise
computer data using any of the above methods
6.3.6 Injection Sequences
Analyzing several samples at one time is a common practice in analytical laboratories, where samples
are queued by a set of commands or “sequences.” The Quality Unit should approve the software system
architecture and the defined rules for creating and executing sequences; controls and permissions for
renaming files after acquisition; controls on modifying method parameters during sample execution;
and copying or moving data files. Where possible, these rules should be incorporated into the system
architecture. Renaming a file to mask or hide the identity of a trial or pre-sample injection is not an
acceptable practice.
In addition, the following controls are recommended to capture such events in an audit trail:
• Name/number of sequence • Reason for modification
• Analyst’s name • Description of the method for each sample
• Name of the product • Review or clearance by a second analyst
before execution of sequence (suggested)
The following conditions also should be listed in the functional requirements and defined in labora-
tory procedures and any deviations should be investigated:
• Modification or execution of partial • Handling transmission loss from analytical
sequences equipment to the connected computer
• Acceptable situations to abort a sequence • Managing power loss between
and to maintain a track of aborted chromatographic runs
sequences
• Controls on sample trial injections, system
• Modification of the method parameters check injections, or single injections
after initiating the sequence
• Controls to identify willful acts to compro-
• Criteria for adding a sample to a sequence mise data using any of the above situations
after initiation
Instr a u u m di e t n t t r a s i e l tup I nj e m ct e i o t h n o [ d a n I D a • ] ly R st e s I D ul , t s a u d • i t t M ra e il t h o ds a u dit trail R es p u r l i t n s t , e a d u / d p i • t u t b r R l a i a s i w l h a s n e d d d a t a a u , d M • i t e t t E r a a l e i d l c t s a i t m t r a o e n s ic ta s m i g p nat ure E n d [ a o ll f e r s l e a e l m c a t t p r e i l d c e d a p n a a a t p a ly e s s r t i s & o r e d]
A n
alysis
I
nt e gr
ati o
n
D
at a r e
vi e
w
R el
e as
e
Figure 6.3.5-1 Typical Data Flow in Chromatographic Analysis
28 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 34 / Report page 29]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6.3.7 Data Processing and Peak Integration
Chromatographic software uses dynamic peak detection algorithms and automatic peak detection
algorithms. Integrating the chromatograms using software to apply the integration events, such as
peak width, threshold, height, and area, etc., and then visually observing the peak integration for its
correctness is generally recommended. The inherent or analytical variations and combination of vari-
ous factors can result in non-Gaussian peaks and drifting baselines in which the auto-integration will
either underreport or overintegrate the peak areas.
Once acquired, the electronic raw data of the measurements (measured values and metadata) are stored
and available for processing. Some acquired electronic raw data already represent usable results (e.g.,
weight, temperature, and humidity). Other acquired electronic raw data, such as intensity values cor-
related with time or wavelength and generated by chromatography or spectroscopy, require further
processing to obtain usable results (e.g., retention times, peak areas, and amounts). These processes,
such as integration and calibration, are defined by processing parameters or calibration factors and
affect only the resultant data after processing, but not the acquired electronic raw data. In contrast to
the acquired electronic raw data, the processing parameters, such as integration events and calibration
curves, may be changed during data evaluation. The changed processing parameters, methods, and
processed data should be identified by versioning (i.e., number of times reprocessed) either on the
results or from the audit trail data (25).
Integration events should be defined through standard algorithms, and metadata and should be associ-
ated with respective raw data files. In such cases, the analyst adjusts the integration events to obtain
proper peak integration. As chromatography is a comparative technique, the consistent integration
events should be applied for the entire set of chromatograms, as much as possible, or published along
with the chromatograms. Figure 6.3.7-1 represents an overlaid chromatogram of the standard and
a sample (of the same concentration) integrated with the same integration events. Integrating small
peaks, closer peaks, negative peaks, drifting peaks, and peak-to-valley requires time and skill. Integrat-
ing peaks manually is not recommended and should be avoided to the extent possible.
Figure 6.3.7-1 Typical Overlaid Chromatogram of Two Injections (Standard and Sample) Integrated with Same Integration Events
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 29

[PDF PAGE 35 / Report page 30]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
QC laboratories should have procedures in place that require authorization to perform manual integra-
tion and for procedures to track such events to avoid unnoticed or unevaluated cases that may affect
the accuracy of the results. PDA defines manual integration as a process used by a person to manually
integrate the peak height or area by modifying the baseline of the chromatogram with use of chromato-
graphic software. The conditions and circumstances when manual integration would be allowed should
be predefined (e.g., complexity of the sample matrix). Generally, a good chromatographic data system
would be able to render consistent and reliable baselines for an overwhelming majority of injections with-
in a chromatographic run. When consistently bad chromatographic peaks and baseline issues are encoun-
tered, having good documentation should not be the only way to address the issue. In this circumstance,
the goal should be to improve the system and ensure that the data generated is reliable and consistent.
The Quality Unit should define standard protocols for processing data to include the following, which
may be instrument- or application-specific:
• Reprocessing peaks
• Applying instrument/application-specific integration events/algorithms
• Fully integrating peaks
• Inhibiting or disregarding any peaks in the test chromatogram (e.g., blank peaks, placebo peaks,
solvent peaks) without scientific justification; examples where justification is needed include
counter ion and reagent interactions with a sample
• Applying the same integration events for all samples in the sample set or sequence and justifying
any change in integration events
Peak integration is the process used by a chromatographic system to determine the peak height and width
and obtain the quantitation of the peak of interest. Certain USP monograph methods specify inhibiting
integration at specified zones in the chromatographic run. USP <621> states that peaks can be disregarded
by setting the thresholds in the integration to at least half of those below reporting threshold (32). There-
fore, utilizing the built-in capability of the chromatographic data acquisition software to inhibit integration
of peaks from solvent, mobile phase, placebo, and counter ions in impurity analysis is a common industry
practice. Firms should scientifically evaluate and judiciously determine whether to use the inhibit integra-
tion functionality. Peaks in the chromatographic analysis may be excluded in the event of a known abnor-
mality. Unknown peaks should be integrated and investigated according to the firm’s quality procedures.
Manual integration is the process used by the analyst to integrate the peak height or area by modifying
the baseline of the chromatograph using software (49). Manual integrations may be required for R&D
and biological labs. Though in QC labs, manual integration may be necessary or acceptable only under
special circumstances (e.g., complex chromatography due to sample matrix interferences, poor resolu-
tion, co-elution of peak of interest, problem with the baseline, or software with limited capabilities);
however, manual integration is not generally acceptable for assay. Manual integration should not be
left to an analyst’s discretion; it should be performed only according to an approved procedure, with
documented approval from a supervisor and results appropriately documented. A mature quality sys-
tem will review these instances as part of continual improvement of methods and equipment. Modern
chromatographic software identifies and displays manually integrated peaks. Figure 6.3.7-2 represents
a model chromatogram with manually integrated peaks and software integrated peaks.
Printed chromatograms should be presented in visible scale as per the respective analysis (peak top vis-
ible for assay or single analysis, peak base clearly visible for purity analysis). After integration, results
may be published or electronically stored. If results are reprocessed, permission from a supervisor is
required. Those types of events may be noted in a log (paper or electronic) for quick reference.
Figure 6.3.7-3 illustrates a chromatogram in proper scale and visibility to determine the proper inte-
gration. Common practice across the industry is to present a visible and clear baseline for multicom-
ponent analysis and the entire peak for single-peak analysis.
30 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 36 / Report page 31]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 6.3.7-2 Typical Chromatogram with Integration Type (Manual/Chromatographic Software)
Figure 6.3.7-3 Chromatogram with Appropriate Integration Events
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 31

[PDF PAGE 37 / Report page 32]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 6.3.7-4a represents the chromatogram printed in large scale, where peak integration is not
visible. Figure 6.3.7-4b represents the same chromatogram with printed proper scaling, where peak
trimming and missing peak integrations are visible, revealing possible intentional data manipulation.
Assay analysis, dissolution, and content uniformity involve a single analyte/peak analysis where the
content will be calculated against a known standard. Gaussian peaks, with allowed system suitability
characteristics of accuracy and precision, are expected in these types of analysis. Normal Gaussian
peaks should be integrated exactly where the peak starts and finishes. The peak integration represented
in these types of analysis is illustrated in Figures 6.3.7-5a-f.
Figure 6.3.7-4a Chromatogram of Related Substances Analysis Presented with an Improper Scale
Missing Peak Peak
Peak Trimming Trimming
Figure 6.3.7-4b Chromatogram of Related Substances Analysis Presented with Appropriate Scale
Improper Integration
Figure 6.3.7-5c Raw Data Integrated
Figure 6.3.7-5a Raw Data of a Single Component Figure 6.3.7-5b Raw Data Integrated with Improper Integration Events Leading
Analysis before Integrating with Proper Peak Width and Threshold to Peak Trimming
32 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 38 / Report page 33]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 6.3.7-5a is the unprocessed signal of a single component analysis. Figure 6.3.7-5b represents
raw data integrated with proper integration events and displayed in visible scaling. Figure 6.3.7-5c
represents the peak integrated by trimming to yield low area. (Associated risk: Reporting fewer peak
areas leads to less assay or dissolution or lower content values.) Figures 6.3.7-5d–f represent the raw
data integrated with improper integration events, which presents more area. (Associated risk: Report-
ing more peak areas leads to more assay or dissolution or higher content values.)
Data manipulation of chromatograms by manually manipulating the integrated peaks is one factor
the FDA has cited in Warning Letters (50–53). In these illustrations, all the integrations presented are
made through chromatographic software by adjusting integration events. Chromatographic software
will indicate which peaks are manually integrated. Laboratory management should have appropriate
controls in place for detecting the data compromises made by applying the wrong integration events.
Figures 6.3.7-6a–c and Figures 6.3.7-7a–c show integration errors that occur for multicomponent
analysis (peak groups), such as related substances analysis/chromatographic purity analysis. In both
cases, fewer peak areas will be reported.
Figure 6.3.7-5d Raw Data Not Integrated Base Figure 6.3.7-5e Raw Data Integrated Figure 6.3.7-5f Raw Data Integrated
to Base with Peak Tailing Peak Followed by a Negative Peak or Drift
Figure 6.3.7-6a Raw Data of Co-eluting Peaks of Figure 6.3.7-6b Co-eluting Peaks Figure 6.3.7-6c Co-eluting Peaks
Related Substance Analysis Integrated with Suitable Peak Width and Integrated with Improper Integration
Threshold Events, Presents Less Response
Figure 6.3.7-7a Raw Data of Multicomponent Figure 6.3.7-7b Multicomponent Figure 6.3.7-7c One Peak Integrated
Analysis Peaks Integrated with Suitable Peak Width with Peak Trimming and another Peak by
and Threshold Integrating Tailing, Fronting
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 33

[PDF PAGE 39 / Report page 34]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6.3.8 Results Printing or Publishing
Some software packages use the term “printing” to generate a final result; in this case, printing does
not mean output to paper form. Printing, or “publishing,” refers to the next step in generating output
once testing is complete. In a well-configured system, the results after this step are final and may not
be changed without reprocessing. Reprocessing must be governed by procedures and software that is
correctly configured and should require a comment or justification. Before publishing, the supervisor or
Quality Unit should review the results, according to established laboratory procedures. Though printing
results on paper is not an ideal practice, some firms still use this approach, often due to limited software
functionality or limited resources. The following items or reports should be generated, through publish-
ing or software functionality, after each analysis and made available in the system for review:
• Sample sequence • Results audit trail (if available)
• Instrument method • Sequence audit trail (if available)
• Integration events/processing method • Method audit trail (if available)
• Results (chromatograms)
The results should include the following criteria:
• Analyst’s name and signature • Chromatograms presented in visible scale
per respective analysis (peak top for assay or
• Date and time results were processed
single-analyte analysis, peak base for purity
• Results audit trail, method audit trail, and
analysis)
sequence audit trail
6.3.9 Audit Trails
An audit trail is a chronology of the “who, what, when, and why” of a record. It ensures a secure,
computer-generated, time-stamped electronic record is available that allows for reconstruction of the
course of events relating to the creation, modification, or deletion of an electronic record. For example,
the audit trail for an HPLC run could include the user name, date and time of the run, integration
parameters used, and details of reprocessing, if any, including the change justification. In addition, as
part of reconciliation, the injection log can be included, but this injection log does not include audit
trail injection information (blank/system suitability/Lot#) (2).
The audit trail feature (or function) should be enabled at all times, with strict access controls in place;
equipment with data processing capability but lacking audit trail capability should be upgraded to
CGMP standards. In those instances where the equipment lacks such capability, appropriate controls
(e.g., paper-based) should be implemented to ensure all data and information generated, along with
the history of all activities performed, is available for review.
The audit trail should include all possible data changes; then, the reviewer can decide whether any data
change represents a compromised or regulated event.
Different types of audit trails supply data on different functions; each should be assessed individu-
ally and, then, all audit trails should be assessed collectively to determine the integrity of the data.
Instrument-specific software provides several fields for configuring audit trails, and templates from
which to choose for presentation. Figure 6.3.9-1 illustrates one approach to audit trail classification.
34 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80