[PDF PAGE 54 / Report page 49]
Risk assessments for paper data should be performed to assess controls in place that provide for trace-
ability and reconciliation of the records. Mechanisms should also be in place to ensure that original
records can be authenticated.
7.2 Risk-Based Mitigation
As discussed earlier in this paper, risks to ensuring data integrity might include computerized systems
with lack of audit trails or appropriate security controls to prevent unauthorized changes as well as
observational test methodologies. A systematic approach to risk mitigation is the use of a risk matrix.
A risk matrix can be established using criticality of the test and maturity of the quality system and use
of risk-reducing technology. Data criticality can be established based on whether the test is for a critical
quality attribute (CQA), such as a sterility test; a critical process control (CPC), such as an environmental
monitoring test; or an in-process control or other test, such as environmental monitoring for nonsterile
products. Figure 7.2-1 shows a risk matrix applied to data integrity. In this example, the matrix is used
to establish which microbiological tests require second-person verification prior to approving test results.
Currently, a high percentage of the tests conducted in microbiology laboratories are observational, that
is, the results (such as a colony count) are viewed and manually recorded on a paper document or in a
computer record. Absent an easy, reliable method to verify the recorded data, some laboratories require
microbiologists to use second-person verification (e.g., supervisor) by physical examination of the test
plates. Further, the second-person verification could be performed as a discreet step prior to approval
of the data or combined with the data-approval step.
Risk factors for the collection, control, and verification of microbiology data are reduced with comput-
er interface technology, such as automated plate readers or rapid methods that produce an electronic
record that is retrievable and relatively tamper-proof or digitally time-and-date-stamped photography
equipment. This can include automation and the use of advanced methods with a validated data re-
cording (for example, ATP bioluminescence platform) system and audit trail capabilities. Even when
a technological solution is not available, a strong pharmaceutical quality system (PQS), including an
effective site audit program, supervisory and Quality Unit presence in the laboratory, and a robust pe-
riodic review of the documentation system, will reduce data integrity risk. On the other hand, a weak
PQS increases the data integrity risk.
Conventional
EM Non-Sterile EM Sterile
Sterility Test
Legend
CQA Critical Quality Attribute
Conventional CPC Critical Process Control
Sterility Test
IPC/ In-Process Control
Other
Rapid Sterility
Auto/ Automated/ Electronic
Test
Elec
QMS Quality Management
Rapid Sterility System
Test
IPC/Other CPC CQA
Data Criticality
Figure 7.2-1 Risk Matrix Example for Microbiological Testing
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 49
ksiR
ataD
launaM
ataD
detamotuA
kaeW
SMQ
gnortS
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Potential Data Integrity Risk Matrix for Microbiological Testing

[PDF PAGE 55 / Report page 50]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
8.0 How to Remediate Breaches in Data Integrity
8.1 Discovery of Data Integrity Issues in Pharmaceutical Laboratories
Data integrity issues may be discovered by various means, including self-reporting, data review, and
internal audits, as well as during regulatory inspections. Any deviations from the established proce-
dures that affect data integrity should be reported through the quality system; the Quality Unit should
then investigate those situations to assess their impact and scope, determine the root cause, and define
corrective and preventative actions.
Deviations affecting data integrity may be a single event or the result of ongoing practices. Regardless,
each instance must be investigated to ensure data reliability. Any data breach or compromise that takes
place due to ignorance or to a willful act may lead to a quality- or public safety-related event. Upon
discovery of a data integrity breach, the actions taken should be proportional to the circumstances.
Key considerations are to contain the event, to gather the data necessary to confirm event details, and
to determine the scope.
Employee interviews play a key role in data integrity investigations and should be conducted as soon
after an event as possible. To prevent a conflict of interest, interviewers selected to conduct the investi-
gations should be independent from the unit under investigation and should conduct interviews away
from the unit under investigation. While data integrity investigations should be documented within
the quality system (as are all types of investigations), portions of these investigations may need to be
kept “confidential” within the quality management system while the investigation is underway to pro-
tect the anonymity of the individuals involved. This is necessary to protect against retaliation, to pro-
mote open communication, and to avoid possible roadblocks during the course of the investigation.
Factors that may contribute to data integrity breaches include:
• Inadequate resources, training, or necessary expertise
• Time constraints
• Poor test methods, validation gaps, or product issues
• Processes, procedures, or systems that do not fundamentally support data integrity.
Data integrity failures may be unintentional errors or may be attributed to sloppiness. They may also
be a deliberate attempt to mislead, misrepresent, alter, or falsify the original data. While corporate
officers, management, and personnel often dismiss the willingness of their colleagues to breach data
integrity principles, its occurrence has been evidenced by multiple incidents of regulatory correspon-
dence and in industry discussions. Leadership may be culpable, intentionally or not, of creating an
environment where values and/or performance expectations hinder compliance, or where individuals
may act in their own interests. Acknowledging these risks is crucial to developing a data governance
system that can detect and remediate data integrity failures of this nature.
8.2 Investigation Considerations
An investigation must evaluate both the impact of the data integrity breach on the data generated and
the decisions made based on that data. Companies might want to use the services of an independent
laboratory to conduct a retrospective review of data and/or perform additional testing.
Remediation of data integrity “risks,” as opposed to an identified data integrity breach, may follow a
similar pattern of investigation to determine the possible impact on data generated; however, the ap-
proach and level of effort invested in a retrospective review will differ. For example, if a system gap is
identified and process improvements are made to address the gap, a retrospective review of data gener-
ated prior to the process improvement may not be necessary. Factors to consider in this decision may
include the overall site compliance profile; complexity of the risk (level of effort to exploit the risk);
associate knowledge (well-known gap or initial discovery); or type of risk, as well as measures in place
and/or other testing that detects a product failure. It may not be possible to confirm with absolute
50 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 56 / Report page 51]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
certainty that a gap has not been exploited; however, when identified, immediate actions should be
taken to protect against that risk being exploited and to correct the system or process for the future.
As an example, if administrator access was given to a laboratory supervisor or analyst and audit trails
were not in place or turned on, a retrospective data review and associate interviews may provide some
evidence of actions taken. Yet, most likely, that review will not provide 100% certainty that the data
generated, while those risks were in place, were not compromised. Taking immediate action to address
those gaps will contribute greatly to ensuring data integrity in the future. Added controls can demon-
strate gaps related to test methods or product issues that may not have been detectable prior to system
upgrades. In that event, a full investigation would be required, including a retrospective review of
previously tested and/or released batches as well as test results for pending and approved applications
that might have been affected.
8.3 Comprehensive Assessment of Systems
For a remediation plan to be effective, a comprehensive assessment (CA) of the potentially affected
system(s) and extent of the inaccuracies must be performed including identification of root cause.
Depending on the severity and complexity of the issue, a competent independent party might best be
utilized to perform the CA under a protocol that specifies how the data or information will be assessed,
along with the scope of the evaluation. The approach selected should be justified. The following points
in the scope of a CA for laboratory data integrity breaches should be considered:
• Time period and product(s) to be covered
• Details specifying data types to be examined (estimated number of HPLC-processed injections,
type of microbial identification platform)
• Equipment to be evaluated (HPLC, GC, NIR, FTIR, automated microbial air sampler, stand-
alone equipment)
• Departments included in the assessment (R&D, stability, microbiology laboratory)
Systems other than the laboratory may need to be included.
The CA should focus on the process gaps that permitted the data integrity breach to occur without de-
tection. Depending on these gaps, the CA would be designed to identify other possible data integrity
breaches that may have occurred. In most cases, the CA and retrospective review should include an
assessment of testing data for incoming materials, in-process testing, stability and finished testing, and
data used to support pending and approved applications to determine if any wrongful acts might have
adversely impacted the application. This should include impact on the development/scale-up/valida-
tion of products distributed. This data review is critical because the findings may need to be reported
to the regional regulatory agency and can be used to inform decisions to initiate corrective actions
against marketed products or the withdrawal of pending or approved applications.
For the remediation to be effective, the scope of the CA must be appropriate. For example, if one or
two employees were engaged in deliberate practices that compromised data integrity, the CA should
require evaluation of all test results generated by those employees. Whether or not lab managers were
aware of the wrongdoing should also be considered in the scope of the CA.
The following are recommendations on how to implement a CA:
• Consider using independent interviews of staff, without fear of reprisal, to ensure the causes of
data integrity issues and scope of the problematic practices are fully understood.
• Develop a detailed protocol and methodology, a summary of all laboratories, manufacturing
operations, and systems to be covered, and a justification for excluding any relevant operation.
• Identify the omissions, alterations, deletions, records destroyed, nonconcurrent records
completed, etc.
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 51

[PDF PAGE 57 / Report page 52]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• When appropriate, conduct a retrospective evaluation of the nature of the deficiencies in testing
data integrity. A risk-based decision should be made in determining the scope of such reviews
considering the data integrity gap, whether there is evidence that the gap has been exploited, and
the potential impact on product quality.
• Assess the associated risk and potential effects of failures on drug products released and on patients.
• Third-party product testing may be considered as part of additional verification.
8.4 Corrective and Preventive Action Plans
A risk-based approach is necessary for establishing corrective and preventive actions for data integrity
breaches uncovered. Actions taken may include establishing additional controls, providing training or
resources to prevent recurrence, or implementing measures to promote transparency and detection.
Any permanent changes implemented should be based upon the results of the investigation and com-
prehensive assessment, the resulting root cause determination, and the gap analysis. The following
steps are commonly taken to prevent recurrence:
• Product impact assessment (e.g., evaluation of risk to patient safety and potential market actions)
• Creation of a mechanism for anonymous reports to surface data integrity issues early, before they
become systemic
• Changes to SOPs
• Changes in personnel
• Changes in access to computerized systems
• Capital investment in upgrading to equipment with more compliant features
• Changes to the quality oversight function (reassessment of roles and responsibilities, QA review
process, how corporate quality/compliance will oversee)
• Improvement in systems that allows employees to report suspected noncompliant practices
without fear of retaliation
• Gap analysis providing clear understanding of deficiencies that lead to questionable practices so
to prevent recurrence
• Evaluation of potential market actions
• Assessment of similar practices affecting other markets (products intended for international markets)
• Engagement with other regulatory authorities and reporting findings
• Comprehensive continuous training program in place and training effectiveness assessment
• Changes to the internal audit program
• Assurance that incidents of missing data, deletion of data, and changes to time-and-date stamps
has stopped and actions have been taken to prevent recurrence
• Verifiable changes to software to ensure inability to manipulate electronic data
• Management strategy, including global corrective action plan that could identify if problems were
limited to a specific site or generalized throughout corporation and how problems will be prevented
• Create a detailed plan on how a firm will ensure reliability, accuracy, and completeness of data
generated and/or submitted to the regulating agency in applications or DMF submissions
• A mechanism to provide regulators and sponsors notifications and updates regarding the
assessment of each application should also be considered
52 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 58 / Report page 53]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
9.0 Conclusion
Data integrity is a key element of ensuring robust operations in laboratories. It signifies the level of
completeness, consistency, and accuracy of testing processes and results. The current focus on data
integrity by health authorities requires companies to remain alert to changing regulations and to in-
stigate internal strategies to detect and correct gaps in data integrity. Therefore, this report identified
the global guidances applicable to the data integrity of analytical and microbiological laboratories and
described recent regulatory actions against pharmaceutical manufacturers who have major breaches.
Frequent internal auditing, continual training of analysts on regulatory expectations for data gen-
eration and management, and assessment of various types of data generated by simple, hybrid, and
complex systems are essential. Advancements in automated systems are improving electronic data
generation and storage, even as many tests are still performed manually, particularly in micro labs.
Thus, computer server qualification, software validation, laboratory equipment qualifications, and
data retrieval for inspection or review are the key elements of data integrity.
Risk assessment of data governance and control of systems in the pharmaceutical industry should be
conducted to remove or mitigate the potential for a breach in data integrity and to avoid enforcement
actions (warning letters, import alerts, notices of concern, and refusal to accept or approve applications).
10.0 References
1. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guide to In- 8. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Questions
spections of Pharmaceutical Quality Control Laborato- and Answers on Current Good Manufacturing Prac-
ries; Silver Spring, Md., July 1993. tices, Good Guidance Practices, Level 2 Guidance
– Records and Reports, July 19, 2011. https://www.
2. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Data Integrity fda.gov/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinfor-
and Compliance with cGMP Guidance for Industry: mation/guidances/ucm124787.htm (accessed Jul
Draft Guidance for Comment; Office of Pharmaceuti- 17, 2018).
cal Quality and Office of Compliance: Silver Spring,
Md., April 2016. 9. European Medicines Agency. Questions and
answers: Good manufacturing practice -- Data
3. World Health Organization. Annex 5: Guidance on Integrity. http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.
Good Data and Record Management Practices; WHO jsp?curl=pages/regulation/q_and_a/q_and_a_de-
Technical Report Series, No. 996. Geneva, 2016. tail_000027.jsp (accessed Sep 29, 2017).
4. Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/Pharmaceu- 10. Federal Financial Institutions Examination
tical Inspection Co-operation Scheme. Draft PIC/S Council (US Government). IT Booklets – Infor-
Good Practices for Data Management and Integrity mation Security, 2016. FFIEC IT Examination
in Regulated GMP/GDP Environments, 2016. Handbook Infobase. Washington, D.C. https://
PIC/S Publications–Guidance documents. (accessed ithandbook.ffiec.gov/it-booklets/information-
Mar 1, 2017). security/appendix-b-glossary.aspx#D (accessed
Mar 16, 2018).
5. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency. MHRA ‘GXP’ Data Integrity Definitions 11. Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 62:
and Guidance for Industry; MHRA: London, March Recommended Practices for Manual Aseptic Processes;
2018. Bethesda, Md., 2013.
6. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for 12. Watson, D. D. The What, When, and How of Pek
Industry, Part 11, Electronic Records; Electronic Signa- Integration: Part 1. What. https://www.chromacad-
tures—Scope and Application; Office of Compliance emy.com/chromatography-Integration-Parameters-1.
in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research : html (accessed April 12, 2018).
Silver Spring, Md., August 2003.
13. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR Part
7. European Commission. EudraLex, Volume 4: Good 58 – Good Laboratory Practice for Nonclinical Labora-
Manufacturing Practice, Annex 11: Computerised tory Studies; U.S. Department of Health and Human
Systems; Brussels, Jun 2011. Services: Silver Spring, Md., April 2017.
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 53

[PDF PAGE 59 / Report page 54]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
14. American National Standards Institute. American 23. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Letter
National Standard for Information Systems—Dic- No. 320-17-04 to Sekisui Medical Co., Ltd., dated
tionary for Information Systems; ANSI/Secretariat: 11/8/16, from the Office of Compliance, Center
Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers for Drug Evaluation and Research. FDA’s Electronic
Association: New York, 1991. Reading Room – Warning Letters. https://www.fda.
gov/iceci/enforcementactions/warningletters/2016/
15. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Part 211–Cur- ucm528590.htm (accessed Feb 28, 2017).
rent Good Manufacturing Practice for Finished
Pharmaceuticals, Subpart C–Buildings and Facilities, 24. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Letter
1995. Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. No. 320-17-03 to Beijing Taiyang Pharmaceutical
http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=9dcac232c Industry Co., Ltd., dated 10/19/16, from Office
962080c0e560c774ccdd429&mc=true&node=pt21. of Compliance, Center for Drug Evaluation and
4.211&rgn=div5#se21.4.211_142 (accessed October Research. FDA’s Electronic Reading Room - Warn-
7, 2016). ing Letters. https://www.fda.gov/iceci/enforcemen-
tactions/warningletters/2016/ucm527005.htm
16. World Health Organization. Annex 2: Good Manu- (accessed Feb 28, 2016).
facturing Practices for Pharmaceutical Products: Main
Principles. WHO Technical Report Series, No. 986; 25. U.S. Food and Drug Administration., 2015. Regula-
Geneva, 2014. tory Action Against Ranbaxy. https://www.fda.gov/
Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/
17. European Commission. Eudralex Volume 2A, Chapter EnforcementActivitiesbyFDA/ucm118411.htm (ac-
5. Guidelines on the Details on Various Categories of cessed Mar 7, 2017).
Variations. 2013. https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/
health/files/files/eudralex/vol-4/annex11_01-2011_ 26. U.S. Department of Justice. Consent Decree of
en.pdf (accessed June 1, 2011). Permanant Injunction Case 1:12-cv-00250-JFM,
2012. Casewatch.net. http://www.casewatch.net/doj/
18. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR ranbaxy/consent_decree.pdf (accessed Jun 12, 2018).
211.25 Organization and Personnel; Personnel qualifi-
cations; Department of Health and Human Services: 27. Cahilly, M. Data Integrity Training Lessons Learned
Silver Spring, Md., 2017. and Case Studies. Washington D.C., 2015.
19. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Letter 28. Stramler, J. H. Jr. The Dictionary for Human Factors
No. 320-17-17 to FACTA Farmaceutici S.p.A., dat- Ergonomics: A Significant Reference Work in Hu-
ed 1/13/17, from the Office of Compliance, Center man Factors. Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
for Drug Evaluation and Research. FDA’s Electronic Annual Meeting Proceedings, 1992; pp 544-547.
Reading Room - Warning Letters. https://www.fda.
gov:80/FDAgov/ICECI/EnforcementActions/Warn- 29. Siegfried Schmitt, E. Assuring Data Integrity for Life
ingLetters/2017/ucm538068.htm (accessed Feb 27, Sciences; PDA DHI, Bethesda, Md., March 2016.
2017).
30. U.S. Pharmacopeia. General Chapter <71> Sterility
20. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Letter Tests. In USP41–NF36; Rockville, Md., 2017.
No. 320-17-13 to Wockhardt, Ltd., dated 12/23/16
from Office of Compliance, Center for Drug Evalu-
31. Platco, C.; Cundell, A. Data Integrity Issues in
ation and Research. FDA’s Electronic Reading Room Microbial Testing. Microbiology 2017.
– Warning Letters. https://www.fda.gov/iceci/en-
forcementactions/warningletters/2016/ucm534983.
32. U.S. Pharmacopeia. General Chapter <61> Mi-
htm (accessed Feb 27, 2017).
crobiological Examination of Nonsterile Products:
Microbial Enumeration Tests. In USP41–NF36;
21. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Letter
Rockville, Md., 2017.
No. 320-17-05 to Srikem Laboratories Pvt. Ltd.,
dated 11/8/16, from Office of Compliance, Center
33. U.S. Pharmacopeia. General Chapter <62> Micro-
for Drug Evaluation and Research. FDA’s Electronic
biological Examination of Nonsterile Products: Tests
Reading Room – Warning Letters. https://www.fda.
for Specified Microorganisms. In USP41–NF36;
gov/iceci/enforcementactions/warningletters/2016/
Rockville, Md., 2017.
ucm529237.htm (accessed Feb 27, 2017).
34. U.S. Pharmacopeia. General Chapter <85> Bacterial En-
22. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Let-
dotoxins Test. In USP41–NF36; Rockville, Md., 2017.
ter No. 320-17-02 to Interpharm Praha A.S., dated
10/18/16, from Office of Compliance, Center for
35. Guilfoyle, D.; Yager, J.; Carito, S. Effect of Refrig-
Drug Evaluation and Research. FDA’s Electronic Read-
eration and Mising on Detection of Endotoxin in
ing Room – Warning Letters. (accessed Feb 28, 2016).
Parenteral Drugs Using the Limulus Amebocyte
Lysate (LAL) Test. 1989, 43 (4), 183-187.
54 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 60 / Report page 55]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
36. Lopienski, K. How Paper and Electronic Source Data 48. U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter
Meet ALCOA Elements; Forte Research Systems: <621> Chromatography. In USP41–NF36; Rock-
Madison, Wisc., 2014. ville, Md., 2017.
37. International Conference on Harmonisation. Qual- 49. Dyson, N. Chromatographic Integration Methods:
ity Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Management, 2006. Edition 2 (RSC Chromatography Monographs), 2nd
ICH Guidelines. http://www.ich.org/products/ ed.; The Royal Society of Chemistry: Cambridge
guidelines/quality/article/quality-guidelines.html UK, 1998.
(accessed August 2016).
50. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Let-
38. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Letter ter No. 320-15-01 to Sharp Global Limited dated
No. 320-14-03 to Usv Limited dated 2/6/14. FDA’s 10/15/14 from Office of Compliance, Center for
Electronic Reading Room - Warning Letters. http:// Drug Evaluation and Research. FDA’s Electronic
www.fda.gov/iceci/enforcementactions/warninglet- Reading Room - Warning Letters. https://www.fda.
ters/2014/ucm386678.htm. (accessed Feb 28, 2017). gov/iceci/enforcementactions/warningletters/2014/
ucm421988.htm (accessed Feb 28, 2017).
39. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Letter
No. 320-14-11 to Apotex Pharmachem India Pvt 51. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Let-
Ltd. dated 6/16/14. FDA’s Electronic Reading Room ter No. 320-16-07 to Ipca Laboratories Ltd. dated
– Warning Letters. http://www.fda.gov/iceci/enforce- 1/29/16. FDA’s Electronic Reading Room - Warning
mentactions/warningletters/2014/ucm401451.htm Letters. https://www.fda.gov/ICECI/Enforcemen-
(accessed Feb 28, 2017). tActions/WarningLetters/2016/ucm484910.htm
(accessed Feb 28, 2017).
40. Haes, S. D.; Grembergen, W. V. Chapter 5: COBIT
as a Framework for Enterprise Governance of IT. 52. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning
In Enterprise Governance of Information Technology: Letter No. 320-15-17 to Unimark Remedies Ltd.
Achieving Alignment and Value, Featuring COBIT 5, dated 9/28/15 from Office of Compliance, Center
2nd Ed.; Springer, 2015; pp 103-128. for Drug Evaluation and Research. FDA’s Electronic
Reading Room - Warning Letters. https://www.fda.
41. International Organization for Standardization. ISO/ gov/iceci/enforcementactions/warningletters/2015/
IEC 20000-1:2011 Information technology - Service ucm465626.htm (accessed Feb 28, 2017).
management - Part 11: Guidance on the relationship
between ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011 and service manage- 53. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning Letter
ment frameworks: ITIL®; ISO/IEC: Geneva, 2011. No. 320-15-05 to Micro Labs Limited dated 1/9/15
from Office of Compliance, Center for Drug Evalu-
42. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. U.S. Code ation and Research. FDA’s Electronic Reading Room
of Federal Regulations Title 21 Part 820.30: Design - Warning Letters. https://www.fda.gov/iceci/en-
Controls. Silver Spring, Md., 2014. forcementactions/warningletters/2015/ucm431456.
htm (accessed Feb 28, 2017).
43. International Conference on Harmonisation. Quality
Guideline Q7: Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for 54. Guttman, B.; Roback, E. Chapter 18: Audit Trails.
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients. Geneva, 2000. In Introduction to Computer Security: The NIST
Handbook, NIST Special Publication 800-12; Gov-
ernment Printing Office: Washington, D.C., Oct
44. International Organization for Standardization.
1995; pp 211-222.
ISO 13485:2016. Medical Devices--Quality Manage-
ment Systems--Requirements for Regulatory Purposes.
Geneva, 2016. 55. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warning
Letters by year, 1998–current. Warning Letters
and Notice of Violation Letters to Pharmaceutical
45. International Society of Pharmaceutical Engineers.
Companies. https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/Guidance-
GAMP 5 Guide: Compliant GxP Computerized Sys-
ComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Enforcemen-
tems. Bethesda, Md., 2008.
tActivitiesbyFDA/WarningLettersandNoticeofViola-
tionLetterstoPharmaceuticalCompanies/default.htm
46. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. General
(accessed March 1, 2017).
Principles of Software Validation; Final Guidance for
Industry and FDA Staff; U.S. Department Of Health
and Human Services: Rockville, Md., Jan 2002.
47. McDowall, R. Validation of Chromatography Data
Systems: Meeting Business and Regulatory Require-
ments: Edition 2; Royal Society of Chemistry:
Cambridge, 2017.
Technical Report No. 80 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 55

[PDF PAGE 61 / Report page 56]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser.
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
• Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an
Authorized User
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
• Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication
• Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other
than an Authorized User
• Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
• Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic
Publication
• Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA
Electronic Publication
• Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication
or its content
• Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose
• Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any
text or graphics
• Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication
• Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material
To License or purchase Reprints
• Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a fee.
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact:
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900,
ext. 133. Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
• Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.
To order reprints, please contact:
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150,
Bethesda, MD 20814.
56 © 2018 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 80

[PDF PAGE 62 / Report page 57]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 80
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials.
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Biotechnology Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality
Committee. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and determines
whether to publish or not publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org.
Sanctioning Advisory Board: RAQAB PDA Officers and Directors
Jeff Broadfoot, Emergent BioSolutions Inc (Chair) Officers
Jacqueline Veivia-Panter, Celgene (Vice Chair) Chair: Rebecca Devine, Ph.D., Regulatory Consultant
Susan Schniepp, Regulatory Compliance Associates Chair-Elect: Rebecca Devine, Ph.D., Regulatory Consultant
(Past Chair) Treasurer: Michael Sadowski, Baxter Healthcare
Secretary: Steven Lynn, Novartis
Karin Baer
Imm. Past Chair: Martin Van Trieste, Amgen
Cylia Chen-Ooi, Amgen
President: Richard Johnson
Veronique Davoust, PhD, Pfizer
Directors
Mirko Gabriele, Patheon Italia SpA
Masahiro Akimoto, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Factory, Inc.
Aaron Goerke, PhD, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.
Barbara Allen, Eli Lilly & Company
Tor Graberg, AstraZeneca
Joyce Bloomfield, Merck
Dipti Gulati, PhD, PJI Biotech
Veronique Davoust, Pfizer
Frithjof Holtz, Merck KGaA
Ghada Haddad, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Hongyang Li, Novartis
Kerry Ingalls, Amgen
Steven Lynn, Lynn Consulting, LLC Mary Oates, Pfizer
Demetra Macheras, AbbVie, Inc. Emma Ramnarine, Roche Pharma
Luciana Mansolelli, Novartis Stephan Rönninger, Amgen
Anil Sawant, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Anette Yan Marcussen, NNE
Susan Schniepp, Regulatory Compliance Associates, Inc.
Elizabeth Meyers, Amgen
Melissa Seymour, Biogen
Shin-ichiro Mohri, Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd.
Catriona Murphy, Eli Lilly and Company PDA Publication Production and Editing
Emma Ramnarine, Genentech/Roche Denyse Baker, Director, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Junko Sasaki, Sumika Chemical Analysis Service, Ltd Tina Morris, VP, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Director of Publishing
Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck Sharpe & Dohme
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Janeen Skutnik-Wilkinson, Biogen
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer
Gopi Vudathala, PhD, XCell Pharma Consulting LLC

[PDF PAGE 63 / Report page 58]
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
BBeetthheessddaa TToowweersrs
44335500 EEaasstt WWeesstt HHiigghhwwaayy
SSuuititee 620000
BBeetthheessddaa,, MMDD 2200881144 UUSSAA
TTeell:: +1 1(3(03101) )665566--55990000
FFaaxx:: +1 1(3(03101) )998866--00229966
EE--mmaaiill:: iinnffoo@@ppddaa..oorrgg
WWeebb ssiittee:: wwwwww.p.pdda.ao.orgrg