3
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
2.0  Glossary and Abbreviations 
Terms used in this technical report are defined in this section. Where a definition is taken verbatim 
from another source, the source is cited and included in Section 9.0 References. All other definitions 
are specific to Technical Report 54-6. Some definitions are based on those in the IPEC General Glossary 
of Terms and Acronyms (8) but modified by substituting the term “excipient” for such words as “mate-
rial” and “product” to aid readability and limit the context. 
A listing of all glossary terms used in current PDA technical reports can be found on the PDA Member 
website. The IPEC General Glossary of Terms and Acronyms is available on the IPEC website. 
Broker 
A broker is an individual who acts as an inter-
mediary. Brokers resell excipients without con-
ducting physical handling of the excipient such 
as warehousing, transport, and repackaging. A 
broker may also be referred to as a trader.
Composite
A composite excipient has two or more compo-
nents and is designed for enhanced functionality. 
Critical Quality Attribute (CQA)
A physical, chemical, biological, or microbio-
logical property or characteristic that should 
be within an appropriate limit, range, or dis-
tribution to ensure the desired product quality 
(TR54, TR54-4) (9, 10).
Distribution
The division and movement of excipients from 
the premises of the manufacturer of such excipi-
ents, or from another central point, to the end 
user thereof or to an intermediate point. 
Distributor
An entity engaged in distribution that takes legal 
ownership of the excipient. For purposes of this 
technical report, the term distributor does not 
include the original excipient manufacturer. 
Drug Product
A finished dosage form (e.g. tablet, capsule, or 
solution) that contains a drug substance, general-
ly, but not necessarily, in association with one or 
more other ingredients. The term “drug product” 
is commonly used by the US Food and Drug Ad-
ministration. European texts use the equivalent 
term “medicinal product,” which is defined as a 
substance or combination of substances that is 
intended to treat, prevent or diagnose a disease, 
or to restore, correct or modify physiological 
functions by exerting a pharmacological, immu-
nological or metabolic action (EMA) (11). 
EXCiPACT™
A nonprofit organization that manages a certifi-
cation scheme available to pharmaceutical excip-
ient manufacturers and distributors worldwide, 
www.excipact.org.
Excipient
Any constituent of a medicinal product other 
than the active substance and the packaging ma-
terial (EC) (1). A substance other than an active 
pharmaceutical ingredient which has been ap-
propriately evaluated for safety and is intention-
ally included in a drug delivery system (IPEC).
End User
Organization using the excipient in the manu-
facture of a drug product. 
Haulier/Hauler
Logistics company involved in the movement of 
an excipient from one location to another. 
Original Manufacturer
Person or company manufacturing a material to 
the stage at which it is designated as an excipient. 
Quality Target Product Profile (QTPP)
A prospective summary of the quality charac-
teristics of a drug product that ideally will be 
achieved to ensure the desired quality, taking 
into account safety and efficacy of the drug prod-
uct (ICH Q8 R2) (12).
Relabeling 
Process of putting a new label on the excipient. 
Traceability to the original manufacturer is only 
assured if the relabeler provides access to its qual-
ity systems. 
Repacking/Repackaging 
Process of putting the excipient into different 
packaging than that provided by the original 
manufacturer. Usually synonymous with rela-
beling.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

4
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Residual Risk
Risk remaining after risk control measures have 
been implemented.
Risk
The combination of the probability of occurrence of 
harm and the severity of that harm (ICH Q9) (7).
Risk Analysis
The estimation of the risk associated with the 
identified hazards.
Risk Assessment
A systematic process of organizing information to 
support a risk decision to be made within a risk 
management process. It consists of the identifica-
tion of hazards and the analysis and evaluation of 
risks associated with exposure of those hazards. 
Risk Priority Number (RPN)
A quantitative measure used when assessing the 
level of risk.
Shipping Agent
Designated person or agency held responsible for 
handling shipments, cargo, and the general inter-
ests of its customers at ports and harbors world-
wide on behalf of ship owners, managers, and 
charterers. Shipping agents often assist with cus-
toms and other clearance routines during import 
and export processes. They may also transport the 
excipient and/or hold it in their warehouse. 
Storage 
The storing of excipients up to the point of use.
Supply Chain
All steps in the entire chain of distribution 
starting from the point at which an excipient 
is transferred outside the control of the original 
manufacturer’s material management system 
downstream to the final user of the excipient 
(IPEC). It is a system of organizations, people, 
technology, activities, information, and resources 
involved in moving an excipient from the origi-
nal manufacturer to the end user.
Supplier
Person or company providing excipients on re-
quest. Suppliers may be distributors or traders, 
among others. Supplier is a generic term that can 
be used to describe any of the actors in the sup-
ply chain but, for the purposes of this technical 
report, it does not include the manufacturer.
Trader
See Broker.
Warehousing Company
Organization providing a warehouse that may be 
used to store excipients and other materials. 
2.1	
Abbreviations
EC	
European Commission
CMO	 Contract Manufacturing Organization
CQA	
Critical Quality Attributes
GMP	 Good Manufacturing Practices
QMS	 Quality Management System
QRM	 Quality Risk Management
3.0 
Overall Strategy – A Holistic View
TR 54-6 provides guidance on quality risk management principles that can be used to assess the risks 
to the quality, safety, and function of an excipient in a drug product. The proposed generic model al-
lows the user to answer the risk question “Is the excipient fit for use in the drug product” through the 
use of a formalized risk assessment. The model, as described in Section 6.0 and illustrated in Figure 
6.0-1, describes the steps involved in identifying whether an excipient is fit for use considering an as-
sessment of its use and function for the excipient user and an assessment of the entire supply chain. 
In the model, the potential hazards from the excipient itself, as well as the supply chain, are ranked and 
evaluated using a risk ranking and filtering approach to evaluate the overall risk of harm to the drug 
product and, through that, to patient safety.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

5
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Based on the results of the risk assessment, a pharmaceutical manufacturer can determine what level of 
GMP will be required. The guides and standards most widely accepted for excipient GMPs are:
• 
EXCiPACT™: International Pharmaceutical Excipients Certification Standards for Pharmaceuti-
cal Excipient Suppliers (13)
• 
NSF/IPEC/ANSI 363: Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for Pharmaceutical Excipients (14) 
• 
IPEC/PQG: The Joint Good Manufacturing Practices Guide for Pharmaceutical Excipients (15) 
• 
USP: USP <1078> Good Manufacturing Practices for Bulk Pharmaceutical Excipients and 
<1059> Excipient Performance (16, 17) 
• 
Japan: Self-imposed Standards of Good Manufacturing Practices for Pharmaceutical Excipients 
(18) 
The pharmaceutical manufacturer may determine that some additional technical considerations be-
yond those in established GMP guides and standards may be needed. As part of the risk assessment 
process, the manufacturer or manufacturing authorization holder of the drug product should engage 
the excipient manufacturer and suppliers to obtain any specifics from the excipient manufacturer’s 
own risk assessment process that the excipient manufacturer is willing to share. Additionally, the com-
plete supply chain profile must be considered for each excipient.
Should the risk assessment uncover an issue requiring additional action, a control strategy should be 
put in place and the affected parties should be notified. 
Before being implemented, any actions recommended as a result of the risk assessment must be dis-
cussed and agreed upon by the excipient manufacturer and the manufacturer of the drug product or 
manufacturing authorization holder, in case those actions may impact the supplier. The results of the 
discussion should be documented in a quality agreement or other document.
A global risk assessment of all excipients used by the drug product manufacturer or manufacturing 
authorization holder will ensure a standardized assessment of all excipients in all drug products and 
provide a holistic view of the supply chain. This enables the excipient user to provide the excipient 
manufacturer, with one voice, a single (worst case) risk assessment. That approach is preferable to 
having multiple users within a single drug product manufacturer each communicating different assess-
ment results to the excipient manufacturer. 
In a global risk assessment, risk review and improvements of the risk assessment might be more dif-
ficult than they would be if separate risk assessments were completed for each drug product or by each 
site using the excipient. The review and approval workflows for a single global risk assessment may 
require more time and effort. However, this process could be shortened by instituting a global risk as-
sessment that involves local ownership. In this scenario, the owner of each product or manufacturing 
site would conduct a separate risk assessment, but all risk assessments would be collected in a single 
document repository. The local owner would maintain responsibility for the data collection, review, 
and approval workflows, and for ensuring that updated information is included in the global risk as-
sessment repository. The repository would serve as a knowledge base for all excipients, allowing the 
drug product manufacturer or manufacturing authorization holder to communicate its requirements 
to the excipient manufacturer with a single voice representing all local owners.
3.1	
Risk Areas Beyond Quality 
While the focus of the excipient risk assessment is quality, a company also should consider other as-
pects that can impact the excipient and, with this, product availability for the patient. These include 
excipient availability; business continuity risk; environmental, socio-economic, environment, health, 
safety, and geographic risks; and general business data. While consideration of these risks is useful as 
part of an overall strategy, it is out of scope of this document and is not discussed further. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

