26
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Internal procedures should define the periodic review and revision process and list the events that 
would trigger a reassessment, such as:
• 
New product 
• 
New formulation of existing product
• 
New manufacturer/supplier
• 
New excipient
• 
Change in notification from manufacturer/
supplier
• 
Change in supply chain
• 
Change in GMP certification status or 
GMP status of manufacturer/supplier
• 
Change to site
• 
Geopolitical/socioeconomic/business 
changes
• 
Regulatory changes
• 
Pharmacopeial changes
• 
Quality events, industry-wide (e.g., TSE)
• 
Shifts/changes in trends
• 
New safety information
When triggering events occur, both the event and the existing excipient risk assessment should be 
reviewed, and a decision should be made about the need to revise the excipient risk assessment based 
on the new knowledge. The process, decision, and rationale should all be documented. Updates to the 
risk assessment may lead to revised control decisions.
8.0 
Benefits and Value / QRM / Knowledge Management 
A global excipient risk assessment throughout the drug product lifecycle delivers the following advantages:
• 
Documented knowledge, in a structured 
manner, about the excipient supply chain 
• 
Ability to rapidly and effectively evaluate 
the requirements for new products that use 
existing or new excipients 
• 
Identification of supply chains that present 
lower risks and preferred supply chains with 
which to build relationships
• 
Focus on specific risk mitigation oversight 
activities for both manufacturer or supplier 
and user
• 
More detailed product knowledge and 
increased understanding of how the risks 
from excipients may affect product quality
• 
Formal assessment and database of risk 
review triggers, such as major changes and 
critical investigations
• 
Knowledge-based and proactive decision-
making 
• 
Provides a common language and approach 
for clear communication with stakeholders 
throughout the supply chain 
• 
Opportunities for knowledge-sharing and 
comparative assessments between manufac-
turers or suppliers and end users
9.0 
References
1.	
European Commission. Directive 2011/62/EU of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 
amending Directive 2001/83/EC on the Community 
Code relating to Medicinal Products for Human Use, 
as Regards the Prevention of the Entry into the Legal 
Supply Chain of Falsified Medicinal Products; Official 
Journal of the European Union. 2011.
2.	
European Commission. Guidelines of 19 March 2015 
on the Formalised Risk Assessment for Ascertaining the 
Appropriate Good Manufacturing Practice for Excipi-
ents of Medicinal Products for Human Use; Official 
Journal of the European Union. European Commis-
sion: Brussels, 2015.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

27
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
3.	
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/Coopera-
tion Scheme (PIC/S). Guidelines on the Formalised 
Risk Assessment for Ascertaining the Appropriate Good 
Manufacturing Practice for Excipients of Medicinal 
Products for Human Use; PIC/S: Geneva, 2018.
4.	
U.S. Congress. Food and Drug Administration Safety and 
Innovation Act; Public Law 112-144—July 9, 2012. U.S. 
Government Printing Office: Washington, D.C., 2012.
5.	
The International Pharmaceutical Excipients Council. 
The IPEC Excipient Information Package (EIP): Tem-
plate and User Guide; IPEC: Brussels, 2012.
6.	
Rafidison, P R, S; Holtz, F. A Practical Approach of 
Implementing GMP for Excipients. Pharmaceutical 
Technology 2014, 2014 Supplement (3).
7.	
International Conference for Harmonisation. Qual-
ity Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Management; ICH: 
Geneva, 2005.
8.	
The International Pharmaceutical Excipients Council. 
General Glossary of Terms and Acronyms. IPEC: Ar-
lington, Va., 2014.
9.	
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 
54: Implementation of Quality Risk Management For 
Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing 
Operations; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2012.
10.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 54-4: 
Implementation of Quality Risk Management for Phar-
maceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations, 
Annex 3: Case Studies in the Manufacturing of Biotechno-
logical Bulk Drug Substances; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2014.
11.	 European Medicines Agency. Medicinal product. 
About us/Glossary. https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/
glossary/medicinal-product (accessed May 30 2019).
12.	 International Conference for Harmonisation. Quality 
Guideline Q8(R2): Pharmaceutical Development; ICH: 
Geneva, 2009.
13.	 EXCiPACT asbl. Certification Standards for Pharma-
ceutical Excipient Suppliers: Good Manufacturing Prac-
tices, Good Distribution Practices 2017; EXCiPACT 
asbl: Brussels, 2017.
14.	 American National Standards Institute. NSF/IPEC/
ANSI 363 - 2016 Good Manufacturing Practices 
(GMP) for Pharmaceutical Excipients; NSF Interna-
tional: Ann Arbor, Mich., 2016.
15.	 The International Pharmaceutical Excipients Council 
& The Pharmaceutical Quality Group. Joint IPEC–
PQG Good Manufacturing Practices Guide for Phar-
maceutical Excipients 2017; IPEC/PQG: Washington, 
D.C., 2017.
16.	 U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter 
⟨1059⟩ Excipient Performance. In USP 42–NF 37, 
USP: Rockville, Md., 2018; p p. 7413.
17.	 U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter 
<1078> Good Manufacturing Practices for Bulk 
Pharmaceutical Excipients. In USP 42-NF 37, USP: 
Rockville, Md., 2012; p p. 7497.
18.	 International Pharmaceutical Excipients Council 
Japan. Self-Imposed Standards of Good Manufacturing 
Practices for Pharmaceutical Excipients and its Explana-
tion; IPEC Japan: Tokyo, 2016.
19.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Inactive Ingre-
dient Search for Approved Drug Products. https://
www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/iig/index.Cfm 
(accessed May 25 2019).
20.	 European Commission. Regulation (EC) No 
852/2004 of the European Parliment and of the Coun-
cil of 29 April 2004 on the hygiene of foodstuffs; OJ L 
226. European Commission: Brussels, 2004.
21.	 European Commission. Part II: Basic Requirements for 
Active Substances used as Starting Materials, EudraLex 
– Volume 4 – Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Prac-
tices for Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary 
Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2014.
22.	 International Conference on Harmonisation. Quality 
Guideline Q7: Good Manufacturing Practice Guide 
for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients; ICH: Geneva, 
2000.
23.	 European Commission. EudraLex – Volume 4 – 
Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practices for Me-
dicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use, Part I: 
Basic Requirements for Medicinal Products; European 
Commission: Brussels, 2015.
24.	 European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture of Ster-
ile Medicinal Products (corrected), EudraLex – Volume 
4 – EU Guidelines to Good Manufacturing Practice, 
Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use, ; 
European Commission: Brussels, 2008.
25.	 European Federation for Cosmetic Ingredients. 
EFfCI GMP for Cosmetic Ingredients including the 
Certification Scheme for GMP for Cosmetic Ingredients 
— Revision 2017; EFfCI.: Brussels, 2017.
26.	 International Food Additives Council. IFAC Quality 
Systems, Food Safety and Good Manufacturing Practices 
Guide for Food Additives and GRAS Substances; IFAC: 
Washington, DC, 2019.
27.	 International Organization for Standardization. ISO 
9001:2015 Quality management systems — Require-
ments; ISO: Geneva, 2015.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

28
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
10.0 
Annex I: Real World Examples of Risk Assessments 
The generic model proposed in Section 6.0 was developed based on real-world risk assessment pro-
cesses donated by several marketing authorization holders. Many risk assessment approaches used 
some form of risk ranking and filtering approach—conducting assessments in two separate streams 
that can then be combined in an overall risk score.
One stream would provide a risk profile for the excipient itself, based on its use in the finished product 
and any intrinsic risk factors. The second stream would generate a risk profile for the supply chain, 
including the excipient manufacturer, suppliers, brokers, and any other players, as well as the strength 
of their quality management systems (QMS). The two streams would then be combined into one risk 
evaluation to determine whether the overall risk is at an acceptable level or additional controls are 
needed. 
10.1	 Example 1: Company U 
Company U is a global manufacturer of various pharmaceutical dosage forms. The company estab-
lished a Microsoft® Excel® tool to be used as a corporate standard.
When multiple manufacturing sites use the same excipient provided by the same excipient manufac-
turing site, the risk assessments can be shared across all sites (with appropriate site-specific modifica-
tions to accommodate excipient usage, supply chain complexity, and other factors).
First, basic information about the excipient and the manufacturer is collected. Then, the collected 
information is consolidated to produce an overview.
For each section of the model, the parameters to evaluate are defined (see Figure 10.1-1), each pa-
rameter is described in detail, and possible scenarios are developed. The severity of each parameter is 
assigned a standard value. In conducting the evaluation, Company U determines the actual probability 
of each parameter. 
The analysis is conducted as follows:
• 
Excipient and excipient usage risk score — Each of the identified excipient and excipient use 
risk factors is evaluated based on the actual origin or usage of the excipient and the actual supply 
chain to determine the probability of risk (P). The predefined weight, or severity (S), is used to 
calculate the risk score for each parameter (P × S). Then, the overall excipient risk score is calcu-
lated as the average across the parameters.
• 
Combined material risk score — A combined material risk score is calculated by adding the 
excipient risk score and the excipient usage risk score.
• 
Manufacturer risk score — The list of risk factors to be considered is evaluated based on the 
actual performance and QMS of the manufacturer. The predefined weight (S) is used to calculate 
the risk score of each parameter (P × S). Then, the overall manufacturer risk score is calculated as 
the average across the parameters.
• 
Gap analysis and actions — The combined material risk score and the manufacturer risk score 
are evaluated together using a risk matrix to identify the “gap level,” as illustrated in Table 10.1-1. 
Where a gap exists between the manufacturer risk score and the combined material risk score, the 
gap must be evaluated to determine the appropriate remediation.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

