5
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Based on the results of the risk assessment, a pharmaceutical manufacturer can determine what level of 
GMP will be required. The guides and standards most widely accepted for excipient GMPs are:
• 
EXCiPACT™: International Pharmaceutical Excipients Certification Standards for Pharmaceuti-
cal Excipient Suppliers (13)
• 
NSF/IPEC/ANSI 363: Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for Pharmaceutical Excipients (14) 
• 
IPEC/PQG: The Joint Good Manufacturing Practices Guide for Pharmaceutical Excipients (15) 
• 
USP: USP <1078> Good Manufacturing Practices for Bulk Pharmaceutical Excipients and 
<1059> Excipient Performance (16, 17) 
• 
Japan: Self-imposed Standards of Good Manufacturing Practices for Pharmaceutical Excipients 
(18) 
The pharmaceutical manufacturer may determine that some additional technical considerations be-
yond those in established GMP guides and standards may be needed. As part of the risk assessment 
process, the manufacturer or manufacturing authorization holder of the drug product should engage 
the excipient manufacturer and suppliers to obtain any specifics from the excipient manufacturer’s 
own risk assessment process that the excipient manufacturer is willing to share. Additionally, the com-
plete supply chain profile must be considered for each excipient.
Should the risk assessment uncover an issue requiring additional action, a control strategy should be 
put in place and the affected parties should be notified. 
Before being implemented, any actions recommended as a result of the risk assessment must be dis-
cussed and agreed upon by the excipient manufacturer and the manufacturer of the drug product or 
manufacturing authorization holder, in case those actions may impact the supplier. The results of the 
discussion should be documented in a quality agreement or other document.
A global risk assessment of all excipients used by the drug product manufacturer or manufacturing 
authorization holder will ensure a standardized assessment of all excipients in all drug products and 
provide a holistic view of the supply chain. This enables the excipient user to provide the excipient 
manufacturer, with one voice, a single (worst case) risk assessment. That approach is preferable to 
having multiple users within a single drug product manufacturer each communicating different assess-
ment results to the excipient manufacturer. 
In a global risk assessment, risk review and improvements of the risk assessment might be more dif-
ficult than they would be if separate risk assessments were completed for each drug product or by each 
site using the excipient. The review and approval workflows for a single global risk assessment may 
require more time and effort. However, this process could be shortened by instituting a global risk as-
sessment that involves local ownership. In this scenario, the owner of each product or manufacturing 
site would conduct a separate risk assessment, but all risk assessments would be collected in a single 
document repository. The local owner would maintain responsibility for the data collection, review, 
and approval workflows, and for ensuring that updated information is included in the global risk as-
sessment repository. The repository would serve as a knowledge base for all excipients, allowing the 
drug product manufacturer or manufacturing authorization holder to communicate its requirements 
to the excipient manufacturer with a single voice representing all local owners.
3.1	
Risk Areas Beyond Quality 
While the focus of the excipient risk assessment is quality, a company also should consider other as-
pects that can impact the excipient and, with this, product availability for the patient. These include 
excipient availability; business continuity risk; environmental, socio-economic, environment, health, 
safety, and geographic risks; and general business data. While consideration of these risks is useful as 
part of an overall strategy, it is out of scope of this document and is not discussed further. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
4.0 
Supply Chain — End to End
Section 4.0 provides examples of supply chains, helps identify the various actors in the supply chain, 
and describes their typical roles. The subsections herein offer examples of the types of information and 
documentation that the various actors could provide. Additionally, it discusses some aspects of the 
potential risks that could be introduced by actors in the supply chain.
Supply chains have become more and more complex over the years. In the past, a manufacturer of 
pharmaceutical excipients often supplied directly to a drug product manufacturer. Today, in addition 
to the manufacturer of the excipient, the distributor, broker, and contract manufacturing organization 
(CMO) each plays a role in the supply chain, and each contributes to the risks to quality in one way 
or another. Each of these companies also could provide information on the excipient’s manufacture, 
testing, and distribution that might be relevant for the risk assessment. 
4.1	
Types of Supply Chains and Risks Presented
Many materials used as excipients are not manufactured specifically for pharmaceutical use, but are 
intended for other applications such as food, cosmetics, or home care. As such, the direct supply of an 
excipient from the manufacturer to the end user may be unusual. In addition, the quantities of excipi-
ents used by the pharmaceutical end user may be only a fraction of the excipient manufacturer’s overall 
volume; in fact, the original manufacturer may not have a business interest in supplying the pharma-
ceutical industry. In such cases, intermediaries often become involved, procuring larger quantities of 
the excipient from the original manufacturer, and then repackaging and relabeling it into quantities 
more suitable for pharmaceutical use. Thus, the supply chain between the excipient manufacturer and 
the pharmaceutical end user often is complex. The complexity is magnified for excipients that move 
internationally.
In both international and domestic supply chains, the point at which the legal ownership of the excipi-
ent transfers from one organization to another is a critical juncture. Each organization needs to have 
defined responsibilities for maintaining records and securing the quality and security of the excipient. 
In complex supply chains, legal ownership may transfer several times, for example from original manu-
facturer to distributor to repackager to end user.
In all cases, the end user needs to identify the intermediaries in the supply chain in order to properly 
assess the risks. This may be difficult, as some organizations in the supply chain may not want to dis-
close their sources, even including the original manufacturer of the excipient. 
This Section 4.1 discusses some of the risk factors inherent to transferring excipients through various 
configurations of supply chains. 
4.1.1	 Direct Supply from Manufacturer
Even when an excipient is supplied directly by a manufacturer to an end user, intermediaries may be 
involved. Logistics operations may be subcontracted to effect movement of the excipients. One or 
more warehousing companies also may be involved. Because all intermediaries are subcontracted by 
either the original manufacturer or the end user, they should have good information about how to 
safely transport the excipient. The supply chain illustrated in Figure 4.1.1-1 is one of the lowest-risk 
arrangements due to the small number of intermediaries and the degree of control that can be applied.
Figure 4.1.1-1	
Supply Chain: Direct Supply from Manufacturer
End User
Original 
Manufacturer
Haulier
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

7
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
4.1.2	 Supply via a Distributor
When an excipient moves from manufacturer to distributor, the distributor becomes the legal owner. 
The distributor then transfers ownership to the end user, possibly after repackaging or relabeling the 
excipient. The distributor may have an agreement with the original manufacturer to market the excipi-
ent using the distributor’s tradename and literature; in this instance, the distributor and manufacturer 
likely will have an agreement to ensure the quality of the excipient. Usually in these cases the entire sup-
ply chain can be mapped with some certainty. This type of supply chain, depicted in Figure 4.1.2-1, 
presents few more risks than the simple manufacturer-to-end user scenario; however, those risks may be 
magnified if the distributor engages in repacking or relabeling, as discussed in Section 4.1.3.
If the original manufacturer has not established agreements with distributors, it will be much harder to 
fully trace all parties in the supply chain, increasing the risks. Other parties may repack and/or relabel 
the excipient. The original manufacturer may change its distributor, hence the process for notification 
of such changes should be agreed between the parties.1 These supply chains are more complex to assess, 
and the attendant risks are higher than in the previous scenarios.
4.1.3	 Supply Via Repackager
Repackaging activities in the supply chain, as illustrated in Figure 4.1.3-1, magnify the risks to excipi-
ent quality. The end user needs to understand the GMP controls applied by the repackager in order to 
minimize the risks to excipient quality, and, if feasible, needs to specify appropriate measures in supply 
or quality agreements.
4.1.4	 Supply Via Broker
A broker usually connects the manufacturer with the customer. Figure 4.1.4-1 depicts a possible rela-
tionship between a distributor and the end user when a broker is involved.
1	 The IPEC Significant Change Guide for Pharmaceutical Ingredients provides a uniform approach to the significance of 
changes involving the manufacture of pharmaceutical excipients and may be a useful resource (19).
End User
Original 
Manufacturer
Haulier
Haulier
Distributor
Figure 4.1.2-1	
Supply Chain: Supply via Distributors
Figure 4.1.3-1	
Supply Chain: Supply via Repackager
Repacking 
Relabeling
Distributor
End User
Original 
Manufacturer
Haulier
Figure 4.1.4-1	
Supply Chain: Supply via Broker
End User
Broker
Distributor
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

8
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
The ability to map the supply chain in this scenario will depend on the degree of transparency provided 
by the broker. When communications are totally open, the supply chain can be traced, and any risks 
can be assessed clearly. For instance, if the broker is fully transparent and the supplier is the original 
manufacturer, the risks may be as low as in the direct shipment scenario described in Section 4.1.1. 
On the other hand, if the broker is less transparent, it may be very difficult to assess the risks, indeed.
4.1.5	 Manufacturer Exporting Excipient Directly to End User
An international supply chain such as that illustrated in Figure 4.1.5-1 usually involves many in-
termediaries. Unlike previous examples in which the parties are relatively fixed, the parties to an in-
ternational supply chain, including haulers, shipping agents, and ships, may vary from shipment to 
shipment. In these situations, quantifying the risks may be very difficult. If the intermediaries are 
fixed, however, suitable inspection controls can be applied at those points, reducing the uncertainty 
presented by the prior steps.
4.1.6	 Manufacturer and Contract Manufacturing Organizations
When one or more CMOs are involved in the supply chain, it is critically important to clearly identify 
and understand which party or parties gather information and who owns the risk assessment. 
The manufacturing authorization holder is ultimately responsible for the risk assessment. Depend-
ing on the quality agreement and relationship between the CMO and manufacturing authorization 
holder, there generally are three options for conducting the risk assessment: 
• 
The CMO might carry out the entire risk assessment, collecting the information about the use and 
function of the excipient in the final drug product. That risk assessment would be reviewed and 
approved by the manufacturing authorization holder.
• 
The risk assessment might be carried out by the manufacturing authorization holder, incorporat-
ing information from the CMO. 
• 
The risk assessment might be carried out by the manufacturing authorization holder based on the 
risk assessment delivered by the CMO. 
In any case, the roles and responsibilities for the CMO and manufacturing authorization holder must 
be clearly defined, including what actions will be taken if the risk assessments completed by the CMO 
and manufacturing authorization holder result in different outcomes. 
Figure 4.1.5-1	
Supply Chain: Manufacturer Exporting Excipient Directly to End User
Original 
Manufacturer
End User
Haulier
Warehousing 
Company
Ship
Shipping Agent
Shipping Agent
Warehousing 
Company
Haulier
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

9
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
5.0 
Different Roles in the Supply Chain and Information-Gathering
To successfully complete the formalized risk assessment process, the information and evidence ob-
tained must support conclusions on risks, identify gaps in GMP, and determine control strategies. The 
risk assessment process is applicable throughout the lifecycle of the excipient—from selection to ter-
mination of use—and remains the responsibility of the manufacturing authorization holder. This key 
task, however, requires collaboration from all other parties in the supply chain. Table 5.0-1 delineates 
the roles in the supply chain, examples of their areas of responsibility, the information for which they 
are accountable, and the types of documents they may be expected to supply.
Table 5.0-1	 Roles in the Supply Chain and Examples of Their Responsibilities
Supply Chain Role
Areas of Accountability
Information Accountable
Documents Typically Provided
Subcontractor of the Excipient 
Manufacturer
–	 Sourcing raw materials
–	 Manufacturing
–	 Testing
–	 Packaging and labeling
–	 Transporting
–	 Manufacture 
–	 Testing certificates
–	 Compliance certificates
–	 Quality standards in use
–	 Manufacturing flow chart
–	 Certificate of analysis
–	 ISO, GMP, or EXCiPACT™ certificate
–	 Supply chain map
–	 Transport and storage conditions
Manufacturer of the Excipient
–	 Sourcing raw materials
–	 Manufacturing under 
appropriate standards
–	 Testing
–	 Packaging and labeling
–	 Transporting
–	 Manufacture 
–	 Testing certificates
–	 Compliance certificates
–	 Quality standards in use
–	 Manufacturing flow chart
–	 Certificate of analysis
–	 ISO, GMP, or EXCiPACT™ certificate
–	 Supply chain map
–	 Transport and storage conditions 
–	 Excipient information package (EIP) or comparable 
information package
–	 Regulatory declaration statement
–	 Technical expert support 
–	 Excipient master files (e.g., U.S. DMFs)
Broker
–	 Flow of information
–	 Supply chain overview
–	 Access to suppliers
–	 Certificate of analysis
–	 Supply chain map
Supplier or Distributor
–	 Transporting
–	 Warehousing
–	 Repackaging
–	 Testing
–	 Transport overview
–	 Storage conditions
–	 Direct link to manufacturer/ 
supplier
–	 Packing and labeling 
–	 Testing certificates
–	 Compliance certificates
–	 Quality standards in use
–	 Access to excipient information package (EIP) or 
comparable information package
–	 Regulatory declaration statement
–	 Certificate of analysis
–	 ISO, GMP, or EXCiPACT™ certificate
–	 Supply chain map
–	 Transport and storage conditions 
–	 Technical expert support
CMO or Manufacturer of Drug 
Product
–	 Sourcing raw materials
–	 Manufacturing drug product
–	 Testing of excipient
–	 Packaging and labeling
–	 Transporting 
–	 Conducting excipient 
risk assessment (Ultimate 
accountability rests with 
manufacturing authorization 
holder)
–	 Excipient information 
–	 Supply chain oversight
–	 Formulation information
–	 Special requirements of 
excipient
–	 Excipient risk assessment
–	 Supply chain map
–	 Audit of excipient supplier and manufacturer
–	 Quality oversight of supplier and manufacturer
–	 Regulatory filing of excipient
–	 Toxicological data
–	 Excipient quality and performance quality trends 
of excipient 
–	 Formulation information 
–	 Specification of excipient 
–	 Control strategy
Marketing Authorization 
Holder
–	 Submission of dossier
–	 Defining route of 
administration and function 
of excipient
–	 Excipient risk assessment
–	 Toxicological data
–	 Maximum daily dose
–	 Excipient use and function
–	 Technical data 
–	 Regulatory file 
–	 Manufacturing process flow
–	 Supply chain overview
–	 Manufacturer and supplier audit documents
–	 Oversight of outsourced activities (e.g., risk 
assessment, compliance history)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

10
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Information to support the excipient risk assessment process can be obtained using a variety of avenues:
• 
Meetings with manufacturers and suppliers
• 
Obligations placed in quality agreements or 
equivalent documents
• 
Chemistry, manufacturing and controls 
(CMC) documentation
• 
Excipient manufacturer customer portals 
• 
Internet 
• 
Manufacturing authorization holder supply 
chain management and quality oversight 
functions
• 
Health Authority portals 
• 
Quality and technical collaborations be-
tween excipient manufacturer and end user 
That said, when collaboration between the manufacturing authorization holder and other parties in 
the supply chain is limited, the manufacturing authorization holder may need to consider alternative 
means for obtaining information. Table 5.0-2 lists some common scenarios and potential resolutions. 
Table 5.0-2	 Common Scenarios in Information-Gathering 
Potential Issues
Manufacturing
Unable to determine all participants in 
the supply chain for commercial reasons, 
e.g., a distributor enforces supply chain 
opaqueness for competitive reasons 
When distributors are part of the supply chain, this is a common scenario. The 
manufacturing authorization holder should identify the supply chain risks 
and, where appropriate, transfer responsibility for supply chain oversight to 
the distributor.
–	 Allow the distributor to redact information in responses to protect their 
business advantage 
–	 Use the quality agreement with suppliers/distributors to assign 
accountability and supply chain oversight
–	 Use onsite audit program to challenge and confirm information
Unable to obtain appropriate regulatory 
declaration statements (e.g., residual solvent 
statement) for an excipient due to the lack 
of technical understanding or expertise of a 
participant in the supply chain
–	 Support the excipient manufacturer/supplier with in-house technical 
support, if available 
–	 Provide the manufacturer/supplier with declaration templates, if available, 
for manufacturer/supplier to complete 
–	 Use the manufacturing authorization holder’s internal technical team to 
assess and/or test material in lieu of supplier regulatory declaration
Unable to obtain all information required 
to support the risk assessment because 
the excipient manufacturer’s quality 
standards do not meet the excipient user’s 
requirements
–	 Determine if the excipient manufacturer is performing additional activities 
to facilitate alignment of quality standards
–	 Reassess to identify gaps that exist and mitigate through internal or 
external action, e.g., increase quality oversight, change specifications 
–	 If the residual risks identified are unacceptable, change the excipient supply 
chain
Insufficient provisions in place (e.g., lack 
quality agreements or unable to agree on 
a confidentiality agreement) to support 
information exchange with manufacturing 
authorization holder
–	 Review obligations agreed with parties in the supply chain
–	 Put in place an appropriate agreement to support this process
–	 Review manufacturer audit reports and supply management files to 
determine whether the assessor for the manufacturing authorization 
holder already possesses required information 
–	 Explore other avenues of obtaining information, e.g., manufacturer’s 
standard customer information portals, public domain information
Insufficient or no collaboration between 
key participants and manufacturing 
authorization holder in the supply chain (e.g., 
no leverage due to low volume purchase, 
stressed or non-existent commercial 
relationships)
–	 Use distributor relationship to leverage information transfer 
–	 Identify alternative sources for obtaining support and information 
–	 Use already-established agreements or put in place appropriate agreement 
to obligate supply chain party support
–	 Review manufacturer/supplier audit reports/questionnaire/excipient file (e.g., 
EIP) and supply management files to determine whether the assessor for the 
manufacturing authorization holder already possesses required information
Unable to support the excipient risk 
assessment process due to limited oversight 
of outsourced activity (e.g., unable to secure 
an audit)
–	 Ensure adequate resources are allocated to ensure appropriate 
prioritization of manufacturer/supplier management activities 
–	 Use third-party audit program (e.g., EXCiPACT™)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

11
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
6.0 
A Model for Quality Risk Management for Excipients 
Experts on the TR 54-6 Task Force conducted an informal survey examining industry practices relating to quality risk management for excipients. Based on analysis and dis-
cussion, they developed a model combining best practices. In addition, the Task Force assessed real-world company models after several manufacturing authorization holders 
shared examples of actual risk assessment processes. See Annex 1 (Section 10.0). 
In general, the proposed QRM model for excipients is based on the risk ranking and filtering method. Risk ranking and filtering is a tool for comparing and ordering 
risks. Risk ranking of complex systems typically involves evaluation of multiple diverse quantitative and qualitative factors for each risk. The tool involves breaking 
down the basic risk question “Is the excipient fit for use?” into as many components as needed to capture factors involved in the risk. 
The two main factors in the model are the intrinsic excipient risks and the supply chain risks. These factors are combined into a single relative risk score that can then 
be used for ranking risks. Filters, in the form of weighting factors or cut-offs for risk scores, are used to support risk acceptance or mitigation. Figure 6.0-1 illustrates 
the steps in the process. In other sections below, this TR highlights and discusses portions of this model.
Figure 6.0-1	 The Complete Generic Risk Model for Excipients 
Supply Chain 
Mapping
Initiate
Risk ID
Risk Analysis
Risk Evaluation
Risk Reduction
Risk Acceptance and 
Communication
Risk Review
Define Excipient 
Requirements (incl. 
The specification)
Analyse impact 
of excipient on 
each Drug Product 
(Family) and its 
manufacturing
Identify Intrinsic 
Risk Factors
Need for 
Excipient
Input from 
product 
and process 
development
High
Medium
Low
Generate 
Overall Risk 
Score
Define Supply 
Chain Risk 
Factors
Supply Chain 
score (SCRPN)
Knowledge 
about 
Suppliers
Input from 
Suppliers
High
Medium
Low
4
10
8
6
6
15
12
9
8
20
16
12
10
25
20
15
Probability
Excipient risk 
score
(ERPN)
Modify 
excipients 
controls
Modify controls 
within Supply 
Chain
Modify Drug 
Product 
Manufacturer 
controls 
(internally)
Re-score 
Excipient risk 
and supply 
chain risk 
scores
Conclude on 
overall Excipient 
risk control 
acceptability
Yes
Risk is acceptable
No
Collaboration with Supplier
Are existing 
control levels 
appropriate?
Communicate and 
agree expectations 
and use with 
Supplier
Evaluation 
effectiveness 
(initial)
Ongoing risk 
review 
(incl. 
Effectiveness)
Triggers 
Drug Product 
Manufacture
Triggers within 
the Excipient 
Supply Chain
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

