Foreword
Joint Initiative between IPEC Federation and PDA
In March 2018, the IPEC Federation and PDA announced their first joint initiative. Both associations 
signed a memorandum of understanding to collaborate on the development of a joint technical report 
on excipient good manufacturing practices risk assessment in response to input from their respective 
memberships. Prior to the collaboration announcement, however, both parties were active on the 
topic of quality risk management. PDA published the PDA Technical Report No. 54 series. In March 
2016, IPEC Europe published the How-To Document – A Guide to Support Manufacturing Authoriza-
tion Holders (MAH) in their Compliance with the European Commission Guidelines on Risk Assessment 
for Excipients (2015/C 95/02). Subsequently, in May 2017, IPEC-Americas and IPEC Europe jointly 
published the Risk Assessment Guide for Excipient Makers, Users, and Distributors. 
Both PDA and IPEC Federation believe that presenting a common approach to the legal, regulatory, 
and related issues concerning excipients is best done as “one voice.” Both collaborators see significant 
potential benefit in leveraging the two organizations’ expertise on excipients and drug product manu-
facture. This technical report will serve as a practical guidance intended for use with existing regulatory 
and industry standards. The authors expect that the document will enable Manufacturing Authoriza-
tion Holders of drug product to either set up or benchmark their quality systems, and further establish 
or continue to collaborate with parties in their excipient supply chain.
This joint PDA-IPEC technical report extends the PDA Technical Report No. 54 series and provides 
guidance on risk assessments for excipients by presenting a model risk assessment, guidance on key 
elements, and a collection of actual examples from excipient users in the pharmaceutical industry. 
About Parenteral Drug Association (PDA)
The Parenteral Drug Association (PDA) is the leading global provider of science, technology, and regu-
latory information and education for the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical community. Found-
ed in 1946 as a nonprofit organization, PDA is committed to developing scientifically sound, practical 
technical information and resources to advance manufacturing science and regulation. Through the 
expertise of more than 10,000 members worldwide, PDA promotes the exchange of rapidly evolving 
information on science, technology, and regulations concerning high-quality pharmaceutical produc-
tion to better serve patients.
About IPEC Federation
The IPEC Federation (IPEC) is a global organization that promotes quality in pharmaceutical excipi-
ents. The IPEC Federation represents five regional International Pharmaceutical Excipient Councils 
(IPECs) — IPEC-Americas, IPEC Europe, IPEC Japan, IPEC China, and IPEC India — and pro-
vides a unified voice to promote the best use of excipients in medicines as a means of improving patient 
treatment and safety. IPEC’s objectives are to contribute to the development and harmonization of 
international excipient standards, the introduction of useful new excipients to the marketplace, and 
the development of good manufacturing and good distribution practices for excipients. 
v
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

1
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
1.0  Introduction
Excipients are integrated into the drug product formulation for various reasons: to aid the drug prod-
uct formulation, to serve as functional or nonfunctional ingredients, or to enable the drug to be 
released from the drug product in a particular, desired manner. The rationale for their use extends 
beyond the point of medical use to include maintenance of the safety or function of the drug product, 
even during storage. While good manufacturing practices (GMP) regulations clearly outline what is 
required for active pharmaceutical ingredients, only a basic framework exists for ascertaining appropri-
ate GMP for excipients through risk assessment. 
In recognition of the criticality of excipients in the production of drug products, the European Com-
mission (EC) Falsified Medicines Directive (2011/62/EU) revised Article 46(f) of Directive 2001/83 
to require manufacturing authorization holders to verify that any excipients used in a product are 
made according to appropriate GMP standards (1). The Falsified Medicines Directive also committed 
the EC to publishing Guidelines on the formalised risk assessment for ascertaining the appropriate GMP 
for excipients of medicinal products for human use (EC Guidelines), which were published on March 
19, 2015 (2). In 2018, PIC/S incorporated the same provisions for formalized risk assessment into a 
publication of the same name, extending the provisions to have global applicability (3). In the U.S., 
the 2012 Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act redefined “current good manu-
facturing practices” to include “the implementation of oversight and controls over the manufacture 
of drugs to ensure quality, including managing the risk of and establishing the safety of raw materials 
[and] materials used in the manufacturing of drugs,” in addition to the final drug product (4). This 
change also emphasizes the criticality of excipients.
Although the accountability for risk assessment rests entirely with the manufacturing authorization hold-
er, all parties in the supply chain are required to support the process by providing relevant information 
(e.g., Excipient Information Packages (5)) to the manufacturing authorization holder. The risk manage-
ment process is applicable throughout the excipient’s lifecycle, that is, from selection through termination 
of use, and remains the responsibility of the manufacturing authorization holder at each stage. 
Over the course of an excipient’s lifecycle, there will be a broad array of drivers for risk assessment and 
reassessment. Those drivers may include, among others, product deviations, market recalls, changes 
in excipient use, supply chain amendments, and adverse trends in quality. The manufacturing autho-
rization holder is responsible for providing evidence that the risk management approach adopted is 
commensurate with the level of risk to ensure the safety, purity and other quality characteristics of the 
excipient in use. 
To comply with the EC Guidelines and PIC/S publication, each excipient used in a drug product 
must be assessed for the risks that it poses to the product’s quality, safety, and purity. From these risks, 
the manufacturing authorization holder must determine the quality standards required for the manu-
facture of the excipient. The manufacturing authorization holder should communicate these quality 
standards to the excipient supplier and seek the supplier’s agreement. Any confirmed gaps in quality 
standards determined by the assessment must be appropriately mitigated, which may require the man-
ufacturing authorization holder to take action on its own or through collaboration with the supplier. 
To ensure that risk assessments remain effective during the excipient’s lifecycle, the manufacturing 
authorization holder must incorporate a periodic review into the excipient risk assessment process.
Figure 1.0-1 illustrates this overall, iterative risk management process as it is used in supply chain 
management (6).
1.1	
Purpose
This report is based on the general principles of quality risk management (QRM) as outlined in ICH 
Quality Guideline Q9 Quality Risk Management (7). It has been developed to provide additional guid-
ance on the excipient risk assessment process required by the EC Guidelines and incorporated into the 
PIC/S publication. In addition, TR 54-6 presents a model risk assessment and real-world examples 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

2
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Figure 1.0-1	 Identifying Whether an Excipient is Fit for Use (reprinted with permission)
from the pharmaceutical industry applicable to excipient use for all dosage forms to illustrate risk 
assessment as an excipient knowledge management solution. In general, the model presented in this 
report is based on the risk ranking and filtering method as referenced in ICH Q9. It also addresses 
pertinent factors such as end-to-end supply chain, control strategy, and benefits and challenges, among 
others. TR 54-6 will also serve as a practical guidance intended for use in conjunction with existing 
regulatory and industry standards; however, it does not replace or alter existing statutory and regula-
tory requirements for assessing excipients for use in medicinal drug products.
Despite the clarity and guidance offered by the EC Guidelines, risk assessors for manufacturing autho-
rization holders still face some challenges in implementing and benchmarking the excipient risk assess-
ment process for two main reasons. First, quality systems applied during the manufacture of materials 
used as excipients are diverse and generally based on the material’s intended use, which may not be 
primarily as a pharmaceutical excipient. Therefore, adjusting an excipient manufacturer’s or supplier’s 
quality systems to meet the pharmaceutical quality system outlined in the guidelines could prove 
challenging. Second, an excipient may be used in different dosage forms by manufacturing authoriza-
tion holders. One manufacturing authorization holder may use a single excipient in both tablets and 
injectables, which may result in different quality requirements applying to a single excipient from the 
same supplier. This also may lead to conflicting requirements for GMP. 
1.2	
Scope
The information in TR 54-6 applies to all excipients used in drug products for human use at all stages 
of the product lifecycle. It assumes the excipient will be used for the drug product in the commercial 
supply phase; however, the manufacturing authorization holder may choose to apply this practical 
guidance in the clinical phase as well. That said, this technical report refrains from providing guidance 
to the manufacturing authorization holder regarding at which clinical phase it should be applied. 
Is an Excipient fit for use?
Supplier/Excipient Identification
Compliance Monitoring (e.g., KPI/Events/Audit)
Risk 
Identification
QMS
Manufacturing
Supply Chain
• Suppliers information
• Quality/Supply agreement
• CAPA System/Change Mgmt
• Complaint history/recalls
• Audit/Inspection results
Route of 
Administration
Function of 
Excipient
• Regulatory Dossier
• Technical 
Documentation
Risk score rating (low, medium, high)
Excipient User
Excipient Manufacturer
Excipient supplier 
assessment
Internal document 
assessment
Implementation of relevant Quality Practices 
(GMP/GDP required)
Accept risk
Risk 
reduction
Unacceptable risk
Control
Review
Risk Assessment
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

