12
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
6.1	
Initiate Risk Management Activities and Identify Assessment Team
The risk assessment process begins with the identification of a need to qualify an excipient or to re-
view an existing excipient risk assessment (e.g., at new product introduction, as a result of obtaining a 
second source, being notified by the supplier of major changes, or one of the numerous other drivers 
discussed below in Section 7.1). 
A successful excipient risk assessment program requires a holistic approach encompassing knowledge of 
the excipient’s use in the pharmaceutical dosage form as well as knowledge of the excipient’s manufacturer 
and supply chain. The assessment team should include individuals from various functional areas, includ-
ing subject matter experts (SME) from the drug product manufacturer who understand the excipient’s use 
in the drug product, as well as individuals from the functions involved in oversight of the supply chain. 
The risk assessment process might include participants with defined roles and responsibilities in the 
functional QRM areas and others, such as:
• 
QRM—risk assessment facilitator knowl-
edgeable about the methodology and tools
• 
QRM experts—area or function leads for 
QRM or the QRM decision-makers
• 
Quality Assurance—focused on use and 
function
• 
Quality—focused on oversight activities 
related to supply chain (e.g., excipient 
manufacturer, supplier, transport)
• 
Qualified/responsible person
• 
Material sciences 
• 
Quality control
• 
Regulatory affairs
• 
Technical/operations 
• 
Sterility assurance
• 
Manufacturer or supplier auditing 
• 
Procurement 
• 
Outsourcing operations—oversight activities
• 
R&D 
• 
Engineering 
• 
Nonclinical statistics 
• 
Legal 
• 
Manufacturing 
• 
Medical/clinical 
• 
Safety and pharmacology/toxicology
Having a multidisciplinary team of individuals working collaboratively to gather and review data and 
assess the potential for risk is critical to ensuring that all risks are considered holistically. The excipient 
risk management process should be built into a company’s existing processes and quality management 
system (QMS).
6.2	
Identify Intrinsic Risk Factors 
In identifying the excipient’s intrinsic risk factors, numerous factors should be considered. 
One primary source is input from product and process development. The Quality Target Product Profile 
of the drug product(s) in which the excipient is to be used provides requirements for the drug product, 
and this forms the basis of information about the use and function of the excipient. The manufacturing 
authorization holder assesses the drug product requirements to develop the drug product critical quality 
attributes (CQA) and to establish the foundation for drug product design and development. During the 
drug product’s design and development, scientific studies are conducted and information is collected con-
cerning the excipient, particularly about how it may interact with the product’s other components. Drug 
product development and process design studies, commercial manufacturing, and associated risk assess-
ments for this product and any other products in which the excipient has been used, provide historical 
information about the excipient that can be used to assess its impact on the targeted drug product.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

13
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
In addition, examples of parameters that can be considered as excipient attributes include:
• 
Characteristics of excipient needed for use in the drug product
• 
Manufacturer’s excipient specifications
• 
Factors learned from the manufacture of the excipients
• 
Existence of multiple and or global manufacturers
• 
Lot-to-lot variability
• 
Risk factors listed in the EC Guidelines of March 19, 2015, such as:
–	 Transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE)
–	 Potential for viral contamination
–	 Potential for microbiological or endotoxin/pyrogen contamination 
–	 Potential, in general, for any impurity originating from the raw materials, e.g., aflatoxins or pesti-
cides, or generated as part of the process and carried over, e.g., residual solvents and catalysts
–	 Sterility assurance for excipients claimed to be sterile 
–	 Potential for any impurities carried over from other processes, in the absence of dedicated 
equipment and/or facilities 
–	 Environmental control and storage/transportation conditions, including cold chain manage-
ment if appropriate 
–	 Excipient stability
–	 Packaging integrity evidence
6.3	
Excipient Risk Analysis
The excipient risk analysis can be carried out in two steps. First, an initial excipient impact assessment 
can be conducted to provide input to the internal specification of the excipients, to identify intrinsic 
risk factors relating to the excipient’s impact on the drug product. This assessment is used in the second 
step—the subsequent risk-scoring of the excipients. Figure 6.3-1 focuses in on one section of Figure 
6.0-1 to illustrate the initiation of the risk assessment when an excipient is needed for a product.
Figure 6.3-1	 Steps in Excipient Risk Identification and Analysis 
High
Medium
Low
Generate Overall 
Risk Score
Excipient risk 
score
(ERPN)
Define Excipient 
Requirements 
(incl. The 
specification)
Analyse impact 
of excipient on 
each Drug Product 
(Family) and its 
manufacturing
Identify Intrinsic 
Risk Factors
Need for 
Excipient
Input from 
product 
and process 
development
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

14
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
6.3.1	 Impact of Excipient on Each Type of Drug Product
After identification as described in Section 6.2, the excipient attributes are assessed for correlation to the CQAs of the drug product in which the excipient is to be 
used. The rationale of the impact must be explained. This step must be taken for each drug product or drug product family. Then, the results can be consolidated 
across products.
Initially, all potential risk factors (hazards) are identified and documented as excipient attributes. Then, CQAs are correlated to the pharmaceutical dosage form, as follows: 
+	
Known Impact (documented effect)
-	
No Impact (no indication of impact)
?	
Impact cannot be ruled out, more information may be needed
The information can be compiled in a table, such as that shown in Figure 6.3.1-1. A column marked “Compliance” is included near the CQAs so that compliance 
with, for instance, pharmacopeial specifications, can be ensured as well. This column is useful because, in some cases, an attribute may be part of a specification, 
e.g., a pharmacopeial specification, that the company will claim adherence to, regardless of the actual impact on the drug product CQAs. This column allows the 
assessors to force such excipient attributes further into the assessment and into the excipient specification. 
Figure 6.3.1-1	
Illustration of an Excipient Impact Assessment to Provide Specification Input
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

15
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Only excipient attributes with a correlation marked “+” are brought forward as needed into the specifi-
cation for further analysis. The attributes marked “?” should be further investigated to obtain the data 
necessary to determine whether there is potential impact on the drug product. If further data cannot 
be gathered, “?” will be treated as a “+,” taking a worst-case approach.
Excipient attributes and impact assessments are used to carry out a qualitative failure analysis in 
which the failure options and effect of failure (consequences) are described. This analysis is based on 
the knowledge gathered during the development phase of the drug product or from other literature 
and knowledge.
From the failure analysis, the excipient user gains understanding of potential and allowed variation 
in the attributes. With this knowledge, specification limits for each material attribute are proposed to 
mitigate the risk of impact. In this way, the excipient impact assessment is used to justify the excipient 
specification.
An impact assessment is conducted for each drug product in which the excipient is used. If done 
retrospectively, this impact assessment leads to an evaluation of the existing specification. If done 
prospectively, the impact assessment provides input to one or more specifications consistent with drug 
product needs. In most cases, it may be advantageous to have a single specification that applies to the 
excipient’s use in all drug products. 
6.3.2	 Excipient Risk Profile based on Use and Intrinsic Factors
The second part of the excipient analysis is creating a risk profile (or ranking) using a question-based 
risk ranking and filtering system. 
At a minimum, the following factors related to the excipient and its use should be considered in de-
veloping the risk score, as explained further in Table 6.3.2-1:
• 
Excipient attributes and relevant specification
• 
Functionality of the excipient in formulation 
• 
Intended patient intake (consider dose regimen, frequency of dose, strength of formulation) 
• 
Route of administration
• 
Excipient origin and potential for contamination
• 
Excipient complexity (composite)
• 
Prior knowledge of and experience with excipient (e.g., known quality defects)
• 
Standard packaging size of the excipient (consider use in manufacture of drug product)
Table 6.3.2-1 describes different scenarios expressing a low, medium, or high risk for each of the risk 
factors (RFE) listed. This table can be used as a starting point for consideration of (potential) risk fac-
tors, then developed and improved over time to reflect the particular excipient and its use in the final 
drug, as well as the user’s experience with the model. While it includes the risk factors required by the 
EC Guidelines, other relevant risk factors can be added.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

16
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Table 6.3.2-1 	
Excipient Risk Calculation Tool
Risk Factor Excipient (RF E)
Low (1)
Medium (3)
High (5)
RF E1: Functionality of Excipient in 
Formulation
Diluent, coloring agent flavor, 
sweetening agent, identity through 
printing with ink, emollient, tonicity 
agent 
Thickener, coating agent, former, 
compression aid, lubricant, glidant 
and/or anticaking agent, humectant, 
suspending/dispersing agent, buffer, 
adhesive, penetrant, disintegrant, 
binder, capsule shell, plasticizers, pH 
modifiers, chelating and/or complexing 
agents, antioxidants, suppository base, 
suspending and/or viscosity-increasing 
agent, stiffening agent, propellant
Antimicrobial preservative, vehicle, 
release modifier, wetting and/or 
solubilizing agent, pH modifier, 
pharmaceutical water 
RF E2: Intended Patient Intake 
(Consider dose regimen, frequency 
of dose, amount of excipient in 
dose form); consult the Inactive 
Ingredients Database (19) 
Expected maximum daily intake 
does not exceed known maximum 
dose of excipient in a drug product 
N.A.
Expected maximum daily intake 
exceeds known maximum dose of 
excipient in a drug product 
RF E3: Route of Administration 
(Risk to the patient)
Topical, oral, vaginal, rectal
Pulmonary/inhalation
Parenteral, ophthalmic, for open 
wounds
RF E4: Potential for Contamination
Excipient is well-defined, not of 
animal origin; manufacturing process 
is well-controlled, resulting in low or 
no potential for contamination by: 
–	 TSE/BSE 
–	 Viral contamination
–	 Microbiological organisms, 
endotoxins, or pyrogens
–	 Impurities resulting from the 
manufacturing process, e.g., 
residual solvents and catalysts 
Impurities from the raw materials, 
e.g., aflatoxins or pesticides
N.A.
Animal origin or circumstances 
indicating a heightened potential for 
contamination by virus, impurities, or 
other unwanted adulterants
RF E5: Excipient Complexity
(Is it a composite or individual 
excipient?) 
Excipient is not a composite 
Excipient is a composite and each 
component of the composite is well 
characterized and supported by 
technical data
Excipient is a composite and 
components are not formally 
managed or traced
RF E6: Prior Knowledge or Experience 
with Excipient (e.g., known quality 
defects)
Material does not cause challenges; 
prior experience with the excipient 
and low or no history of defects
Prior knowledge or experience with 
the excipient is minimal 
History of defects and challenges, or 
no prior knowledge of or experience 
with the excipient
RF E7: Packaging Size
(Consider internal use in 
manufacture of product)
Single-use, ready to be used in 
manufacturing
Excipient must be divided or 
repackaged for manufacturing, but 
transfer of excipient into alternative 
primary packaging does not 
introduce additional risks
Excipient must be divided or 
repackaged in a highly controlled 
environment with high precision 
before use in manufacturing
RF Ex: Add according to specific needs 
for the excipient in final drug product
To be defined
To be defined
To be defined
Each selection will result in a value of 1 (low), 3 (medium), or 5 (high) for risk.
The risk score for the excipient (ERPN) is calculated as the sum of the risk scores for each of the seven 
identified risk factors (RF E)2, divided by the number of risk factors. The resulting ERPN will be in the 
range of 1 (Low) to 5 (High).
Overall Excipient Risk Score (ERPN) =
RF E1 + RF E2 + RF E3 + RF E4 + RF E5 + RF E6 + RF E7
7
2	  Users would adjust the calculation as necessary to reflect additional risk factors that they have identified for 
consideration or to weight the individual risk factors based on the company’s analysis and risk tolerance.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

