5.7 Lyophilization
Lyophilization, or freeze-drying, is a process through which water is removed from the liquid solution
by freezing the product, subliming the ice, and desorbing residual water to low levels. Vials are filled
with liquid product and stoppers are partially seated into the vials on the filling line prior to accumu-
lation for the lyophilizer-loading operation. The vials are loaded onto the freeze-dryer shelves, either
manually using bottomless trays, or via an automated mechanical loading system. Upon reaching the
specified end conditions of the process, the stoppers are fully seated into the vials with the hydraulic
shelf-stoppering system. Vials are then unloaded from the chamber. Manipulation of the vials during
the loading, stoppering, and unloading processes, in addition to the freeze-drying process itself, can all
be potential sources of glass vial handling issues.
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 17

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.7.1 Loading and Unloading
During the traying, transfer, loading, and unloading process, glass-to-glass and glass-to-metal interac-
tions occur similar to other vial manipulation operations, such as filling and capping. Vials are typically
conveyed by sliding across stainless-steel surfaces and then nested with other vials in a close-packed con-
figuration, experiencing forces applied from surrounding vials during movement. Vials could be accu-
mulated onto individual trays and transferred manually to the freeze-dryer or transferred by automated
loading systems. Typical automated material-handling systems transfer and load the entire lyophilizer
shelf, row by row, or by some other indexing method. The tooling used to manipulate these vials should
be compatible with the vial size and type. Material-handling methods with significant glass-to-glass and
glass-to-metal contact can lead to small scratches, checks, or cracks, creating a weakened region in the
glass that can potentially lead to breakage at that location when stresses are exerted.
Over time and repeated use, cleaning, and sterilization, wear on the bottom surface of the tray can
become evident and warping of the transfer ring may occur, leading to “pinched” vials when nested. In
turn, the prominence of glass defects can increase the risk of container failure due to increased friction
and limited mobility.
5.7.2 Lyophilization Process Concerns
The potentially significant stress imposed on the glass from the expansion of product during the freez-
ing and drying steps is a concern. As the product freezes, crystals form and the product can expand,
often upward from the bottom of the vial, but also outwardly and down from the product surface
toward the bottom. The extent of this effect will vary depending on the specific product formulation.
Although this expansion would not initiate glass breakage by itself, the risk to vial breakage increases
with the presence of a defect, such as a blemish due to scratches in the vial from glass-to-glass and
glass-to-metal abrasion. Vial design, especially in the heel area, may also have an impact on breakage
during expansion. With a large fill volume, internal forces are increased significantly. Figure 5.7.2-1
and Figure 5.7.2-2 show examples of glass fractures and lensing, respectively, that can occur during
the freeze-drying process. Other product effects can also impose stress on the container (14).
5.7.3 Seating the Stopper
Final seating of the stopper occurs within the lyophilizer chamber at the end of the lyophilization
process, when the shelves are either lowered or raised to fully insert the partially seated stoppers. The
suspended shelves most often are driven by a hydraulic ram (Figure 5.7.3-1). Pressure exerted by the
hydraulic system is set initially for the most demanding need, such as 2 cc or 3 cc vials with a 13 mm
finish. Such small vials have greater density across the shelf surface area and require the greatest pres-
sure (force per unit area) to fully seat the stoppers. In order to apply a uniform pressure to each vial
across the shelves, the shelves should be level and planar. If there is any significant variation to pressure
distribution, the force on the vials can be localized significantly in one area, which could lead to glass
breakage.
One area to assess is the container-to-container height variation; stoppering forces will be concentrated
to any vials that may be slightly taller than the surrounding vials. The difference in vial-stopper height,
in some instances, has been sufficient to result in broken vials. When a partial shelf-load of vials left at
the end of the filling operation are being placed on the lowest shelf, there must be a sufficient number
of vials, and they must be evenly positioned across the shelf to accommodate the pressure evenly. Fail-
ing to evenly distribute the vials across the shelves can lead to cocked shelves and distortion of the shelf
suspension hardware. In addition, for container-closure systems with a poor stopper fit or misplaced
stopper, cocked closures upon stoppering can lead to excessive force and, potentially, broken vials.
Some breakage observed in a lyophilizer may not be due to improper handling but may be attributed
to vial nonconformities such as leaners, rocker or uneven bottoms, or an improperly designed or
formed bottom radius.
18 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.7.2-1 Vial Fracture Due to Expansion of a Product Component
Figure 5.7.2-2 Lensed Vial Due to Expansion of a Product Component
Figure 5.7.3-1 Hydraulic Ram for Stoppering Lyophilized Vials
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 19

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.7.4 Points to Consider
Once risks for glass handling defects and breakage have been assessed, based on material-handling
conditions and variables for the specific product and container configuration, there are systems that
can be implemented to reduce the risk. The material of construction on contact surfaces, such as
guide rails on the filling line during material-handling operations, has an impact. The condition of the
shelves, conveyors, trays, and rings should be flat, level, and smooth, and monitored on a predeter-
mined schedule for adequate maintenance. Vial pushers, indexers, and other vial manipulators should
be compatible with the system. Using plastics for vial contact surfaces and eliminating pinch points
can help alleviate glass-to-glass or glass-to-metal friction (stickiness). The container-closure industry is
making strides in decreasing the risk of vial defects; for example, preloaded vials, already indexed into
tubs, can limit glass-to-glass and glass-to-metal interaction.
The height of the container-closure system should have an allowable tolerance range specified to pre-
vent significant variation across a shelf and unequal forces. Thermal stresses should be limited, where
possible, during the lyophilization process. Product expansion behavior during the solidification pro-
cess should be known and potentially limited, by limiting fill height in the container, altering the ratio
of crystallizing to noncrystallizing components, or considering alternate freezing methods, such as
controlled nucleation, which initiates nucleation of ice from the liquid surface.
5.8 Capping
Vial capping is the last step in the aseptic process to fully seal a parenteral vial. The primary seal of a
parenteral vial packaging system is the interface of the elastomeric stopper flange and the land sealing
surface on the crown of the vial. Capping is the process of sealing the vial by compressing the flange of
a rubber stopper against the top surface of the glass vial, forming the primary seal, and then crimping
an aluminum ferrule around the stopper and vial finish. Sufficient vertical load force is necessary to
optimally compress the stopper, achieve sufficient seal tightness, and assure container-closure integrity.
A side load may also be imparted when the metal is crimped (Figure 5.8-1).
5.8.1 Impacts
Regardless of the sealing method, the stress created in the glass from these loads of an optimized cap-
ping process (< 130 N force) should be well below that where breakage would be expected (see Appen-
dix I, Section 8.3.4 for further discussion on conditions influencing breakage). Breakage, however,
is sometimes observed at the capper. Glass failure at capping is likely the manifestation of significant
surface damage caused to the vial earlier in the process.
Improper set-up of the capper or excessive vial variability (e.g., offset necks, bent necks, large necks,
leaners, rocker bottoms, laps (folds) in the neck) (Figure 5.8.1-1) could cause the neck to come in
contact with the sealing rail or disc, causing surface damage to the neck of the vial that may propagate
into fractures (Figure 5.8.1-2).
Transfer of vials into and out of the capper usually consists of a combination of belts, screw feeders,
and star wheels. Transfer mechanisms are discussed in Section 5.2.
5.8.2 Points to Consider
To manage the capping process, an appropriate combination of set-up parameters and change-parts
must be determined for each container-closure combination. That the sealing disc or rail will not
contact vials within normal variability must be assured, and detailed capping equipment set-up pa-
rameters must be established and documented for each package combination. The parameters should
be based on achieving sufficient stopper compression to achieve acceptable container-closure integrity
without excessive force. Component variation and stack-up tolerances should be considered in estab-
lishing the capper parameters.
20 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Offsetting (top and bottom) springs or dampers are employed to compensate for total height variation.
Additionally, automated inspection systems are used to remove out-of-specification components, vials
missing stoppers, or misplaced stoppers.
Figure 5.8-1 Capping Loads (Yellow Arrows)
The finish and plane of the seal surface is not Finish not concentric with the body.
perpendicular to the axis of the body.
Plane of the container bottom that is not Fold or overlap of glass on the exterior glass surface.
perpendicular to the axis of the body.
Figure 5.8.1-1 Examples of Vial Variability from PDA TR 43 (1)
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 21

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.8.1-2 Examples of Surface Damage and Breakage Due to Contact with Sealing Disc or Rail
(a) Abrasion from sealing disc; (b) Close-up of figure a; (c) Chipping from sealing disc; (d) Broken vial neck
5.9 Terminal Sterilization
Terminal sterilization is performed once the vial is stoppered and capped to assure the sterility of
the product (15). Moist heat, which is applied in the sterilizer (oven) by spraying hot water on the
product, is the method used for parenterals in vials. The process uses pressure, temperature, and time
parameters. The loading pattern of the units in the chamber should be uniform to ensure proper heat
distribution.
Vials that are in contact with one another in the sterilizer may bond with the surface of another vial,
causing them to stick together. When these vials come apart, the stuck marks may act as stress concen-
trators (See Section 5.4).
Breakage of vials during terminal sterilization is most likely due to an upstream incident. The practical
strength of the glass may have been reduced, thus reducing the burst pressure of the vials.
5.10 External Washing
Transitions that convey the glass containers into and out of the external washing unit operation (e.g.,
star wheels, screw feeds) must be aligned and synchronized. Also, a slight downward slope or short
vertical step downward should be employed when transitioning to or from conveyors and dead plates.
When grippers are used to convey the glass container through the external washer, proper alignment of
the grippers and the pressure applied must be set to avoid introduction of glass defects or glass break-
age. Feedback mechanisms or a sensor to detect proper functionality of the grippers should be used to
prevent such glass breakage. The water and air pressure and their direction should be set appropriately
to avoid glass-handling issues.
22 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.11 Inspection
Filled containers should be inspected individually for contamination or other defects (1). Inspections
can be carried out using three methods: manual, semi-automated, or automated. The sorting of ac-
cepted or rejected vials should follow the recommendations outlined in this section.
5.11.1 Manual Inspection
Manual inspection consists of a human inspector handling the vials directly. Typically, an inspector
manipulates a vial under a calibrated light source and in front of both white and black backgrounds
to enable proper inspection (Figure 5.11.1-1) (5,16,17). During the inspection process (as with all
manual processes), proper and careful handling should be employed to avoid damaging the vials. The
accept-or-reject decision is based on the inspector’s knowledge and training.
5.11.2 Semi-Automated Inspection
Semi-automated inspection also uses a human operator to make accept-or-reject decisions; however, the
vial handling is done with automation. Typical semi-automated inspection machines include a roller
conveyor for vial transportation and spinning of the vial, while also providing proper lighting and mir-
rors that allow the inspector a full view of the container. Handling the vials within a semi-automated
inspection machine should limit glass-to-glass contact and minimize impact during transitions.
5.11.3 Automated Inspection
Automated inspection can be performed using both sensor-based and camera-based systems and, depend-
ing on the process, can incorporate different handling designs. Appropriate, container-specific change
parts and set-up are necessary to ensure proper handling, inspection, and prevention of additional damage.
For example, the base attachments and spindle caps on machines using inspection turrets are designed
in such a way that the vial is held in place during the spin process to prevent the vial from being thrown
from the turret (“spin-out”) (Figure 5.11.3-1). Vials are sorted depending on the results of the inspection
process. For ejected vials, limit glass-to-glass contact and minimize impacts during transitions as the ejected
vials may be reinspected manually or reintroduced into the automated inspection process.
5.11.4 Inspected Vial Ejects
Vials that fail an initial inspection may be reintroduced into the line. Acceptance criteria should be
defined, and a risk assessment should be conducted to determine the level of reinspection required.
Figure 5.11.1-1 Manual Inspection Hood
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 23

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.11.3-1 Automated Inspection System
Controlled eject lanes are preferred over eject bins to avoid damaging the vials. If eject bins are used,
their design and process should be determined as outlined in Section 5.2.
5.11.5 Points to Consider
Two upgrades are recommended to improve the handling of glass vials during the inspection process:
puck-handling and direct-spin system. With puck-handling, after the vial is fed through an infeed
screw and star wheel, it is placed on a specialized puck. This puck is then transported throughout the
machine carrying the vial. The advantage of this system is the reduced interaction between machine
and glass. The machine passes the puck from the star wheel to an inspection turret and back to the star
wheel without any additional forces exerted on the glass vial.
The direct-spin system provides an individual servo motor for each location on the pre-spin or inspec-
tion turret. That allows increased control of the spin speeds of the vial, optimizing the machine for a
larger range in containers and reducing the risk of vial “spin-out”.
5.12 Off-Loading
Off-loading is the collection of finished product from the line. When transferring the vials into interim con-
tainers prior to labeling, materials, and practices similar to those outlined in Table 3.0-1 should be employed.
5.13 Vial Labeling
Typically, labeling does not occur in-line following the final container inspection. Vials are often pack-
aged for transport (within a facility or to a remote location) and care should be taken to prevent dam-
age from glass-to-glass contact, vibration, and other shocks. Trays are unloaded manually onto the
labeler in-feed; then, a combination of star wheels and/or scroll feeds orient and singulate the vials for
labeling. As with other processes, vials downed during labeling should be handled as recommended in
Section 3.0. Once the label is applied, the vials are transferred to the label inspection unit.
24 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.14 Secondary Packaging
Secondary packaging is the final step in the pharmaceutical process, one that provides the glass vial
with extra protection from rough handling during distribution and storage. Folding cartons, made of
cardboard or coated paperboard, are often used. The carton should be properly sized, designed in a way
that prevents glass breakage or damage, and made of materials with a lower friction factor and shock
absorption. For multi-vial packs, the inner compartment of the carton should be designed so that the
packaging prevents glass-to-glass contact.
5.14.1 Points to Consider
Newer carton designs are available with double-walled construction and cushioning that protect
against severe impact and provide crush resistance. Cartons with an integrated partition should be
suitable for both manual and automated packaging lines. Pre-glued edges can support the cover, pre-
venting pressure on the vials during stacking. Additionally, labels that add an extra layer of protection
are available for certain applications (e.g., cushion or double-thickness labels).
5.15 Finished Product Storage and Handling
The remaining aspect of the pack-out configuration, how the vials will be stored and handled during
distribution, presents a number of factors that should be considered, such as:
• Set-back of the load from the edge of the pallet
• Carton-stacking configuration
• Need for corner protection
• Need for slip sheets between layers
• Method of securing the load to the pallet
• Total height of the pallet
Double-stacking of pallets is generally not recommended and should be avoided, especially during transport.
