4.0 Risk Assessments
An effective risk management process can reduce glass handling hazards during initial process devel-
opment and design and also when evaluating process changes. Further, risk management can be used
to discover the root cause of glass breakage events and make informed decisions during investigations.
A risk management program can support regulatory discussions and inquiries, ultimately providing
regulators with higher confidence in the pharmaceutical manufacturer’s capabilities to address these
types of events. The scope of the risk management program, specific to glass handling, should include
the full lifecycle of the glass container including the manufacture and shipment from the supplier
to filling, packaging, and distribution to the customer. There are several helpful documents available
to support risk assessment activities, such as ISO documents, ICH guidelines, and PDA technical
reports (6-9).
Risk assessment comprises identification of potential risks, analysis of the probability of occurrence,
evaluation of potential impact of the risk, and prioritization for action. Risk assessments can be quanti-
tative or qualitative in nature. A quantitative assessment, in which a numerical value or range of values
describing the level of risk, may be used. Or, a qualitative assessment, using relative categories such as
“high,” “medium,” and “low,” may be used to characterize the risks. In either case, the definition and
rationale for each category should be clearly defined.
A risk assessment is performed by a cross-functional team that includes the appropriate SMEs and/
or responsible persons to assure accurate analysis. Multiple data sources are used to support the as-
sessment including, among other material, process maps, procedures, manufacturing floor experience,
frequency data, deviation and complaint history, and detection capability. These inputs ensure the
accuracy of the risk analysis, so they must be robust.
Subsequent to risk assessment, risk controls are considered and applied where appropriate to eliminate
or reduce risks identified by the risk assessment. The amount of risk control (i.e., risk reduction or
elimination) should be proportional to the significance of the risk and should be assessed based on a
benefit-to-risk analysis.
The resulting risks, mitigating activities, and level of risk acceptance must be effectively communi-
cated. Risk communication and review requires appropriate documentation as well as communica-
tion of the risk decisions to the persons authorized to accept the risk and direct response strategies
for risk mitigation and follow-up (e.g., functional experts and area or operations heads). Risk re-
sponse activities need to be reviewed periodically to confirm ongoing compliance effectiveness and
proactively reevaluated when new process, equipment, or industry changes influence or alter the
underlying risk profile.
Many tools are available that can be used to employ effective risk management. Table 4.0-1 provides a
list of tools typically used with a brief description and potential applications for each.
One effective method used to assess the risk inherent in a process specific to glass handling is the Fail-
ure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA). This method is widely used by many industries, including
the pharmaceutical industry. Although its original and intended use had been to proactively identify
unacceptable risks prior to failures occurring, the FMEA has also been used successfully in a reactive
fashion to evaluate processes for most likely root causes of failures after they occur.
The FMEA method is based on the theory that the risk of any particular failure is a composite of the
severity, frequency, and probability of the detection of that failure. Cross-functional team participants,
with a diverse knowledge of the process, compile an exhaustive list of potential failures and, taking
into account the known attributes of the process, thoroughly analyze each one. This output is then
evaluated to ascertain if the risk is acceptable or unacceptable. Mitigation activities are identified and
completed for those risks deemed unacceptable.
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 7

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 4.0-1 Typical Risk Management Tools
Risk Management Tool Description / Attributes Potential Applications
Basic Tools
• Diagram Analysis Simple techniques that are commonly used Compilation of observations,
• Flowcharts to gather and organize data, structure risk trends, or other empirical
management processes, and facilitate information to support a variety
• Check Sheets
decision-making of less-complex deviations,
• Process Mapping
complaints, defects, or other
• Cause/Effect Diagrams
circumstances
(i.e., Ishikawa or
fishbone diagrams)
Risk Ranking and Filtering • Method to compare and rank risks Useful for situations when the risks
• Typically involves evaluation of multiple, and underlying consequences are
diverse quantitative and qualitative factors for diverse and difficult to compare
each risk, weighting factors, and risk scores using a single tool
Statistical Tools • Control Charts Visualization and evaluation of
• Pareto Charts data to assist in the identification
of trends, issues, and appropriate
• Histograms
corrective actions
Advanced Tools
Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) • Method used to identify all root causes of Evaluation of deviations and
an assumed failure or problem investigations
• Used to evaluate system and subsystem
failures one at a time, but can combine
multiple causes of failure by identifying
causal chains
• Relies heavily on complete process
understanding to identify causal factors
Hazard Operability • Tool assumes that risk events are caused Commonly used to evaluate
Analysis by deviations from the design and process safety hazards
(HAZOP) operating intentions
• Uses a systematic technique to help
identify potential deviations from normal
use or design intentions
Failure Mode Effects • Assesses potential failure modes for Evaluation of equipment
Analysis (FMEA) processes and the probable effect on and facilities; analysis of a
outcomes or product performance manufacturing process to identify
• Once failure modes are known, risk reduction high-risk steps and critical
actions can be applied to eliminate, reduce, parameters
or control potential failures
• Highly dependent on strong understanding of
product, process, and facility under evaluation
• Output is a relative “risk score” for each
failure mode
An FMEA should be performed during the initial design and development of the product. Thus,
critical elements of the container design can be identified to ensure product quality including, but
not limited to, considerations for processing steps such as filling, blast freezing, lyophilization, and
final storage conditions. The glass breakage FMEA may be performed in conjunction with a FMEA
for other types of potential failures. This can confirm the original FMEA and provide a benchmark
risk assessment for production. An FMEA should be performed during evaluations of changes to the
process as a specific step of process change control. The existing FMEA should be modified and used to
8 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
ascertain if risk will change due to the planned process change. Any increase in risk due to the planned
change should be mitigated prior to implementation. A periodic review should be completed to con-
firm ongoing effectiveness of controlling risk levels and identify opportunities for further mitigation
through development of new technology or advanced procedures.
The specific glass-handling hazards to address as part of an FMEA should include glass particles or
fragments that could enter a container from a glass breakage event, and/or events or risks resulting in
breakage or a cracked container. The scope of the FMEA should cover as much of the lifecycle of the
glass container as possible, including supplier manufacturing and shipment as well as receipt, filling
and packaging, and final distribution.
During the risk analysis, potential failure modes specific to the glass-handling hazards are identified and the
potential causes and current controls are captured. The risk associated with specific failure scenarios is estimat-
ed using a risk priority number (RPN). An RPN is determined for each scenario based on the severity of the
failure effect, the frequency of occurrence of the potential cause, and the detection and mitigation (preven-
tion) capability that exists based on the controls currently in place. The definition and rationale for rankings
used to complete each element of the RPN should be clearly outlined and agreed upon by the FMEA team.
Multiple sources of information are employed to determine the RPN. Process maps and procedures that
outline the relevant process steps, and the equipment associated with them, are used to ensure that all relevant
areas are captured in the evaluation. In addition, and importantly, observations on the manufacturing line
are conducted as part of a complete process review of the manufacturing floor or location of the process and
equipment. Pictures and videos gathered, either during the process review or from previous efforts, are useful
for evaluating the severity, frequency, and detection of each failure mode. Specific glass-breakage frequencies,
locations, and root causes, as well as investigation history, are used to further inform the FMEA. Visual in-
spection capabilities throughout the process should be outlined to provide information relative to detection.
Finally, the definition and rationale for rankings used to assess each criterion of the RPN should be clearly
outlined and documented. An example of RPN definitions specific to glass-handling hazards is provided in
Table 4.0-2; values and definitions may change depending on the individual process or situation.
Table 4.0-2 Example of Risk Priority Number (RPN) Factor Determination
Criteria Correlation Factor Considerations
How severe is the effect on the
Will cause glass to crack or break/chip and enter
10 product?
container
10 = Previously observed glass
Severity May cause glass to crack or break/chip and enter break/crack
5
container
5 = May cause breakage or
Will not cause glass to crack or break/chip and enter cracking, but has not been
1
container observed previously
Daily (1/2) 10 How often does the event occur (if
observed in the past)?
Weekly (1/20) 7
How often should the event be
Monthly (1/100) 4
Occurrence expected to occur (if not observed
Yearly (1/1000) 1 in the past)?
Has the event ever occurred (if
Remote or never (1/1,000,000) 1
documentation exists)?
No possibility/highly unlikely to detect and/or control (< 50%) 10 How probable is it that the defect
(crack or glass in product) will be
Detection/ Unlikely to detect and/or control (50%–90%) 7
caught before passing to the final
Control Somewhat certain to detect and/or control (90%–100%) 4
customer?
Certain to detect and/or control (100%) 1
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 9

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
After all risks are identified and assigned an RPN, each risk is evaluated to determine the appropriate
level of mitigation or acceptance of risk and prioritized as to which potential failure modes should be
addressed first. The level of mitigation should be proportionate to the level of risk. The rationale for
the level of mitigation and/or acceptance of risk should be clearly documented and agreed upon by all
FMEA participants and stakeholders.
The FMEA results, participants, ranking rationale, and supporting data should be appropriately docu-
mented to support future investigations, process change or periodic review, and regulatory discussions.
In addition, the results of the FMEA should be communicated to the appropriate stakeholders to
ensure mitigation actions are taken and tracked to closure.
