1.0 Introduction
Glass has long been one of the first materials fabricated by humankind to contain valuables—from
perfumes, oils, and potions to the most technologically advanced. Glass has many properties that make
it an appropriate packaging material for parenteral drugs, including:
• Rigidity and durability
• Stability and compatibility with filling and shipping processes
• Ease of cleaning and sterilization
• Gas impermeability and maintenance of container-closure integrity
• Compatibility with a wide range of drug products
• Optical transparency and clean appearance
• Ease of drug product inspection
Like other packaging materials, glass is not always the appropriate packaging material. Not all glass
types are the same in composition and properties. Based on the glass type, some drug formulations can
react with glass, particularly those with a high pH or certain buffers.
Beyond this consideration is the fact that glass can break. Glass breakage can result in processing down-
time, an increased number of production interventions, injury, increased particulate load, and loss of
product. Ultimately, patient safety can be put at risk due to a loss of container-closure integrity (possibly
including sterility breaches), lost or improper doses, or injury from glass shards and particulates.
The resistance of glass to breakage is less a property of the material, as glass is inherently strong, but
more about the condition of its surface. For glass to break, both a stress and a flaw must be present at
the same place and at the same moment. As will be explained in this technical report, stress, whether
from an applied load, impact, or thermal shock, is generally temporary and the glass container will
retain its initial integrity and strength. Flaws, however, are permanent once induced.
As glass is handled through its manufacturing processes and subsequent pharmaceutical processes, it is
vulnerable to surface damage. Best handling practices can preserve the inherent strength of the glass,
whereas poor glass handling practices can significantly reduce the practical strength of glass containers.
Surface damage induced early in the manufacturing process may manifest itself as failure later in the
process or in the field as the container is subjected to subsequent stresses.
1.1 Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this technical report is to provide a technical understanding of glass, its strength, and
its limitations, and to provide guidance in best handling practices for glass vials throughout the phar-
maceutical process—receipt, storage, preparation, filling, stoppering, freeze-drying, and capping. This
document focuses on glass vials, where surface damage may occur, and where excess stresses may be
applied during processing and handling. Many of the principles discussed here can be applied to the
handling of glass syringes, cartridges, ampoules, and other glass container types.
This report also reviews typical pharmaceutical glass handling processes and identifies areas of concern.
Points to consider are presented for line, material, and equipment enhancements as well as guidance
and practical approaches for using procedural controls to better employ existing equipment.
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 1

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2.0 Glossary and Abbreviations
Breakage Downed Vial
An event that happens when the practical A vial that has fallen or tipped over and is no longer
strength of the glass is exceeded. This occurs vertical within the processing line.
due to a combination of stress (see Stress) and a
relevant surface defect. Ductile
An attribute of materials that are able to deform
Break Force under stress.
The force required to break glass, usually given
in Newtons (1 kg/v × sec2). Dwell Mark
A fracture surface marking representing the site of
Brittle a fracture discontinuity caused by a sudden shift in
An attribute of materials that are not able to the stress distribution or by a fracture stopping for
deform and thus break immediately under some length of time; also known as an arrest line.
excessive stress, even if the material is inherently
strong. Flaw
A mark, fault, or other imperfection that mars
Check a substance or object (e.g., scratches, scuffs,
A discontinuity in the glass surface that does checks, bruises).
not penetrate through the glass wall (1).
Fractography (Fracture Analysis)
Collection Bin The study of the fractured surfaces that can
A container for collecting vials that have been determine the origin and applied load needed to
removed or diverted from the production line. cause breakage.
Eject Bin Fracture Origin
The container for collecting downed vials The single, unique location at which a fracture
or vials removed from the production line system begins.
following an inspection point within the
production process with the intent of rein- Glass (Silicates)
spection and possible reintroduction to the An inorganic product of fusion that has been
production stream. cooled to a rigid condition without crystallization
and softens gradually upon reheating. Most com-
Reject Bin mon pharmaceutical glasses consist of silicon di-
The container for collecting vials that have oxide as the primary component and may contain
been rejected from the production line aluminum trioxide, boron trioxide, sodium oxide,
following an inspection point within the potassium oxide, magnesium oxide, calcium
production process wherein the vial will be oxide, barium oxide, and/or other oxides (3).
removed from production.
Glass Strength
Concentricity The capacity of glass to withstand tensile stress
Having a common center as circles or spheres until failure.
(e.g., the finish of a vial should be concentric
with the body, otherwise it would be considered Lehr
offset and/or out-of-round) (2). A temperature-controlled oven for annealing
objects made of glass.
Crack
Fracture that penetrates completely through the Lyophilization (Freeze-Drying)
glass wall (1). A process to remove the aqueous component
in a material by controlling temperature and
Dead Plate pressure changes in the water-freezing realm.
A stationary transition platform between two The result is a powdery cake that needs to be
pieces of equipment. reconstituted in a solution before usage.
2 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Practical Strength Thermal Stress
The resistance to breakage based on geometrical The stress produced by a temperature dif-
aspects of the glass, flaws inside and outside of ferential within a glass body (3).
the glass, residual stress inside the glass, and the
interior and exterior mechanical load. Thermal Shock
A rapid change in temperature imposed on a
Screw Feed (also known as Timing glass body that may lead to checking, cracking,
Screw, Scroll Feed, or Worm Gear) or complete breakage (3).
A mechanism that moves vials from one area of
the processing line to another in single file and Vial
at a specified pace. Glass container with a finish and bottom that
can be either molded or tubular.
Singulation
The process of arranging vials into single file Molded Vial (Molded Bottle)
from a bulk configuration. Glass container with a finish and bottom,
generally formed by a molded process
Starwheel (e.g., blow-and-blow or press-and-blow).
A wheel with pockets used to individually move Made directly from the melting furnace
vials into fixed positions. into a mold shaping the glass in a one-step
process.
Stress
A force resulting in a dislocation of atoms. Tubular Vial
Glass container with a finish and bottom,
Compressive Stress generally converted from a glass tube that
Describes a force that is pushing the atoms was initially drawn from a melting furnace
together. in a two-step process.
Tensile Stress
Describes a force that is pulling the atoms apart.
2.1 Abbreviations
COF FMEA
Coefficient of friction Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
CTE RPN
Coefficient of thermal expansion Risk priority number
