9.0 Appendix II: Investigations
Production personnel must be aware when a failure occurs. Any failure should be immediately investi-
gated; this may include conducting a risk assessment to determine the cause and the corrective action
steps to be taken. These steps should be detailed in a standard operating procedure (SOP) and the cor-
rective actions taken should be documented. Production personnel should be well trained in proper
glass handling, conducting initial-failure assessments, sample collection, and sample preparation for
fracture analysis.
Certain risks must be well understood when glass damage or breakage is observed. Risks go beyond the
immediate failure of a broken or damaged container, potentially including subsequent failure of addi-
tional containers and possible glass particulate contamination in adjacent containers on the line. Steps
should be taken to mitigate any risk by isolating and evaluating adjacent vials before batch release. If
glass fragments are observed on or near the line, it is crucial that all the other remnants be found and
collected. The objective is to ensure that no vials—chipped, damaged, or containing glass particles—
continue to be processed that pose a potential risk to subsequent steps or harm to the patient.
In order for breakage to occur there must be a:
• Force applied to the item to generate stress in the glass
• Flaw to act as the origin of the fracture
The general aim of fracture analysis is to identify the:
• Type and magnitude of force that was applied to the container
• Type and severity of the defect at the fracture origin
• Cause of the breakage, whether due to
– Defective container that failed at normally expected levels of applied force
– Excessive force applied to a commercial-quality container
9.1 Initial Investigation
Initial evaluations by production personnel can often help identify the root cause(s) of the failure. Ob-
servations can include the breakage pattern, line location, and relative size and number of fragments;
these comments can provide important clues as to the cause of the breakage, for example:
• A chip observed near or around the filler, or on a belt or accumulator just beyond the filler, often
indicates a filling needle strike on the mouth of the vial.
• Numerous small fragments or a complex fracture pattern observed often indicates the breakage was due
36 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
to unusual excessive forces on the container; small fragments could also occur when a primary fragment
(such as a chip) is subsequently crushed by another applied load. The excessive force may be due to
misaligned transfer mechanisms, a pinch point, a mispositioned container, or an out-of-spec container.
• A simple fracture pattern or just a few large fragments observed indicates a low-energy break, pos-
sibly a manifestation of a significant flaw or damage that occurred upstream.
Sometimes, the only corrective action needed is a simple line adjustment and a determination that
the correct change parts are in place. Other times, more extensive corrective actions may be needed.
Appendix 1, “Glass Breakage Investigation Worksheet and Checklist,” provides a simple means for
operators to record relevant information about any vial breakage they observe that will be valuable to
the initial evaluation of the failure.
Performing a detailed analysis of the breakage using fractography (fracture analysis) may be the best
way to determine or confirm the exact cause of a failure (1,2). A qualified fractographer can identify
the point of failure origin, providing clues to the type of surface defect and the cause, including the
material at contact. Fractography can also estimate the force that caused the failure. Fractography
requires that all, or as many of the fragments as possible, be collected for evaluation along with the
portion of the sample containing the fracture origin. As much as possible, fragments from different
individual vials should not be comingled; they should be treated carefully so as not to create secondary
defects on the broken glass. The collection and preservation of the samples should be conducted so as
to prevent any additional damage that may make the analysis more difficult or may obscure the true
cause of the breakage. Samples should be packaged carefully and properly identified. Depending on
the nature of the product and the containers, collecting samples of the units prior to, and following
the breakage to compare to the broken unit may help in determining the root cause (e.g., needle-strike
marks on vials following the broken unit, marks on vial necks from the capping process).
9.2 Root Cause Analysis
Proper analytics and root-cause determination can help identify and address systemic failures in the
glass handling process. If no trained fractographer is onsite, there are fractography services available to
outsource analysis of breakage samples. For further information on defects, including those that may
lead to breakage, refer to PDA Technical Report No. 43 (Revised 2013): Identification of Nonconformities
in Molded and Tubular Glass Containers for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing (3).
In cases where the breakage is witnessed or the cause is known, fracture analysis may provide further
information regarding the mechanics of the failure. However, if the cause of fracture is not known,
before adjustments are made to the line handling, it is very important to perform a thorough fracture
analysis to identify the exact cause of failure.
• Simple breakage patterns with a few large fragments sometimes suggest a significant flaw in the
container; the source of the flaw needs to be identified in order to be corrected. If the flaw at the
origin is related to handling, the damage source(s) must be isolated and eliminated. If the flaw is
related to forming or glass-melting, then the glass manufacturer must correct the problem.
• Complex breakage patterns with many small fragments suggest a high-energy break due to exces-
sive applied stresses. As such, a thorough review of the line would be recommended, and adjust-
ments should be made to reduce the magnitude of any forces found to be excessive.
To mitigate future incidents of glass breakage, root cause analysis may include:
• Fracture Analysis – Conducted by a qualified fractographer
• Supplier Evaluation – Review for atypical levels of incoming defects, dimensional conformity, etc.
• Incoming Supplies Inspection – Review alignment with supplier testing procedures and criteria
• Equipment and Handling – Assess areas prone to breakage, including glass-to-glass contact, glass-
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 37

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
to-metal contact, high back-pressure zones, transitions, and others; high-speed cameras are often
used to assess glass breakage sources on the line
• Line Clearance Procedures – Remove all open containers that could be impacted during a glass
breakage event and put in place robust line clearance procedures
• Training – Assess employee training and ensure that operations staff are trained to understand the
criticality of their response to glass breakage, factors that contribute to glass breakage, and the im-
pact on customers if defects are passed downstream
• Metrics – Review glass breakage frequency and locations of impacted lots
• Visual Inspection – Review visual inspection process and defect rates; visual inspection methods
should have defined capability for removal of glass defects and glass particles
• Packaging and Distribution – Review downstream processing for potential issues
9.3 Corrective and Preventive Actions
Corrective and preventive actions (CAPA) should be defined as part of the glass breakage investigation.
A list of typical CAPAs would include:
• Collaborate with supplier to eliminate the source of incoming defects and ensure high-quality supply
• Remediate sources of glass breakage found on the line, upstream and/or downstream
• Install active monitoring through a walk-down of the line or continuous operator-monitoring
• Enhance line-clearance procedures to eliminate the potential impact of glass-breakage events
• Install shielding to limit the impact of glass-breakage events
• Train operators, supervisors, and all staff to reinforce the importance of proper glass handling and
the appropriate response to glass-breakage events
• Improve detection methods (visual inspection)
9.4 References for Appendix II
1. Quinn, G P. NIST Recommended Practice 3. Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report
Guide: Fractography of Ceramics and Glasses. No. 43 (Revised 2013): Identification and Clas-
NIST: Gaithersburg, Md., 2016; Vol. Spec. Publ. sification of Nonconformities in Molded and
960-16e2, p 640. Tubular Glass Containers for Pharmaceutical
2. Wei, R. Fracture Mechanics: Integration of Me- Manufacturing: Covering Ampoules, Bottles,
chanics, Materials Science, and Chemistry. Cam- Cartridges, Syringes and Vials; PDA: Bethesda,
bridge University Press: New York, 2010; p 232. MD, 2013.
38 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
