8.0 Appendix I: Fundamentals of Glass Science
To know how to properly handle glass and the various rationales behind it, the fundamental chemical
and physical properties of glass need to be understood (1). The standard types of glass used for medical
purposes are soda-lime silicate and borosilicate (see Table 8.0-1). Borosilicate glass is a Type I glass rec-
ommended for use in parenteral packaging. Soda-lime silicate glass is a Type III glass recommended for
packaging nonparenteral drugs. Typical compositional ranges for pharmaceutical glasses are outlined in
various national standards, such as ISO 12775 and ASTM E438 (2-3). Both these standards describe two
types of borosilicate glass based on their coefficients of mean linear thermal expansion (see Section 8.1).
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 27

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 8.0-1 Overview of Glasses Used in Pharmaceutical Primary Packaging by Classification and Standards
Borosilicate
3.3 5.0 7.0 Quartz Soda-Lime-
Aluminosilicate Group Group Group Molded (Fused Silicate Tubular/
Tubular Tubular Tubular Silica) Molded
Commonly Available Compositions
SiO 70-80 80-82 72-75 70-74 65-70 > 99 70-75
2
BO – 12-13 9-11 5-8 9-11 – 0-1
2 3
AlO 6-12 2 5-7 4-6.5 3-7 – 2-4
2 3
NaO/KO 8-13 4 6-9 9-12 9-10 – 12-16
2 2
MgO/CaO/BaO 3-7 0 1-3 5-7 4-5 – 10-15
Physical Data
CTE [10-6 K-1 (20 °C;
Not
300 °C)] as specified 3.2-3.3 4.8-5.6 Not described 90-93
described
by ASTM E438
CTE [10-6 K-1 (20 °C;
Not
300 °C)] as specified 3.3 4.9-5.5 Not described 8-10
described
by ISO 12775
CTE [10-6 K-1 (20 °C;
300 °C)] as mainly 3.5-7.0 3.3 4.9-5.4 6.3-7.0 5.8-6.5 < 1.0 7.1-9.3
found on the market
Annealing Point (°C) by 550-
560 560 560-575 550-580 > 1150 525-540
ASTM E438 or common 570
8.1 Coefficient of Thermal Expansion
Most materials expand and contract upon heating and cooling, respectively. The extent of expansion
is dependent on the specific glass chemical composition. This expansion can be measured using tech-
niques such as push-rod dilatometry and is expressed as the change in length per temperature unit,
otherwise known as the coefficient of linear thermal expansion (CTE). The CTE for a glass is generally
reported as mean value over a specific temperature range (e.g., the slope of a linear fit over a defined
temperature range to a plot of expansion as a function of temperature is equal to the CTE). The higher
the CTE, the more the material will expand when heated and, conversely, the more it will shrink when
cooled. ASTM E228 and ISO 7991 provide guidance on measuring the CTE of glass (4-5).
Table 8.0-1 shows the different glass types used in parenteral packaging and their corresponding
CTEs. The CTE is also a main factor in determining the resistance of glass in a flawless, nonstrength-
ened state to sudden temperature changes. Increasing resistance to thermal shock is correlated with
decreasing CTE. The relationship between CTE and the temperature difference that can be endured
for different glasses is illustrated in Figure 8.1-1.
Soda-lime silicate glass with a wall thickness of 0.5 mm can withstand a maximum rapid temperature differ-
ence of approximately 110 °C without cracking. Standard borosilicate glass of the same thickness can endure
greater temperature differences. Borosilicate glasses having a CTE of 5.0 10-6 K-1 and 3.3 10-6 K-1 with a
wall thickness of 0.5 mm can withstand approximately 220 °C and 340 °C rapid temperature differences,
respectively, and are generally more resistant to thermal shock than soda-lime silicate glass. Due to the fact
that glass has poor thermal conductivity, a thinner wall thickness is recommended for thermal resistance
while a thicker wall will withstand greater mechanical loads. These calculations are theoretical, however, and
refer to glass in a flawless state. In practice, glass is never in a flawless state; therefore, the presence of surface
flaws may be more significant than the CTE alone in determining thermal shock resistance (6).
28 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 8.1-1 Comparison of Different Glass Types and Wall Thicknesses (according to CTE) (© SCHOTT AG)
8.2 Stress Inside the Glass
8.2.1 Melting and Solidification Behavior of Glass
The transition of a solid crystal to molten liquid occurs instantaneously at fixed melting temperatures,
T . In contrast, solid glass does not possess a melting temperature. Instead, the viscosity of glass chang-
m
es continuously as a function of temperature when going from the solid state to the liquid state. This
behavior can be illustrated using the Volume-Temperature (V-T) diagram shown in (Figure 8.2.1-1).
In order to form a typical glass, a molten liquid must be cooled below T without crystallizing, thereby
m
becoming a supercooled liquid. The point at which the slope of the V-T curve deviates from the su-
percooled liquid line marks one boundary of the “glass transformation range” (also called the “glass
transition range”). The intersection point of lines extrapolated from the solid and liquid sections of
the glass V-T curve is one definition of the glass transition temperature, T. Other descriptions for T
g g
exist within the glass community, generally within the context of the experimental technique used to
measure T such as dilatometry, calorimetry, or viscometry.
g
The T of a glass is dependent on chemical composition and is of practical importance in glassmak-
g
ing. In particular, the T lies between the annealing point and the strain point. The annealing point is
g
approximately located at the upper temperature boundary of the glass transformation range and can
be broadly defined as the temperature at which a majority of residual stress within a glass is dissipated
within several minutes. The strain point is approximately located at the lower temperature boundary of
the glass transformation and can be broadly defined as the temperature at which a majority of residual
stress within a glass is dissipated within several hours. In addition, the strain point marks a limit for
structural rearrangement of the glass (i.e., residual stress will not be removed to any significant extent
once a glass is cooled below the strain point). Knowledge of these temperature points are used to design
annealing schedules that remove a majority of forming-induced stress within a glass article.
8.2.2 Physical Definition of Stress
Physical stress (σ) can be defined as the force (F) per unit area of a material element (A). There are two
important types of stress in the pharmaceutical packaging handling process: tensile stress and compres-
sive stress (Figure 8.2.2-1). If the atomic positions are changed by an external force (i.e., a tensile or
compressive force), the atoms will attempt to return to their original, optimal distance by counteract-
ing the external force.
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 29

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 8.2.1-1 Volume-Temperature Diagram of a Crystal and of Glass
Figure 8.2.2-1 Tensile and Compressive Force Schematic (© SCHOTT AG)
48.2.2.1 Thermal Stress During Container Manufacturing
During the formation of a container, the raw material is melted, and a tube is drawn and cut into
lengths. The glass has a low, even stress distribution at this point in the process. Heat must be applied
again to the glass tube when forming a container (Figure 8.2.2.1-1). Forming the container employs
temperatures of 1000 °C or greater, which causes stress at the bottom and at the opening of the con-
tainer while the rest of the tubing remains cool. While heating up one part of a glass tube, the atoms
being heated increase their oscillation. As the heated part is cooled down quickly after the forming
process, the atoms do not have sufficient time to rearrange to their former structure. Rather, they are
stuck in the position they occupied at that time, and both tensile and compressive stress is created
(Figure 8.2.2.1-1).
30 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 8.2.2.1-1 Schematic Representation of Heating* and Forming of a Glass Tube into a Vial (© SCHOTT AG) (1)
*orange=heated atoms that are oscillating; gray=atoms that are not heated and thus stay in place; after cooling down,
compressive and tensile stress is created in the transition zones (yellow) of the heated and nonheated atoms
In order to restore the glass to a low-stress state, the entire vial is annealed by heating to about 20 °C
above T for some period of time and then slowly cooled in a strictly controlled process in an annealing
g
lehr (oven) (1). After the annealing process is complete, a majority of forming-induced stress in the
glass should be reduced to an acceptable level. In this manner, introducing thermal stress into the glass
and releasing it again does not lead to an accumulation of stress and weakening of the glass. However,
if this stress is not released properly, the risk of the glass breaking at the zone of tensile stress is greater.
The amount of residual stress can be determined by polariscopic measurement devices. Figure 8.2.2.1-
2 shows an example of an annealed versus an unannealed vial.
Except for the sealing of ampoules, residual thermal stress cannot be introduced in the filling process
as the temperature never exceeds the T of the glass.
g
Like the tubular process, stress is introduced into molded vials or bottles during the forming pro-
cess. A gob of molten glass is dropped into a mold and formed via a press-and-blow process or
blow-and-blow process. The vials must undergo an annealing process with controlled cooling to
relieve the stress.
If the temperature difference at a certain spot on the glass exceeds the particular thermal shock pa-
rameter of that glass, however, micro-cracks can result. Thermal shock occurs when a thermal gradient
Figure 8.2.2.1-2 Polarized Light Image of Annealed, Partially Annealed, and Not Annealed Vials
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 31

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
causes different parts of an object to expand by different amounts. This phenomenon can occur where
cold metal meets hot glass (e.g., in the container production process or in and after the depyrogenation
oven). For example, residual water from the washing process can cool the bottom of the vial in the
depyrogenation oven while the glass is heated from the outside. The thermal shock parameter depends
upon the particular glass composition, conductivity, and other factors (4).
During depyrogenation, the containers are typically heated to about 350 °C in order to reduce the
risk of possible pyrogen contamination. In some applications, the depyrogenation process is also used
to bake a silicone emulsion onto the glass surface (7). As this temperature range is below the typical
T temperatures of glasses used in pharmaceutical packaging, this process poses no risk in terms of
g
thermal stresses. It does, however, facilitate the introduction of scratches that decrease the mechanical
strength which is discussed in Section 8.3.
8.2.2.1.1 Exposure to Cold Temperatures
Glass will be exposed to temperatures of approximately -40 °C to -80 °C during lyophilization and
of -150 °C to -196 °C for cold storage, including cryopreservation. The lower the CTE, the more
stable the glass is in terms of thermal shock resistance (see Section 8.1), but the rate of change must
be extremely high for thermal shock breakage. Use of glass with lower CTEs may reduce the breakage
risk due to rapid rate of change; however, surface defects still play the major role in glass breakage.
Breakage during exposure to cold temperatures are primarily due to flaws present in the glass and the
outward pressure of the internal materials, not thermal stress (8). The fewer defects there are on the
bottom area and area of drug contact, the less likely the glass will break. Section 5.7.2 discusses stress
due to mechanical expansion of the drug product during freezing. The stress due to expansion of the
product should not be confused with thermal stress. Vial breakage during the lyophilization process is
usually due to the mechanical stress from the expanding solution rather than thermal stress. Likewise,
the thermal stress does not contribute to breakage when glass is immersed in liquid nitrogen, but the
sole cause of the failure is the outward expansion force of the frozen material.
8.3 Mechanical Strength of Glass
8.3.1 Ductile versus Brittle Materials
Along with thermal stress, physical load can introduce a great amount of stress onto glass. Breakage
will occur if the physical load is greater than the practical strength of the container.
Materials are generally differentiated into two failure mode categories: ductile and brittle. Ductile
materials, like metals (and some polymer materials), deform under tensile stress; that is, they undergo
a plastic deformation (changing their shape) rather than breaking immediately. During plastic defor-
mation, the molecules in the material are able to move. This provides the material’s ability to bend
before breaking.
Brittle materials break before the molecules in the material can move sufficiently to support bending.
The molecules are literally torn apart in place. Brittle materials, such as glasses, are unable to undergo
plastic deformation and therefore, break abruptly.
8.3.2 Practical Strength
For brittle materials like glass, practical strength depends on such parameters as geometric aspects of
the glass piece, flaws inside and on the surface of the glass, residual stress inside the glass, and the inte-
rior and exterior mechanical loads on the glass. An equation to determine practical strength for brittle
materials, developed by A. A. Griffith, is shown in Figure 8.3.2-1 in a simplified manner (9). The
stress intensity factor is the estimation of how the size and geometry of the flaw amplifies the applied
tensile stress at the tip of the flaw.
32 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
σ = stress (induced by an applied force)
Y = geometric factor (which considers the location of the defect
K = σ • Y√c
among other factors)
√c = critical dimension (e.g., depth of defect)
Figure 8.3.2-1 Stress intensity Factor (K) According to Griffith Theory
The stress (σ) applied to the glass can result from an impact with a material harder or equally as hard
as glass (e.g., metal). Stress can also come from inside the container, such as when internal pressure
is built up during lyophilization, from vertical pressure, for example, during crimping, or from side
pressure, for instance, a jammed screw feed, loaded accumulator table, or back-up on the conveyor.
The geometric factor (Y) takes into consideration the flaw geometries, including the relative location
of the flaw (e.g., through thickness crack, edge/surface flaw in “V” shape, corner flaw in “V” shape,
surface “U” shape or semicircular flaw).
The last parameter, critical dimension (c), describes the geometric aspects of the defect, such as the
relation of the defect depth to the radius of the flaw tip; the larger the radius of the flaw tip, the more
the glass is weakened. A very deep flaw will lower the glass strength much more than a surface scratch.
Ultimately, breakage only occurs if both the stress and the flaw or stress riser are present in tandem,
and the combined phenomena exceed the practical strength of the particular piece of (7). This explains
why realistically predicting the practical strength of different glasses is difficult. An extrapolation from
empirical measurements is the closest estimate that can be made, which would be valid only for the
measured batch. However, a well-controlled manufacturing process should be able to produce vials
within a predictable range of mechanical performance.
8.3.3 Tensile and Compressive Stress
Glass always breaks at the point of tensile stress location. In Figure 8.3.3-1, (a) shows a downward
force, e.g., capper, and (b) shows a side or squeeze-force, e.g., a backed-up conveyor or screw feed with
(a) (b)
Figure 8.3.3-1 Vial with Compressive and Tensile Stress Areas (© SCHOTT AG)
Figure (a) has force applied to sealing surface of the vial creating tensile stress in the outer surface of the neck and heel
and compressive stress in the side wall. Figure (b) has force applied to the side wall creating tensile stress on the interior
surface at the exterior load location and exterior surface 90 degrees from load. Long Blue arrows are compressive stress
and short orange arrows are tensile stress. Large red arrows represent load forces.
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 33

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
their respective compressive and respective tensile stress areas. When compressive stress is exerted from
one side, it always induces tensile stress in certain other places, but these areas of tensile stress are not
always clearly detectable.
8.3.4 Surface Condition and its Impact on Practical Strength
During the lifecycle of a glass container, it passes through a number of handling steps. Any of these
steps can create varying degrees of surface discontinuities, like scratches or even microfissures in the
glass, that may decrease the functional strength of that particular glass container. Only in combination
with a specific stress on the glass, however, does breakage occur. Figure 8.3.4-1 presents an example
of the relative decrease in practical strength (measured as break force) due to surface discontinuities
inflicted during handling.
Break force, strength, or failure probability measurements can be used to determine the extent that
surface discontinuities and physical impact result in decreased practical strength. In certain cases, the
effects of different handling processes can be determined by these measurements.
Figure 8.3.4-1 Example of Decreasing Glass Practical Strength by Surface Flaws Induced through Pharmaceutical
Processing (1) (© SCHOTT AG)
Figure 8.4-1 Visualization of the Reaction of Water Vapor from Humidity and the Glass Surface (© SCHOTT AG)
34 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
8.4 Adsorption Layer on the Glass
When glass is freshly heated or cleaned, the surface reacts with adsorbates from ambient air (e.g.,
water, hydrocarbons) that then saturate the surface. Figure 8.4-1 shows a schematic of the reaction of
water with a glass surface. Initially, the water is only adsorbed, and a monolayer is developed. After a
few weeks, however, the water diffuses deeper into the surface (10). This adsorption layer acts like a
cover on the glass and protects it from scratches, and the more developed layer can better protect the
container from scratches. This protective layer can be removed by heating the glass (e.g., depyrogena-
tion oven); a monolayer will evaporate more quickly under dry air/heat conditions. As the kinetics of
reestablishing the protective layer are very slow; submerging the glass in water will not accelerate the
reaction.
This phenomenon of building up and evaporating the protective layer is equally valid for all glasses.
This also infers that scratches and sticking behavior is a matter of glass handling rather than the com-
position of glass itself.
The water layer not only protects the glass from scratches, but it also plays a significant role as a lu-
bricant, decreasing the friction between glass containers or between glass and metal. This property
becomes especially important during the filling process as it can limit the number of scratches that the
containers may receive, potentially allowing an increase in the speed of the filling line.
8.5 Chemical Strengthening
Chemical strengthening by ion exchange creates a residual compression layer on the inner and outer
glass vial surfaces that resists the applied tensile stresses required to propagate flaws. It can also hinder
minor to moderate surface damage, blocking the routes along which cracks could otherwise propa-
gate and, thereby, prevent breakage. Chemical strengthening can be performed on aluminosilicate,
borosilicate, or soda-lime silicate glass containers with sufficient available sodium ions to increase
their mechanical strength. Because the glass tubing is heated in the container formation process, any
chemical process must be performed on the final container, not the glass tubing. To avoid thermal
shock, the empty glass containers are gradually heated to the bath temperature before immersion in a
potassium melt (e.g., KNO ) where an ion exchange reaction takes place. In this reaction, sodium ions
3
(Na+) from the near-surface regions are exchanged for potassium ions (K+). Potassium ions are larger
in diameter than sodium ions (K+’s radius is roughly 0.38 Å larger than that of Na+), leading to com-
pressive forces that let the glass withstand higher external loads. At the end of the designated immer-
sion time, the containers are removed from the bath, allowed to cool, undergo thorough salt-removal
process, and are then dried. This surface compressive stress creates an additional barrier to prevent
the formation and propagation of checks as well as suppressing the creation of visible glass particles.
Chemical strengthening also improves the overall robustness of the vial, reducing the probability of
breakage from high-stress loading and particulate generation from fragmentation.
Applying an additional protective coating to the outer surface of the glass container, as discussed in
Section 6.3, will lower its COF and minimize surface damage during frictive sliding contact.
8.6 References for Appendix I
1. Boltres, B. When Glass Meets Pharma: Insights 3. ASTM International. ASTM E438 - 92(2018)
About Glass as Primary Packaging Material. ECV Standard Specification for Glasses in Laboratory
- Editio Cantor: Amsterdam, 2015; p 80. Apparatus; ASTM: West Conshohocken, Pa., 2018.
2. International Organization for Standardization. 4. ASTM International. ASTM E228 - 11(2016)
ISO 12775:1997 Guidelines on Types of Glass of Standard Test Method for Linear Thermal Expan-
Normal Bulk-Production Composition and their sion of Solid Materials With a Push-Rod Dila-
Test Methods; ISO: Geneva, 1997. tometer; ASTM: West Conshohocken, Pa., 2016.
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 35

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5. International Organization for Standardization. als during Lyophilization. PDA J Pharm Sci and
ISO 7991:1987 Glass — Determination of Coef- Tech 2019, 73 (1), 30-38.
ficient of Mean Linear Thermal Expansion; ISO: 9. Zehnder, A. Griffith Theory of Fracture. In Ency-
Geneva, 1987. clopedia of Tribology, Wang, Q; Chung, Y, Eds.
6. Wang, Q, et al. Thermal Shock Effect on the Springer: Boston, 2013.
Glass Thermal Stress Response and Crack Propa- 10. Birch, W, et al. 13 - Wettability Techniques to
gation. Procedia Engineering 2013, 62, 717-24. Monitor the Cleanliness of Surfaces. In Develop-
7. Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report ments in Surface Contamination and Cleaning:
No. 3 (Revised 2013): Validation of Dry Heat Fundamentals and Applied Aspects, Kohli, R;
Processes Used for Depyrogenation and Steriliza- Mittal, K, Eds. William Andrew Inc.: Norwich,
tion; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2013; p 40. NY, 2008; pp 693-723.
8. Machak, D; Smay, G. Failure of Glass Tubing Vi-
