5.0 Glass Vial Handling Process
The glass-handling process begins at the glass vial manufacturer and continues through the final pack-
aging at the pharmaceutical company and shipment to their customer. As shown in Figure 5.0-1,
numerous transfers take place within that process. Considerations for glass handling must be taken
into account for the transfers between process steps which are outlined in Figure 5.0-1.
Some points to consider in transfers to and from the warehouse include ensuring the hand truck or lift
wheels are in good condition, the operators are properly trained, the facility floor is in good condition
with no potholes or deep cracks, and the floor of the transition from room to room is level.
Once vials are in the filling process, many types of transfers occur such as tray loading (flipping) or
unloading onto the washer loader. Ensuring the proper fit for off-loading trays and the proper align-
ment of the transfer trays will mitigate the risk of damage to the vials. During transfer, “pushing” on
WAREHOUSE MANUAL
RECEIVE AND MANUAL DISASSEMBLE FOR PULL SAMPLES FOR UNPACK FOR
TO LINE WAREHOUSE TRANSFER SAMPLE SELECTION INSPECTION TRANSFER TO LINE TRANSFER
TRANSFER TO LINE
WASH
ASEPTIC (MAY BE BY 3RD DEPYROGENATE/ STOPPER
INSPECT AND LOAD FILL
PROCESSING PARTY PRIOR TO STERILIZE PLACEMENT
RECEIPT)
MANUAL
TRANSFER
FREEZE DRY/ TERMINAL
CAPPING AFTER FILL WASH TO AND
LYOPHILIZATION STERILZATION
FROM
STORAGE
MANUAL MANUAL
POST FILL TRANSFER TRANSFER
AUTOMATED MANUAL RELEASE SAMPLING
INSPECTION INSPECTION TO AND INSPECTION AND INSPECTION TO AND
AND ASSEMBLY FROM FROM
STORAGE STORAGE
MANUAL
SECONDARY SECONDARY TRANSFER WAREHOUSING AND
LABELING
PACKAGING PACKAGING TO SHIPPING
STORAGE
Figure 5.0-1 Generic Glass Vial Handling Process
10 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
glassware during the transfer can create excessive back pressure, which should be avoided. Any dam-
aged vials should be discarded promptly throughout the process.
Caution should be taken to ensure suitable materials of construction are used for transfers on the fill-
ing line for belts, guide rails, dead plates, screw feeds, and star wheels.
5.1 Packaging for Transport and Storage
The glass-handling process begins at the glass vial manufacturer, where the pack-out configuration
must be specified to minimize the risk of damage or breakage during transit or shipment from a suppli-
er to a pharmaceutical firm. These configurations should be standardized for each container type and
size: shrink-wrapped module type with glass-to-glass contact or a tray with or without cell partitions or
separators. The number of containers that are held in a module or tray and their arrangement is typi-
cally driven by the infeed of the pharmaceutical processing equipment. The packaging format is also
sized to maximize pallet space. Where modules are used, ensure proper packing and shrink-wrapping
of the module (e.g., vial alignment, tightness of shrink-wrap) and avoid flexing and module-to-module
impact during handling which may cause glass-to-glass abrasive damage.
The remaining aspect of the pack-out configuration should include a review of such factors as: the set-
back of the load from the edge of the pallet; module-stacking configuration; need for corner protection
and straps; need for slip sheets between layers; method of securing the load to the pallet; and total
height of the pallet. Double-stacking of pallets, especially during transit, should be avoided.
5.2 Integrated Line with Multiple Transfer Points
To ensure the pharmaceutical processing equipment is designed appropriately, collaboration with ma-
chine manufacturers is recommended. Where equipment from different machine manufacturers is
used, ensure that each machine is properly integrated into the line. An appropriate risk assessment
should be conducted during the machine design and line integration. Typical transfer points at the
pharmaceutical company that should be evaluated include belt transfers, guide rails, dead plates, screw
feeds, star wheels, and pick-and-place devices.
Vials can be automatically or manually pushed from a tray onto an accumulation table, where they
are transferred to an infeed screw. To ensure the proper feeding of vials into the screw, proper spacing
between vials, which is determined by belt speed before the screw, is important. The number of vials
that back up prior to the screw should be kept to a minimum to reduce glass-to-glass contact between
vials that could potentially cause damage.
Machine designers endeavor to remove potential negative impacts to the vial; however, not all risks
can be removed. With the transport of vials, abrasion to the body is always a risk; therefore, proper
materials should be used to reduce friction on the bottom, heel, and body of the vial. The greatest risk
in vial damage comes during the transition from infeed screw to star wheel or from star wheel to star
wheel (or inspection turret). Proper timing of the star wheels is critical, as is precision machining of
size-change parts and low-backlash gearing or clutches. If the vial is not handled smoothly, with care
taken to reduce impact forces, the vial body may experience excessive stress, which can cause breakage,
cracks, or other damage.
A risk assessment should be conducted to properly design the process and materials for collecting
downed vials that are ejected from the line if they may be reintroduced into the line. The assessment
should determine the appropriate drop height, the amount of cushion or padding required, the fre-
quency of emptying the eject bin, and the level of inspection required prior to reintroducing the vials to
the line. The edges of the eject bin should be rounded to avoid sharp edges that could damage the vials.
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 11

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.2.1 Accumulators
Accumulators are used between segments of a filling line where the throughput speeds of the specific
units of equipment may vary or be intermittent, or where one unit may be more likely to experience
periods of down time (e.g., after depyrogenation and before filling, or after stoppering but before cap-
ping). Accumulators are also used for loading and off-loadings trays at the beginning, during transfers,
or at the end of line (e.g., after lyophilization and before capping, or after terminal sterilization but
before labeling).
Accumulators may be of several types, including rotary tables (Figure 5.2.1-1), push (back pressure),
and bi-flow.
5.2.1.1 Key Parts of the Process and Potential Impact on the Containers
The accumulation of vials often leads to abrasion damage to the glass surface. This happens especially
where large numbers of vials are tightly gathered and the vials continue to revolve and rotate against one
another, or where one or more vials become trapped in an eddy of the flow and remain for a long pe-
riod of time. This type of damage is typically evidenced by circumferential scuff or scratch rings. These
rings are usually observed at contact areas just below the shoulder and above the heel of the vial (Figure
5.2.1.1-1). While every surface discontinuity affects glass strength, the significance of these, relative to
the potential for container failure, should be evaluated through the process described in Section 5.4.
The type of damage shown in Figure 5.2.1.1-1 may occur wherever rotary tables are used, but it is
most prevalent when these tables are used immediately after depyrogenation. Depyrogenation dehy-
drates the glass surface, eliminating its natural lubricity and exacerbating friction damage. In addition
to damaging the glass surface, visible and subvisible glass particulates may be generated in the process.
5.2.1.2 Points to Consider
As good general practice, the table should be properly sized for the planned line speeds and large enough
so that it is not loaded to more than one-third of its capacity. Additionally, directional flow control devices
should be engineered to prevent eddies (opposite circular flows) in the flow of vials.
Figure 5.2.1-1 Example of a Rotary Accumulation Table
12 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.2.1.1-1 Abrasion rings
Guides and rails should be constructed of suitable, nonabrasive plastic materials. Transfers onto the
table should prevent any impact, either glass-to-glass or glass-to-metal, especially at the heel of the vial.
To facilitate this, the turntable itself should be slightly lower than the dead plate or belt from which
the vials are being received. This difference, however, must be small enough that it does not cause vials
to tip over while still allowing for a smooth transfer.
Monitoring and controlling the vial accumulators can mitigate the risk of damage to the glass surface,
and limiting the number of vials allowed to accumulate on the table to a practical minimum (i.e., a
number of vials that allows for the process to proceed efficiently yet avoids overcrowding and damage
to the vials) is recommended.
Throughput speeds should be as consistent as possible for each segment of the line, reducing the need
for accumulation. When this is not possible, the line should be regulated (i.e., sections stopped and
started) to minimize accumulation. This may be accomplished with procedures and training or by
integrating the control systems of the various segments of the line. Accordingly, the movement of vials
on the table should also stop if the line itself is stopped. This will preclude excessive accumulation of
vials onto the table.
If turntables or accumulation tables must be used, they should be designed to minimize the momen-
tum of the containers (e.g., low speed settings) in order to reduce the level of forces between contain-
ers, thus reducing the occurrence of abrasions in the glass and generation of the glass particles. Using
low speed settings would also reduce the level of fallen containers at transition points.
5.3 Vial Washing
In parenteral packaging, glass vials are typically washed prior to being sterilized for filling. Vial washing
is conducted in order to ensure removal of such materials as bacterial toxins, chemical substances, and
particulates so that the product meets expectations of identity, purity, quality, and safety.
5.3.1 Washing Machines
Washing machines are available in various designs, the most common being linear tunnel and rotary
(Figure 5.3.1-1). Vials are washed with either a diving spray nozzle or a stationary, nonpenetrating
spray nozzle. When using diving spray nozzles, where a needle enters the vial and sprays the vial from
the bottom up, there is a risk of needle strikes on the bottom of the vial, the inside wall, or the finish
of the vial that could result in a bent needle, glass damage, and particulate generation (glass chips).
The risk of vial strikes increases when multiple vials must be aligned with an array of needles for simul-
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 13

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.3.1-1 Diving Nozzle Rotary Washing Machine
taneous washing. The process parameters, including needle depth and centering, must be adapted for
varying vial sizes or designs (10-11). Needles should be routinely inspected for straightness to prevent
needle strikes. Some newer washing machines can be equipped with needle strike alarms to aid in risk
management.
For washers that use buckets to hold the vials, inverted or double-stacked vials (two vials within the
same bucket) are vulnerable to breakage due to needle strikes. Automated systems that detect and eject
upside-down vials or detect double-stacked vials can be incorporated to mitigate this risk. Manual
intervention procedures to address vial orientation issues may be needed for some washing systems.
Automatic tray loader/unloaders, conveyers, and infeed-outfeed systems keep human interaction to a
minimum.
For rotary washers, water jet pressure should be moderated to ensure vials are not forcibly ejected from
the grippers by an excessive jet stream.
In limited applications, batch washers are used to wash vials one tray or module at a time. Loading
plates and corresponding washing needles must be matched to the respective tray configuration and
vial size to avoid glass damage or breakage during loading. A visual check and preventive maintenance
plan should be in place to identify bent or damaged needles that may pose a risk for needle strikes dur-
ing washing. Care should be taken during loading and unloading to prevent glass damage or breakage
(e.g., when inverting the vials from the loading plate onto a stainless-steel tray).
5.4 Dry Heat Sterilization and Depyrogenation
Dry heat sterilization and depyrogenation of the vials occurs immediately after washing and is usually
accomplished using dry heat. Dry heat ovens may take the form of tunnels or batch ovens. The ovens
often serve as the transfer portals from the preparation area into the aseptic area. Vials are usually ster-
ilized at ≥ 160 °C for up to two hours and depyrogenated at approximately 325 °C for at least thirty
minutes, but the times and temperatures can vary depending on the specific process requirements
(12–13).
14 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
These two processes may increase the coefficient of friction (COF) of the glass surface and make the
vials more susceptible to abrasion. This is of particular concern if the vials will be subjected to glass-to-
glass or glass-to-metal contact, such as on a rotary accumulation table. This type of friction damage is
typically evidenced by scuff rings or scratches on the vials (Figure 5.2.1.1-1). This damage is usually
observed just below the shoulder and above the heel of the vials. Though small and relatively minor in
appearance, scratches and scuffs can potentially contribute to breakage under sufficient mechanical or
thermal stresses further downstream. In addition to damaging the glass surface, visible and subvisible
glass particulates may also be generated in the process. The longer the time the vials are subjected to high
temperatures, the more profound the increase of the COF. In a case where vials are in contact with one
another, one vial may bond with the surface of another vial, causing them to stick together. When these
vials come apart, distinct vertical marks will be apparent (i.e., stuck marks) (Figure 5.4-1). These marks
may act as stress concentrators and fracture origins as the vials are subjected to subsequent loads during
downstream processing or handling.
5.4.1 Continuous Convection Tunnel
After the air-drying process, the glass vials (either in single file or in rows) pass onto a conveyor belt
over a dead plate. Back pressure from the continuous loading of the belt pushes the material onto the
conveyor.
Ideally, the conveyer belt should be operated in a “pull mode” and run at a slightly higher speed than
the feed rate from the washer in order to maintain a small space (e.g., ~1 mm) between the rows of
vials. This transition is sometimes supported by a pushing device to complete the transfer from the
washer to depyrogenation tunnel.
Maintaining a minimal downward transition of the vials is recommended to reduce the probability of
damaging the heel region.
Vials are then moved through the convection tunnel on the conveyor at a predetermined rate. Tun-
nels typically include three heat zones: a preheat zone, a hot zone (where the glassware is exposed to
sufficient temperature for sufficient time to effect sterilization/depyrogenation), and a cooling zone
(Figure 5.4.1-1). Depyrogenation guidelines are presented in PDA Technical Report No. 3 Validation
of Dry Heat Processes Used for Depyrogenation and Sterilization (12).
Figure 5.4-1 Stuck Marks
Technical Report No. 87 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 15

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.4.1-1 Typical Depyrogenation Tunnel Layout with a Preheat Zone (1), a Hot Zone (2), and a Cooling Zone (3)
The vials are then pushed out of the tunnel, using slight back pressure, across a dead plate, and onto
the next stage of the process by an accumulator.
5.4.2 Points to Consider
As best practice, containers should be dry prior to exposure to depyrogenation temperatures (Zone 2
in Figure 5.4.1-1), as residual moisture may attack the interior surface of the glass causing etching or
glass corrosion (12).
In the event downstream processes come to a stop, it should also halt additional vials from entering
the tunnel to prevent overloading, while allowing the in-process batch to complete the validated depy-
rogenation cycle.
Viewing windows are recommended so the entire depyrogenation area can be observed for evidence
of such overcrowding as containers riding on top of the bulk material and fallen or broken containers.
Although the glass structure is not impacted directly by the temperatures used for depyrogenation,
leaving the containers in the tunnel beyond the validated depyrogenation process time is not recom-
mended (see Section 5.5).
The temperatures achieved during depyrogenation remove the protective water skin from the contain-
ers, leaving them more vulnerable to surface damage, such as scratches. As a result, the exiting contain-
ers may be more prone to damage in general and have a higher COF than prior to depyrogenation (see
Appendix I, Section 8.4).
5.4.3 Batch Depyrogenation Oven
Another method for dry heat sterilization and depyrogenation is the use of a depyrogenation oven,
which allows for processing of smaller rather than continuous processing. Trays of vials are loaded into
the oven on racks and depyrogenated according to a validated cycle. The trays are typically unloaded
under a Grade A (ISO 5) unidirectional airflow and then transported to the vial-filling line. Due to
the absence of the protective water skin, consideration should be given during loading, unloading,
and transport to limit movement of the glass vials within the stainless-steel trays to prevent damage
or breakage.
16 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 87

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.5 Vial Filling
Drug product is added to vials at a filling station. Vials are transferred to the filling station after wash-
ing and depyrogenation by a conveyor belt, with a star wheel or by a gripper that picks up the vial by
the neck. Vials are filled with a filling needle by either a fixed nozzle or a diving nozzle apparatus. Once
filled, the vials move along the line to the stoppering station where they are stoppered either by direct
placement (where the stopper is picked up by vacuum) or by a rotating wheel.
5.5.1 Impacts
Vials transported by means of a conveyor belt experience glass-to-glass contact as they move along the
line, which can result in abrasions to the glass. Vials that are transported by a star wheel or by gripper
have glass-to-glass contact only at the vial gate, where they accumulate, and where damage can occur.
For filling lines that use grippers (i.e., pick and place) to move vials, the gripper configuration and the
amount of pressure exerted on the vial are critical and should be compatible with the vial neck size.
Ideally, grippers should be constructed of plastic rather than metal.
Needle installation and alignment should be verified at set-up. A needle strike may occur when a filling
needle is misaligned with the vial being filled; the needle strikes the top of the vial and can chip the
vial and/or bend the needle. Needles can also become bent when striking vials that have offset finishes.
Damage in the lip region of the vial can go unnoticed through inspection as the stopper and seal can
mask the damage. Regular inspection during the production batch should assess misalignment of and
damage to filling needles. Vial attributes such as leaners (slanted bottoms), bent or offset finishes, or
small inner diameter, can increase the risk of needle strikes.
During weight checks, vials can be damaged or broken when transferred from the filling line to the
weigh station. Vacuum-assisted vial grippers can reduce the incidence of damage but can also be im-
pacted by particulate matter if the vials are not adequately clean.
5.5.2 Points to Consider
The filling process can be improved to further reduce damage to the vials by replacing the metal with
plastic throughout the line. Damage to the vial due to needle strikes can be reduced by changing the
stainless-steel filling needles to disposable plastic. In contrast to the impact from a metal needle, a
plastic filling needle would fail or bend before the vial would break.
5.6 Stopper Placement
At the stoppering station, the stoppers can be placed on the vials either directly (pick-and-place) or by
a rotating wheel. The risk of incurring damage during the stoppering process is very low as there is no
glass-to-glass contact during stoppering. Any breakage observed during stoppering is most likely due
to damage that occurred upstream.
