Client Management
[PAGE 106]
Page 2
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 10
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
1
Client Types
Personal Computers (PCs) in the form of stationary PC units, laptops, or ‘hand-helds’ are used by companies in a
variety of roles with distinctly different risk profiles depending upon their use. Those that are connected to the
company’s network may be prepared and maintained according to a set of client types, e.g., unrestricted, restricted,
or controlled as described in Section 5 of this Guide.
As part of the client preparation process, companies may choose to prepare and verify installation scripts, or use an
image-generating tool, which mirrors an image of a released software configuration onto PCs.
2
Client Management
The Client Management group or designated individual maintains the expertise and resources required to provide
adequate client management services to the company. Some of the main responsibilities of the unit are:
•
to acquire formal approval by QA and management representatives of significant changes
•
to apply change controls in conformance with procedures (see a Section 6 and Appendix 7 of this Guide)
•
to maintain controlled standards for approved hardware and software components, and settings in conformance
with security requirements and IT Code of Conduct
•
to test PC platforms and corporate office packages to ensure an effective and stable client user environment
•
to test or qualify clients against all corporate applications
•
to provide and verify installation images or scripts conforming to standards to enable cloning of clients
•
to detect and correct errors in both hardware and software
•
to assemble documents and installation manuals
•
to advise and instruct client supporters and others
•
to install security patches on clients
•
to scan all standard clients for virus
•
to ensure timely update of anti-virus software and signature files
•
to administrate centralized maintenance processes
•
receipt and registration of all IT equipment
•
to manage system time (if not managed by servers) (see Section 5 of this Guide)
[PAGE 107]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 3
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 10
•
installation and set-up of standard clients
•
before delivery of the PC or other equipment, to conduct prescribed tests to ensure that all installation and
configuration matters are in order
•
to implement handling of used hardware for recycling
•
to provide User support
•
to provide a general contact to suppliers
3
PC Platforms
PCs should possess enough computing power and connectivity to run the client software and other software that is
required by the applications. The company will usually have some basic requirements for specific hardware as a
result of long term commercial agreements with specific suppliers. Care should be taken to ensure that the chosen
PC brands conform to standards for protection against Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) and Electromagnetic
Compatibility (EMC) and other applicable codes.
4
Operating System Platform
Client modifications may be managed centrally by the Client Management Group or locally by the user or a local
administrator. Modifications to a set of clients have a greater risk level than modifications to a single instance. All
modifications should be managed carefully according to SOPs.
As is the case for servers, the configuration of critical items of the client operating system can be grouped into three
categories:
•
manufacturer supplied default parameters that remain unchanged
•
Manufacturer supplied default parameters that will be altered to address specific company requirements for the
client. These parameters also may be changed later during the client life time to optimize performance
•
parameters that are supplied blank, and should be populated by the company, and without which the client may
not work
[PAGE 108]
Page 4
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 10
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
5
User Modifications
Company policies may dictate whether clients should be restricted from user modification (see Section 5 of this
Guide). Many applications, especially those that are GxP regulated, will require that PCs running thick client
software be restricted, or even controlled in order to obtain the necessary confidence that data is not lost or
modified in an unauthorized way. Other application (system/data) owners may have similar considerations.
PCs running thin client software are less prone to causing data modifications or availability problems, e.g., when
using Web-based client technology.
6
Images or Installation Scripts
Client management often includes the creation and maintenance of images or standard installation scripts or both.
This ensures easier management of client preparation processes and demonstration of control.
Besides the operating system and standard office packages, an image could include the company’s most used client
software rendering subsequent requests for installations unnecessary. This approach would improve reinstallation
time, but require more time supporting the image, and although user accounts would not be created on a default
basis, security policies could be violated.
Before an image can be released for use, it should be tested against the relevant applications and hardware used in
the company.
7
Patch Management
Security patches to be installed on clients should be tested for compatibility with the operating system, office
software packages, and client software. A test lab with instances of the hardware and software used in the company
should be available, and pilot installations in a no-impact live environment should be made as part of the
qualification plan. This should discover potential problems with the patch in the live environment before general
rollout.
Besides test requirements, security patch information from the supplier should be made available to the
organization. This will ensure awareness of the process and allow owners of critical business applications outside
the scope of the PC management group to conduct tests before rollout (see Appendix 6 of this Guide).
[PAGE 109]
Appendix 11
Network Management
[PAGE 110]
Page 2
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 11
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
1
Introduction
The current dominating network technology is based on internet standards, including the protocols: Internet
Protocol (IP) and Transmission Control Protocol (TCP). Consequently, this Appendix focuses on providing
recommendations based on those standards. Companies that use other technology may still find useful guidance in
this Appendix if they look at the information provided as concepts rather than specific for a single technology.
All quantitative measures provided in this Appendix are derived from actual situations and are meant to assist
companies, and not to prescribe certain absolutes.
2
Goal
The goal of network management is to identify and employ a variety of tools, applications, and devices to assist
managers in monitoring and maintaining network performance in support of other platforms and services.
3
Network Management
When establishing the infrastructure network management process, the network administrator should break down
the work process into logically separated steps as indicated below. These steps should enable the company to
implement controls commensurate with the size and complexity of the infrastructure, and with the risks associated
with the network or network segment in question.
Provisioning and Installation
•
Planning
•
Design
•
Analysis
•
Facilities Installation and Maintenance
•
Network Installation
•
Data Gathering and Analysis
Operations and Maintenance
•
Trouble Ticket Administration
•
Routine Network Tests
[PAGE 111]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 3
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 11
Network Operations Center
•
Upgrades
(NOC)
•
Event/Log Management
•
Fault Management/Service Restoration
•
Change Management
•
Configuration Management
•
Performance Management
•
Security Management
•
Account Management
•
Report Management
4
Network Provisioning and Installation
Network provisioning involves the following tasks:
•
Network planning and design is the responsibility of the network engineering group which keeps track of new
technologies and introduces them as needed in conformance with applicable standards and company
requirements.
•
Identification of bottlenecks through analysis of traffic and performance data provided by the Network Operation
Center (NOC) and introduction of modifications to the network to optimize the use of the equipment.
•
Keeping track of new network management tools and introducing them where they would be efficient for
gathering statistics and showing trends of traffic patterns for tuning and planning purposes.
5
Network Operation Center (NOC)
The function of the NOC, typically headed by the overall network administrator, is to assume responsibility for the
daily operation of the network. The responsibility of the NOC is to provide network services in conformance with
SLAs and other applicable requirements and standards, this includes:
•
establishing a network management system, e.g., based on SNMP
•
ensuring that the gathering of data for performance, tuning, and accounting purposes is functioning and kept
current
•
restoration of faulty services
[PAGE 112]
Page 4
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 11
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
•
analyzing logs and assuring that all manageable network devices respond as required, e.g., via Syslog, an
industry standard used to log information for network devices
•
assuring that there are current and easily available configuration backups of all network equipment as well as a
documented trace of all configuration changes
•
providing management with reports and statistics (KPIs) to ensure that the network is performing optimally and
the SLAs are within the agreed limits
•
ensuring that approved security procedures are followed by tracking all network accesses and by securing that
only permitted access to the network is allowed
•
applying tools and procedures to ensure that the availability (defined by different parameters such as latency,
bandwidth, and availability) is maintained by analyzing trends, planning upgrades, performing preventive
maintenance, and fault correction
6
Common Network Protocols and Tools
The following common protocols and tools can be used to support effective network management.
6.1
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP/RFC1157)
Network management system contains two primary elements:
1. Manager
2. Agents
The manager is the console through which the network administrator performs network management functions,
often accompanied by data management systems to store configuration information, logs of alarms/alerts (‘traps’ in
SNMP context), and performance data history.
Agents are the entities that interface to the actual device being managed. Bridges, hubs, routers, or network servers
are examples of managed devices that contain managed objects.
SNMP allows managers and agents to communicate for the purpose of accessing these objects.
The SNMP has become the de facto standard for internet work management. Because it is a simple solution,
requiring little code to implement, suppliers can easily build SNMP agents into their products. SNMP also separates
the management architecture from the architecture of the hardware devices, which broadens the base of multi-
supplier support.
6.2
Syslog (RFC3164)
This protocol has been used for the transmission of event notification messages across networks for many years. Its
value to operations and management has led it to be ported to many other operating systems as well as being
embedded into many other networked devices.
[PAGE 113]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 5
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 11
In its most simplistic terms, the Syslog protocol provides a transport to allow a machine to send event notification
messages across IP networks to event message collectors, also known as Syslog servers.
One of the fundamental tenets of the Syslog protocol and process is its simplicity. No stringent coordination is
required between the transmitters and the receivers.
There are usually many devices sending messages to relatively fewer collectors. This compilation process allows an
administrator to aggregate messages into relatively few repositories.
6.3
Remote Monitoring (RMON) (RFC 1757)
Remote network monitoring devices, often called monitors or probes, are instruments that exist for the purpose of
managing and/or monitoring a network. A company may employ many of these devices, up to one per network
segment, to manage its networks.
RMON also appears as a software capability that is added to the software of certain network equipment, as well as
software applications that could run on servers or clients. Despite the variety of these approaches, the RMON
capability serves as a dedicated network management resource available for activities ranging from long-term data
collection and analysis or for ad-hoc fire fighting.
7
Network Performance Metrics
Table A11.1 represents actual settings for a network segment and may be used as guidance for a company to decide
on its own metrics and limits.
Table A11.1: Example Network Performance Limits
Network Metrics
Unit
Alert Limit
Action Limit
Average load over 24 hrs
%
>10
>20
Peak load
%
>40
>80
Collision rate
% of net time
>0.1
>1.0
Discards (lost packages)
% of net time
>0.1
>0.5
BCast/MCast (simultaneous
% of net time
>2
>5
transmission to many receivers)
Switch CPU-load
% of max
>50
>70
A monitoring frequency of one to four times a month should be considered; in larger organizations, monitoring
would be automated and run almost continuously.
[PAGE 115]
Appendix 12
Glossary
[PAGE 116]
Page 2
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 12
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Glossary
1
Definitions
Assessment
Investigation of processes, systems, or platforms by a subject matter expert or by IT Quality and Compliance. An
assessment does not need to be independent in contrast to audit.
Audit (ISO/GAMP®)
Systematic, independent, and documented process for obtaining evidence and evaluating it objectively to determine
the extent to which agreed criteria are fulfilled.
Building Block
Group of components defined, installed, and controlled by a set of specifications defined by the company to
maximize opportunity for re-use.
Certification
The process of confirming that a system or component complies with a specific standard, e.g., a network installation
may be certified against the ISO/IEC 11801 standard. In the context of this Guide, ‘certification’ does not imply
involvement of an authoritative body, cf. ‘Certification Authority.’
Certification Authority (CA)
A trusted third-party organization or company that creates and manages digital certificates to distribute public keys
and other information.
Change Control (Generalized based on GAMP®)
A formal process by which qualified representatives from appropriate disciplines review proposed or actual changes
to an object. The main objective is to document the changes and ensure that the object is maintained in a state of
control.
Client (in context of Client/Server)
The networked computing device enabling the user to access a client/server system; this encompasses desktops,
laptops, palmtops, etc. Note: A thick client performs the bulk of data processing operations locally using software
stored on the client, in contrast to a thin client, which has greater reliance on the server. In both cases, data is
typically stored on the server.
Compliance
The practice of obeying rules or requests made by people in authority, e.g., adherence to certain specified standards
such as regulations, good practices, SOPs, SLAs, or specified (user) requirements.
[PAGE 117]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 3
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 12
Computerized System
All of the computers with their associated hardware, software, and documentation needed to satisfy specific user
requirements, e.g., Laboratory Information Management System. Note: This Guide does not consider standardized
components such as routers and switches to be computerized systems.
Configuration Management
Those activities necessary to precisely define an object at any point during its life cycle, e.g., manage all
constituents of a specific server building block.
Data Management Software
All the software in the technology stack between the operating system and the application software, e.g., Database
Management Systems, middleware, and application enabling software.
Disaster
Any event (i.e., fire, earthquake, power failure, etc.) which could have a detrimental effect upon an automated
system or its associated information.
Disaster Recovery Plan
A plan to resume a specific essential operation, function, or process of an enterprise.
Firmware
Software (firmly) embedded in hardware components. Note: Despite its name, current technology will often permit
firmware to be updated post installation.
GxP Application
Software entities which have a specific user defined business purpose that must meet the requirements of a GxP
regulation.
GxP Regulation
The underlying international life science requirements such as those set forth in the US FD&C Act, US PHS Act,
FDA regulations, EU Directives, Japanese MHLW regulations, or other applicable national legislation or regulations
under which a company operates.
Infrastructure Process (Based on ITIL)
A connected series of actions with the intent of satisfying a purpose or achieving a goal in support of managing the
infrastructure, e.g., the primary goal of the problem management process is to facilitate the timely collection,
trending, and resolution of real and perceived problems.
Infrastructure Services
A computerized part of the infrastructure controlled by personnel, or processes, e.g., printing service, email service,
or file storage service.
[PAGE 118]
Page 4
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 12
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Infrastructure System
A system designed or configured to support infrastructure processes – in contrast to supporting primary business
processes.
Interface (FDA)
A point of communication between two or more processes, persons, or other physical entities.
IT Infrastructure
The aggregation of a company’s computer platforms and services including their associated processes, procedures,
and personnel.
Logical Access Controls
The features embedded in software programs combined with specific settings (Access Control Lists) that are used to
authenticate a user requesting access to computerized resources.
Network
1. An arrangement of nodes and interconnecting branches (FDA).
2. A system (transmission channels and supporting hardware and software) that connects several remotely located
computers via telecommunications (ISO).
Network Topology
The specific physical (real) or logical (virtual) arrangement of the elements of a network. Note: Two networks have
the same topology if the connection configuration is the same although the networks may differ in physical
interconnections, distances between nodes, transmission rates, and/or signal types.
Periodic Review (GAMP®/PDA)
A documented assessment of the documentation, procedures, records, and performance of a computer system to
determine whether it is still in a validated state and what actions, if any, are necessary to restore its validated state.
The frequency of review is dependent upon the system’s complexity, criticality, and rate of change.
(Infrastructure) Platform
The hardware and software which must be present and functioning for an application program to run (perform) as
intended, e.g., RDBM platforms, network platforms, or server hardware platforms.
Privileged Access
Access to resources or data with the capability of performing administrative tasks, e.g., create, modify, or delete user
profiles in contrast to ordinary end-user access levels.
Qualification
Process of demonstrating whether an entity is capable of fulfilling specified requirements. Note: In the context of
meeting regulatory requirements, ‘qualification’ implies adherence to strict documentation requirements, reviews,
and approvals.
[PAGE 119]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 5
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 12
Quality Assurance (QA)
The planned systematic activities necessary to ensure that a component, module, or system conforms to established
technical requirements (ISO).The activity of, or group responsible for, ensuring that the facility and systems meet
GxP requirements (based on ISPE).
Quality Control (QC)
The operational techniques and procedures used to achieve quality requirements (FDA). Group responsible for
checking or testing that specifications are met (based on ICH Q7A).
Quality Management System (ISO)
The organizational structure, responsibilities, procedures, processes, and resources for implementing quality
management.
Risk (ISO)
Combination of the probability of occurrence of harm and the severity of that harm.
Risk Assessment
Overall process comprising a risk analysis and a risk evaluation:
•
Risk Analysis
Systematic use of available information to identify hazards and to estimate the risk.
•
Risk Evaluation
Judgment, on the basis of risk analysis, of whether a risk which is acceptable has been achieved in a given
context. (ISO 14971 definition modified by GAMP)
Risk Management (ISO)
Systematic application of management policies, procedures, and practices to the tasks of analyzing, evaluating, and
controlling risk.
Security
The protection of computer hardware and software from accidental or malicious access, use, modification,
destruction, or disclosure. Security also pertains to personnel, data, communications, and the physical protection of
computer installations.
Subject Matter Expert (SME)
A person who possesses a documented deep comprehension of the theory and concepts within his or her field of
work.
Supplier
Any organization or individual contracted directly by the customer to supply a product or service.
[PAGE 120]
Page 6
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 12
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Testing (IEEE)
The process of exercising or evaluating a system or system component by manual or automated means to verify that
it satisfies specified requirements or to identify differences between expected and actual results.
Validation (FDA)
Establishing documented evidence which provides a high degree of assurance that a specific process will
consistently produce a product meeting its pre-determined specifications and quality attributes.
Virus
Generic term for all the various types of malicious code that have been designed to breach a company’s security
measures.
2
Acronyms and Abbreviations
ANSI
American National Standards Institute
BIPM
Bureau International des Poids et Mesures, provider of UTC, the coordinated universal time
BS
British Standard (e.g., BS 7799)
CAPA
Corrective and Preventive Action
CDMS
Clinical Data Management System
CFR
Code of Federal Regulations (e.g., 21 CFR Part 11)
CI
Configuration Item
CIL
Configuration Item List
CM
Configuration Management
CPG
Compliance Policy Guide
CPU
Central Processing Unit
CSV
Computerized System Validation
CV
Curriculum Vitae
DBMS
Database Management System
DS
Design Specification
EIS
Enterprise Information System
EMC
Electromagnetic Compatibility
EMI
Electromagnetic Interference
[PAGE 121]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 7
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 12
ERP
Enterprise Resource Planning
EU
European Union
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
FS
Functional Specification
GAMP®
Good Automated Manufacturing Practice
GCP
Good Clinical Practice
GDP
Good Distribution Practice
GLP
Good Laboratory Practice
GMP
Good Manufacturing Practice
GxP
Good ‘x’ Practice, where ‘x’ one of: Clinical, Distribution, Laboratory, Manufacturing
HW
Hardware
IDS
Intrusion Detection System
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commission
IQ
Installation Qualification
IS
Information Systems
ISO
International Organisation for Standardization
ISPE
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering
IT
Information Technology
ITIL®
Information Technology Infrastructure Library
IVRS
Interactive Voice Response System
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
LAN
Local Area Network
LIMS
Laboratory Information Management System
NAS
Network Attached Storage
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
OGC
Office of Government Commerce
[PAGE 122]
Page 8
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 12
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
OQ
Operational Qualification
OS
Operating System
OSI
Open Systems Interconnection
PC
Personal Computer
PDA
Parenteral Drug Association
PIC/S
Pharmaceutical Inspection Cooperation Scheme
PQ
Performance Qualification
QA
Quality Assurance
QM
Quality Management
QMS
Quality Management System
RFI
Radio Frequency Interference
SAN
Storage Area Network
SLA
Service Level Agreement
SNMP
Simple Network Management Protocol
SOP
Standard Operating Procedure
SQL
Structured Query Language
STP
Shielded Twisted Pair
SW
Software
TAI
Temps Atomique International (International Atomic Time)
TSB
Telecommunication Systems Bulletin
UPS
Uninterruptable Power Supply
URS
User Requirement Specification
US
United States
UTC
Coordinated Universal Time (Language independent international abbreviation)
WAN
Wide Area Network
WAP
Wireless Access Point
[PAGE 123]
Appendix 13
References
[PAGE 124]
Page 2
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 13
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
References
1.
GAMP® 4, GAMP Guide for Validation of Automated Systems, ISPE (Publishers), 2001.
2.
GAMP® Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based Approach to Compliant Electronic Records and Signatures, ISPE
(Publishers), 2005.
3.
FDA Glossary of Computerized System and Software Development Terminology.
4.
PIC/S Guidance on Good Practices for Computerised Systems in Regulated “GxP” Environments (PI011-2)
(available at www.picscheme.org).
5.
ISO 10007:2003 Quality Management Systems  –  Guideline for Configuration Management. The Official Web
site for the ISO may be visited at http://www.iso.org.
6.
ISO/IEC 17799:2000 Information Technology  –  Code of Practice for Information Security Management. The
Official Web site for the ISO may be visited at http://www.iso.org.
7.
ISO 9000:2000 Quality Management Systems  –  Fundamentals and Vocabulary. The Official Web site for the
ISO may be visited at http://www.iso.org.
8.
ISO/IEC 14763 Information Technology  –  Implementation and Operation of Customer Premises Cabling. The
Official Web site for the ISO may be visited at http://www.iso.org.
9.
ISO/IEC 11801:2002 Information Technology  –  Generic Cabling for Customer Premises. The Official Web
site for the ISO may be visited at http://www.iso.org.
10. ISO 14971:2000 Medical Devices  –  Application of Risk Management to Medical Devices. The Official Web
site for the ISO may be visited at http://www.iso.org.
11. IEEE Std. 610.12-1990 Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology
12. NIST Special Publication 800-30 Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems
13. OGC (ITIL) Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL), Service Support Service Support (CCTA)
(IT Infrastructure Library) The Stationery Office Books.
14. ISPE Baseline® Pharmaceutical Engineering Guides for New and Renovated Facilities, Volume 5,
Commissioning and Qualification, March 2001.
15. “Risk Assessment for Use of Automated Systems Supporting Manufacturing Processes, Part 1 - Functional
Risk,” ISPE/GAMP® Forum, Pharmaceutical Engineering, May/June 2003, Vol. 23, No. 3 pp. 16-26.
16. RFC 2196, “Site Security Handbook,” B. Fraser, SEI/CMU, September 1997.
17. ISO 7498 Information Processing Systems  – Open Systems Interconnection  – Basic Reference Model. The
Official Web site for the ISO may be visited at http://www.iso.org.
[PAGE 126]
ISPE Headquarters
3109 W. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd., Suite 250
Tampa, Florida 33607 USA 
Tel: +1-813-960-2105, Fax: +1-813-264-2816  
ISPE Asia Pacific Office
73 Bukit Timah Road, #04-01 Rex House, Singapore 229832
Tel: +65-6496-5502, Fax: +65-6336-6449
ISPE China Office
Suite 2302, Wise Logic International Center
No. 66 North Shan Xi Road, Shanghai, China 200041 
Tel +86-21-5116-0265, Fax +86-21-5116-0260
ISPE European Office
Avenue de Tervueren, 300, B-1150 Brussels, Belgium
Tel: +32-2-743-4422, Fax: +32-2-743-1550
www.ISPE.org