Infrastructure Security
[PAGE 84]
Page 2
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 6
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
1
Introduction
A defined level of infrastructure security is required to meet business purposes and to satisfy external regulations.
Lack of security may compromise availability of applications and services, record integrity and confidentiality,
reputation with stakeholders, and may lead to unauthorized use of systems that would impact on product quality.
A company should take cultural and practical aspects into consideration when defining the rigor of its approach.
Companies may adopt different approaches for specific infrastructure elements, based, e.g., on criticality and risk.
2
Infrastructure Security Management
Infrastructure security management includes all the policies, procedures, requirements, training and audit programs,
etc. that a company may define appropriate to safeguard the infrastructure, including information assets.
As a minimum, regulated companies need to satisfy the applicable GxP requirements. Relevant documents include
the PIC/S Guide (see Appendix 3, reference 4), which builds on ISO/IEC 17799:2000 Information Technology  –
Code of Practice for Information Security Management (see Appendix 13, reference 6). The 21 CFR Part 11
contains security requirements focused on electronic records and signatures (see Appendix 13, reference 2).
RFC 2196, “Site Security Handbook,” is another useful source of information (see Appendix 13, reference 16).
Infrastructure security is a subset of a company’s IT Security management plan and companies may elect to extract
applicable guidelines from, e.g., ISO/IEC 17799:2000 Information Technology  –  Code of Practice for Information
Security Management (see Appendix 13, reference 6), and apply those to infrastructure elements.
Security controls, in general, are considerably cheaper and more effective if incorporated at the requirements
specification and design stages.
2.1
ISO/IEC 17799 - Code of Practice for Information Security Management
The international standard ISO/IEC 17799:2000 Information Technology  –  Code of Practice for Information
Security Management (see Appendix 13, reference 6) is an internationally recognized set of recommendations for
developing security policies and conducting auditing. Many organizations use this standard as a baseline from
which to start when developing their policies and their information security programs. Other standards also may be
appropriate.
Information security is characterized in the standard as the preservation of:
•
Confidentiality: ensuring that information is accessible only to those authorized to have access
•
Integrity: safeguarding the accuracy and completeness of information and processing methods
•
Availability: ensuring that authorized users have access to information and associated assets when required
Information technology security is achieved by implementing a suitable set of controls, including policies, practices,
procedures, organizational structures, and computerized functions.
[PAGE 85]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 3
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 6
The ISO/IEC 17799:2000 Information Technology  –  Code of Practice for Information Security Management (see
Appendix 13, reference 6) is a risk-based method for assessing, evaluating, and managing risks. It takes a holistic
approach to security, and provides a framework for developing a security program. It provides guidelines for
organizations on how to develop and implement such a security program and how to improve currently deployed
programs.
The ISO/IEC 17799:2000 Information Technology  –  Code of Practice for Information Security Management (see
Appendix 13, reference 6) has 10 sections:
1.
Security Policy
2.
Organizational Security
3.
Asset Classification and Control
4.
Personnel Security
5.
Physical and Environmental Security
6.
Communications and Operations Management
7.
Access Control
8.
System Development and Maintenance
9.
Business Continuity Management
10. Compliance
Not all of the controls described in ISO/IEC 17799:2000 Information Technology  –  Code of Practice for
Information Security Management (see Appendix 13, reference 6) will be relevant to all infrastructures, nor to every
situation. It cannot take account of local system, environmental, cultural, or technological constraints. Consequently,
the use of ISO/IEC 17799:2000 Information Technology  –  Code of Practice for Information Security Management
(see Appendix 13, reference 6) as a guide should be adapted to the circumstances of each organization.
2.2
ISO/IEC 17799 and Regulations
Regulatory guidance recommends consideration of these standards, but does not require organizations to be
formally accredited.
Companies should define a list of ISO/IEC 17799 issues that are relevant to infrastructure security within their own
organization (i.e., define what is business critical, GxP related, and the infrastructure subset). Existing infrastructure
policies and procedures should be mapped against the applicable sections of ISO/IEC 17799:2000 Information
Technology  –  Code of Practice for Information Security Management (see Appendix 13, reference 6) and an
internal audit of these policies and procedures used to demonstrate to regulatory authorities that the organization is
in control.
[PAGE 86]
Page 4
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 6
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
2.3
Technical versus Procedural Issues
Management should establish an administration or individual obligated to define and monitor an infrastructure
security program. Administrative, physical, and technical controls should be utilized to achieve management’s
security directives.
•
Administrative controls include the development of policies, standards, procedures and guidelines, security
awareness training, incident management, etc.
•
Technical controls consist of access control mechanisms, password and resource management, identification and
authentication methods, security devices, etc.
•
Physical controls consist of controlling individual access into the facilities and different departments, locking
systems, removing unnecessary floppy disk or CD-ROM drives from workstations, protecting the perimeter of
the facilities, monitoring for intrusion, etc.
2.4
Security Incident Management
To ensure efficient coordination of security incidents, an incident management procedure should be established as
effective communication channels are essential in the quick identification and mitigation of a specific threat.
Seemingly isolated incidents may not receive an appropriate level of attention unless they are centrally reported. For
instance, the seemingly benign situation of an account being locked, e.g., due to a forgotten password, may become
more suspicious if the same event occurs repeatedly.
The incident management process can be integrated into problem escalation processes with increased levels of
priority to ensure appropriate responses.
2.5
Intrusion Detection
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) in the form of hardware or software are commonly available, enhancing the
security of the perimeter of internal networks. Determined intruders may be able to penetrate firewalls, but attacks
do not come only from external sources. Depending on the impact and risks involved, companies may decide to use
IDS technology to mitigate risks.
By monitoring suspicious activity, alarms can be sounded earlier, giving more time to react to an imminent threat.
Although not infallible, they offer an additional level of protection to complement a well-configured firewall. It is
important to have incident management procedures in place to ensure no time is lost once an alarm has been raised.
As with firewalls, IDSs are only as effective as their configuration and administration. A well-maintained pattern
database and regular review of IDS summary reports ensure their efficacy.
2.6
Vulnerability Management
Vulnerability scanners or adequate manual procedures should be applied to determine weaknesses and gaps in the
platforms’ security configurations. Corrective actions include:
•
application of patches
•
changes to security settings
[PAGE 87]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 5
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 6
•
harnessing the network topology
However, the volume of security alerts can make it difficult to determine which threats are real, and which threats
are unlikely to be exploited. A practical approach to vulnerability management is to start with a complete inventory
of systems, which permits an assessment of where best to focus available resources. A small number of reliable
sources of security alerts should be identified, and the risk of each threat should be assessed, prioritized, and
categorized to determine an appropriate response. With numerous new security threats being identified each day,
depending on the risk, it is often more appropriate to patch or fix during scheduled maintenance (e.g., weekly or
monthly) rather than daily.
2.7
Anti-Virus Shield Update
Most anti-virus applications can initiate totally automatic updates, but some companies prefer controlled daily
updates rather than ad-hoc updates throughout the day. In this way, a risk-based approach can be applied very much
like security patch management, assessing the threat presented versus the inconvenience of excessive updates. In
both cases, Configuration Management practices are required, recording which updates were applied to which
systems, and at what date and time.
Servers, and especially clients, that are not office based pose difficulties in distributing virus updates. There are two
possibilities for update:
1. updates which are controlled and distributed from the internal IT department
2. automatic updates from the anti-virus supplier which requires no intervention
The first option ensures that Configuration Management processes can be followed, allowing testing prior to
deploying the update, but it often inhibits rapid response.
The second option poses challenges for Configuration Management. A Risk Assessment to compare the risk of
deploying untested updates versus leaving clients without updates for longer periods may be considered. If this
approach is adopted, a Periodic Review of the update process effectiveness should be conducted.
2.8
Public Key Infrastructure
In cases where a company needs to utilize features such as digital signatures, it may consider implementing a Public
Key Infrastructure (PKI), or exploit PKI services provided by external organizations, or both.
Digital signatures are employed when the intended use is to secure the authenticity, non-repudiation, integrity, and
confidentiality of external messaging over any digital communication channel. Users need to install client programs
and to obtain a certificate from a trusted third party, either directly or via the company’s own Certification Authority
(CA).
2.9
Origin of Software
The origin of all software related to qualified infrastructure platforms should be known in order to avoid quality and
security related issues. If a company decides to use open source software, it should ensure that a reputable software
supplier supports the product and version, and accepts responsibility for maintaining it.
Software downloaded from non-reputable or unknown sources should be avoided.
[PAGE 88]
Page 6
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 6
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
3
Upgrades and Patches - Balancing
Qualification and Security
Considerations
Changes to IT Infrastructure platforms require formal change control processes, documentation, and testing. These
processes take time, especially where individual application tests are required, and particularly for GxP applications.
Where changes are required to address security vulnerabilities, applying the full change control and testing
processes prospectively may present an unacceptable risk to the business in terms of security. However, direct
application of any upgrades/patches without change control and testing may compromise the qualified status of the
IT Infrastructure and present compliance issues.
First, the scope of the change should be understood, e.g., does it cover:
•
Network Operations
•
Clients
•
Servers
•
Firmware/Hardware
•
Data Management Software
•
Operating System
•
Infrastructure Utility Systems or Tools
Second, the urgency of the change should be established.
3.1
Urgency of Security Update
A prerequisite to determining an appropriate course of action is to understand the risks associated with a given
security vulnerability. This information should be available from the operating system/application suppliers and
confirmed by end user groups.
Generally, this will position the urgency of application of the change into one of three criticality categories:
1. Emergency Fix: should be applied as soon as possible, where the security vulnerability presents immediate and
real threats to the business
2. Urgent Update: probable threat, fix should be applied within a specified time scale
3. Update: no immediate threat, consider including within next scheduled platform upgrade
[PAGE 89]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 7
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 6
3.2
Compatibility of Security Updates
Security patches are usually available only for a limited number of product versions; suppliers of interacting
software may not provide compatible versions which creates a dilemma for system owners. In addition, validation
and availability requirements constrain upgrade options. Where critical security patches cannot be installed, system
managers may have to resort to procedural controls or even to isolate the system from other systems or from the
corporate network. Company security policies should outline strategies to pursue.
Further guidance on managing security upgrades and patches is given in Appendix 7 of this Guide.
[PAGE 91]
Appendix 7
Upgrade and Patch Management
[PAGE 92]
Page 2
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 7
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
This Appendix presents some risk-based considerations when determining an appropriate approach to upgrades and patches.
1
Fundamental Principles
Regardless of the criticality of an upgrade, the following aspects should be considered:
•
Change Control
Change control documentation should be raised to cover application of the upgrade/fix. For emergency changes,
this may be retrospective (but within a minimum period of time following application of the upgrade).
•
Configuration Management
Configuration Management records should be maintained; documentation recording versions and patch levels of
platforms should be accurately maintained. For emergency changes, the documentation may be retrospectively
updated.
•
Communication
All owners of critical applications should be made aware of the requirement for an upgrade prior to its
application.
•
Incident Monitoring
An incident monitoring process should be in place. Where emergency changes are applied with minimal or no
specific application testing, particular attention should be given to incident monitoring and reporting.
2
Upgrade Strategy
The upgrade strategy should be based on a technical assessment and an impact assessment:
•
The IT group should perform a technical assessment of the upgrade, reporting whether the upgrade is minor,
medium, or major in nature, based on complexity and possible impact on applications.
•
All owners of critical applications should perform an impact assessment on their systems based on the available
information.
Issues can arise with applications when implementing patches/upgrades to platforms where the base application and/
or operating system have not been upgraded for an extended period of time and lag behind the current version by a
number of minor/major releases. Where this is the case, installation of an emergency upgrade may be compromised
– resulting in either the application being unable to run or the patch being unable to be applied. In each case, there
is a clear business risk, which should be managed by evaluating the risk, documenting conclusions, and where
necessary, introducing controls to manage the risk.
Systems that have been removed from operational use, but have been retained as read-only systems for the purposes
of record/data retrieval (i.e., partially decommissioned) may present issues, particularly where product support of
the base application is no longer available from the system’s supplier. In these cases, consideration should be given
to isolating or segregating the system to reduce the risk.
[PAGE 93]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 3
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 7
Where an update is applied during formal testing, where that testing forms part of the validation of a system, the
level of re-testing required should be determined based on an assessment of risks.
Upgrade strategies should be in place for all applications, but especially for business critical or GxP applications.
3
Level of Application Testing
Four general levels of testing that may be applied to applications following a platform upgrade include:
1. No Testing
2. Confirmation Testing
A minimal level of documented testing to verify that an application runs on an updated platform.
3. Confidence Testing
Documented testing against pre-defined specifications that consist of a representative subset of functional tests on
the updated platform.
4. Full Testing
Full regression testing of the application on the updated platform.
For emergency changes (e.g., critical security update), it is likely that no prospective testing will be applied to
applications. For business critical and GxP applications, enhanced incident monitoring should be applied in this
instance, and a documented justification made until retrospective testing, or final impact evaluation has been
completed.
Where the update is not categorized as an emergency, some level of testing should be applied; the level being
dependant on the nature of the upgrade and information available.
Where the update is technically assessed to be of a minor nature, then confirmation testing only may be appropriate.
For highly critical business or GxP systems, or where the update is assessed to be significant (or likely to have an
impact on applications), then confidence tests should be considered as a minimum requirement.
For an update of a major nature where application impact is likely, and particularly for business critical or GxP
systems, then full (regression) testing should be performed.
The two stage Risk Assessment process defined in GAMP® 4 (see Appendix 13, reference 1) is a good tool for
assessing the appropriate level of testing to apply (an example is given in Appendix 2 of this Guide). The process
involves assessing three considerations:
•
the impact of failure of the system (business and quality risk)
•
the likelihood of failure
[PAGE 94]
Page 4
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 7
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
•
the probability of detection of the failure
If an update affects significant platform components, the need for regression testing of the platform also should be
considered.
4
Global/Multi-Site Systems
For systems that are used at multiple locations, where the company has a worldwide standardization of platforms, an
efficient approach is to perform testing at a single location and then use this as the basis of reduced or no testing at
the other locations.
[PAGE 95]
Appendix 8
Outsourcing
[PAGE 96]
Page 2
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 8
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
1
Definition of Responsibilities
Outsourcing involves the transfer of management and operations of a company’s IT Infrastructure to an external
company. The scope varies, but some examples include:
•
operation of a data center and/or networks
•
operation of systems and/or processes (e.g., Help Desk)
•
hardware/software component build (e.g., workstation)
The contracted service provider may have staff located on the regulated company’s premises or the resource and
services may be provided from a remote location (if that location is on a different continent the term ‘offshoring’ is
sometimes used rather than ‘outsourcing’).
The regulated company remains responsible for the regulatory compliance of their IT operations regardless of
whether they choose to outsource/offshore some or their entire IT Infrastructure processes to external service
provider(s). Compliance oversight and approvals cannot be delegated to the outsource partner.
The external service provider has the responsibility for ensuring that their service meets the customer’s
requirements. Critical elements for the external supplier to focus on include:
•
regulatory education: ensuring that all staff and contractors provided through the outsourcing agreement
understand the regulatory compliance impact of their actions and seek appropriate approvals
•
creation and maintenance of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and work instructions
•
creation and maintenance of quality records4
•
Quality Assurance and Quality Control of their IT Infrastructure processes and procedures
2
Special Considerations
The location from which the outsourcing company provides services to the regulated company should be assessed.
Services located on the regulated company’s site should be managed in accordance with the company’s standard
security processes. However, services provided from a location outside the regulated company’s boundaries may
require additional controls to ensure similar levels of security (e.g., in the case of remote management of a data
centre or a Help Desk process).
4 A ‘quality record’ is evidence that a required quality assurance activity has been performed and the results of that
activity.
[PAGE 97]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 3
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 8
3
Contracts
The regulated company is responsible for interpreting GxP regulations and defining appropriate requirements for the
IT Infrastructure.
These should be provided to the external service provider in terminology that they recognize as requirements for
services. It is recommended that the terminology of IT industry best practices be used wherever possible.
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) and acceptance criteria should be defined by the regulated company governing
the level of control required in the operation and maintenance of the IT Infrastructure.
Contracts should handle the ownership and retention of documents and records relating to the service being
managed, e.g., if a contract is ended with an external supplier, the regulated company needs to be able to have
access to those documents or records at a later date in case of investigation.
Contracts should clearly state the conditions under which the regulated company, or regulators, can undertake on-
site audits to verify conformance to agreed provisions. The level of expert support required on site to facilitate
inspections, agreed notifications, and alert levels also should be specified.
4
Service Level Agreements
Where services or other deliverables are requested by one organization and are provided by another, consideration
should be given to establishing mutual expectations in a formal SLA.
An SLA is especially useful when the service provider is external to the customer; in such cases, the SLA will
usually be included as part of a contract, and clearly state KPIs and the associated fees.
Both organizations involved should assign members of their management team to handle the preparation and
ongoing performance monitoring of the SLA, price negotiations, complaints, etc. Depending on the complexity and
importance of the service involved, a monthly or annual performance report may be warranted.
A typical SLA will specify:
•
contacts on either side
•
duration of validity and circumstances triggering reviews
•
pre-requisites and customer deliverables or involvement
•
scope and nature of the required services
•
metrics in the form of KPIs
•
records demonstrating fulfillment of specified service levels
•
pricing arrangements, including penalties in case of shortcomings
[PAGE 98]
Page 4
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 8
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
•
reports, scope, frequency, distribution
•
audit provisions, including preparedness to facilitate inspections from regulatory authorities or other regulators
A mechanism should be established to ensure that all applicable changes within one organization are assessed for
any impact on the other organization.
See GAMP® 4, Appendix O2, for further guidance (see Appendix 13, reference 1).
5
Audits
Before entering into an outsourcing arrangement, a supplier audit should be considered to assess the external service
provider’s capability to meet regulatory compliance requirements, and pertinent security policies. Staff from the
regulated company’s QA should be allowed to repeat this initial audit at suitable intervals, or if certain conditions
warrant investigations.
The regulated company is responsible for authorizing the appropriate resolution or mitigation of areas of non-
compliance that may arise as a result of an audit of the external service provider. The regulated company should
include tracking and monitoring of these within its Corrective and Preventative Actions (CAPA) program to closure
in order to demonstrate control.
The external service provider should provide a formal written response to audits conducted by or on behalf of the
regulated company, and as appropriate develop and execute remediation plans to address these. In many cases this
will require a discussion between the regulated company and the external service provider to agree appropriate
resolution.
A company should enter into a non-disclosure agreement with the supplier to specify what information the other
party has and what may, and may not, be shared with whom. This could be part of the audit plan or embedded in a
SLA or other contractual document.
See GAMP® 4, Appendix M2, for further guidance (see Appendix 13, reference 1).
6
Training Requirements
Regulations require that personnel have the appropriate combination of education, training, and experience to
perform their assigned tasks. This applies to external supplier personnel as well, and the service provider should
ensure that their staff is trained, as appropriate, in regulatory compliance. Such training should be documented.
[PAGE 99]
Appendix 9
Server Management
[PAGE 100]
Page 2
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 9
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
1
Introduction
The objective of the Server Management process is to ensure that specified requirements for operational availability,
performance, and security are consistently fulfilled by the server. An important part of the process is to manage the
server configuration and changes needed to meet the objectives.
This Appendix provides guidance to a company to assist in deciding schemes for server management, consistent
with the individual needs and criticality of server functions and managed data. All quantitative measures provided in
this Appendix are derived from actual situations and are meant to assist companies, and not to prescribe certain
absolutes.
2
Backup and Restore
Failures of computer systems may result in a loss of data. The backup of electronic data from any given computer
platform is consequently essential to preserve the integrity and availability of the data contained on those systems
and is considered in the following sections. Also see GAMP® 4, for additional guidance (see Appendix 13, reference
1).
2.1
Backup
There are two main types of backup, full and incremental/differential.
A full backup consists of a copy of all data on a given system. An incremental backup is a copy of data that has
changed since the last backup cycle was completed.
The quantity of data, and the backup solution available, will dictate the type of backup that can be performed for
any particular system.
The following minimum requirements are recommended:
•
full backup: once per week, one day per week
•
incremental or differential – all other days
Historical backups should be taken as appropriate.
Backups should be monitored to ensure successful completion. The following activities should be applied:
•
review of backup logs to ensure successful completion
•
proactive assessments conducted on a regular basis to ensure that all required systems are included in the
scheduled backup operations
•
backup media management
[PAGE 101]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 3
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 9
2.2
Verification
Most commercially available backup solutions are capable of performing a verification of the data that has been
backed up.
Despite the low risk of malfunctioning modern equipment, an extensive verification of the backup should be made
when data is considered critical for the business although the quantity of data may prevent a full verification from
being performed.
2.3
Schedules
The type of data should largely dictate the backup schedules. At the enterprise level, data actively in use can be
considered to be changing each working day with the backup procedure normally taking place overnight.
Defining the schedule for global systems requires careful consideration, as there may be access by users from other
locations. All users should be informed of the backup schedule for these systems so they are aware that there may be
periods of unavailability.
Certain application data files cannot usually be backed up while they are in use. Backup schedules may require
augmented processes, coordinating their actions with the deactivation of the applications in question.
2.4
Restore
When a restore request is received, consideration should be given to whether the person requesting the restore is
authorized to do so, and that they are authorized to view the data being restored.
When restoring data, checks should be made to ensure that more recent versions of the files being restored are not
overwritten, unless this is specifically requested. Where required, consideration also should be given to enable
recovery to the point of failure.
Restoration beyond clearly defined single records or files may pose a challenge in assuring that all related records
are brought back to the same state or point in time to retain overall integrity of the set of records. This can be
achieved only through carefully planned interactions with the system/data owner representatives.
2.5
Storage
A process for protecting backup data should be established with the aim of preventing loss, damage, and
unauthorized access. The procedure should be documented and provide controls to:
•
ensure secure storage facilities with proper access controls, and environmental conditions
•
provide indexing and labeling capabilities and means to timely retrieval during inspections
•
detect the end of the retention requirements for specific records and notify data owner
•
ensure that changes are carried out under change control
•
securely destroy data given the necessary authorization
[PAGE 102]
Page 4
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 9
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Although manufacturers give an expected lifetime for media, in practice the expected lifetime of the media, when it
contains data, is considerably less than this figure.
Provisions should be made to ensure that data are refreshed after a defined period of time to ensure the continuing
integrity of the data.
To ensure the ability to recover data (electronic records) in the event of a disaster, and based on an assessment of
impact and risk, backup media should be stored at a secure ‘off-site’ facility. ‘Off-site’ in this context means
geographically diverse from the location where the system is housed.
See GAMP® 4, Appendix O6, for further guidance (see Appendix 13, reference 1).
2.6
Testing
The requirement to test the backup process should encompass any off-site storage solutions.
The test should aim to restore data from historical backups, which may require the handling of off-site backups
where they exist. This will ensure that the procedure to recall off-site media works as expected.
Restoring actual backups and comparing against the unchanged original file, where possible, gives the opportunity
to check that the whole data path from original backup of the data, through to the final restore, maintains the
integrity of the data. This periodic activity may, therefore, certify the process of both the backup and restore
procedures.
3
Technical Performance and Capacity
Monitoring
The performance of devices and services need to be monitored to ensure that stated or implied expectations can be
achieved.
Review results or alarms based on this monitoring will trigger maintenance, update, support, or disaster recovery
activities, and therefore, form the basis for a fast active/proactive operation and maintenance.
In order to assure that servers perform as required, surveillance procedures should be developed and alert and action
limits defined. For infrastructures mainly supporting administrative type applications, server performance can often
be considered a statistical entity that on average should provide a certain level of service. In such cases, the platform
manager would be concerned with a very high degree of equipment utilization for economical reasons, and the
operational key alarm limits would be set around available storage capacity. For time-critical systems, the platform
manager would be more concerned with ensuring enough reserve resources to meet surges in demand. Table A9.1
lists sample performance metrics for a process control server, as an aid in deciding metrics and limits in the context
of all relevant deciding factors. In some cases, it poses less risk to product quality attributes or required records to
allow a higher load, e.g., on a server, than it would to replace it with a new and more powerful one.
[PAGE 103]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 5
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendix 9
Table A9.1: Example Server Performance Limits
Server Metrics
Unit
Alert Limit
Action Limit
(Real-time system)
CPU load
%
>60*
>80*
Server Work Queue
#
>2
>4
Available primary memory
MB
<50*
<10*
Memory swops
Pages/sec
>15
>20
Physical memory (disk space)
% disk access time
>60
>80
Physical memory queue length
#
>2**
>4**
Network interface
kB total/sec
>50***
>80***
*
Very much dependant on actual system set-up
**
Depends on disk array configuration
*** Depends on application and network topology
Monitoring should take place on a daily basis using applicable software tools. A baseline should be created at the
time of installation, and actual values should be considered based on those readings.
When using complex Process/System Management Applications, the monitoring and event reaction could be
automated.
See GAMP® 4, Appendix O5, for guidance on planning and recording monitoring activities (see Appendix 13,
reference 1).
4
Remote Management
When servers are remotely managed, e.g., via outsourcing or offshoring arrangements, it is important to maintain
the required level of security. Consideration should be given to the use of secure communication channels.
[PAGE 105]
Appendix 10
