OQ and Acceptance
The final stage of Qualification is to confirm that the IT Infrastructure component operates in an expected manner as
defined in appropriate specifications.
Provided the platforms are all commercially available standard products, the focus of OQ should be to test
connectivity and where applicable capacity using integrated or add computerized tools, rather than core
functionality.
At a minimum, OQ should consist of a set of instructions to be followed, which describe the necessary test steps,
expected results, and evidence to be collected. OQ should be based on the outcome of the Risk Assessments already
carried out (see Section 5.5 of this Guide) to verify that the sum of requirements derived from serviced applications,
if applicable, are met.
Typical tests to consider would include:
•
verification of key Data Management Software, e.g., by checking database connectivity
•
verification of all permanent IP-addresses, and response times under conditions specified by the Qualification
Plan by use of commands that allow the user to verify network connectivity
•
verification of the routing pattern under conditions required by the Qualification Plan by use of, e.g., commands
that allow the user to trace a network packet to its destination
•
verification of security settings across all platform components and checking that default passwords have been
altered
•
verification of critical firewall features, positive as well as negative testing (it allows traffic that should pass and
blocks traffic that should be blocked)
•
verification of key Operating System (OS) functionality, e.g., by checking accessibility to defined disk volumes
•
verification of time synchronization
Tools available for the OQ tests and maintenance in general will depend on the chosen technology.
Tests should be traceable to requirements where appropriate.
In simple cases, IQ and OQ may be combined in one activity; however, the sequence of installation followed by
operational testing should be maintained unless pre-qualified building blocks are used.
[PAGE 43]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 41
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
5.8
Reporting and Handover
Following the successful execution of Installation and Operational Qualification specifications and closure of any
issues, a report should be written which confirms that all of the specified activities have been successfully
completed, as well as confirming that all the critical processes are described and implemented. The report should be
reviewed and approved by QA.
Depending on the project characteristics, this could be a single report, one per building block, one per platform, or a
combination thereof.
The approved report enables platform owners to demonstrate compliance to auditors and inspectors, and provides
assurance to application owner(s) that the platforms are in a state of control.
Once all these activities have been confirmed and approved, the platform is ready to load the application and any
migrated data and platform qualification documentation produced should support the validation of the
application(s).
6
Maintaining the Qualified State
During Operation
The IT Infrastructure typically changes frequently, sometimes on a daily or hourly basis, depending on the size of
the infrastructure. The IT Infrastructure should be maintained in a documented state of control by ensuring
appropriate:
•
Change Management
•
Configuration Management
•
Security Management
•
Server Management
•
Client Management
•
Network Management
•
Problem Management
•
Help Desk Provision
•
Backup, Restore, and Archiving
•
Disaster Recovery
•
Performance Monitoring
•
Supplier Management
•
Periodic Review
[PAGE 44]
Page 42
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
In order to be efficient and cost-effective, the required documented state of control should be achieved and
maintained in an appropriate manner, e.g., automatic tools available should be exploited wherever possible.
The use of a documented QMS, (see Section 3 of this Guide), should address all the listed requirements. The
following sub-sections give further guidance on key topics of interest.
6.1
Change Management
The change control process cannot be separated from Configuration Management. When changes are proposed,
both change control and Configuration Management activities need to be considered in parallel, particularly when
evaluating impact of changes. However, it should be noted that due to the simplicity, the frequency and occasionally
the urgency of some changes (e.g., network port patching or security patching), change control procedures need to
accommodate timely and effective, yet documented, updating methods.
Change management processes should define how changes to configuration items should be managed, and should
include an assessment of the impact on supported GxP applications and the extent of re-qualification required,
where applicable.
Further guidance on managing upgrades and patches is given in Appendix 7 of this Guide.
GAMP® 4, Appendix O4, also provides further guidance on change management (see Appendix 13, reference 1).
6.2
Configuration Management
Configuration Management (CM) covers the identification, recording, and reporting of components, including their
version, constituent components, and relationships.
As a minimum, all items identified as critical for maintaining the qualified state of the platforms should be kept
under CM providing an approved baseline for further evolution and allowing safe restoration of a qualified baseline
in case of problems.
Components are typically referred to as Configuration Items (CIs). CIs include hardware items, software items,
critical parameter settings, documentation, and any other part of the IT Infrastructure that an organization wishes to
control. The level of information held about each CI will depend on the component’s attributes. CIs, usually, are
defined down to the lowest level at which a component can be independently installed, replaced, or modified.
GAMP® 4, Appendix M9, provides further guidance (see Appendix 13, reference 1).
6.3
Security Management
IT Infrastructure security is required both for business purposes and to satisfy various regulations, such as health,
finance, and occupational. Lack of security may compromise availability of applications and services, record
integrity and confidentiality, reputation with stakeholders, and may lead to unauthorized use of systems that
ultimately would impact on product quality.
[PAGE 45]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 43
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Information security is often characterized as the preservation of:
Confidentiality
•
ensuring that information is accessible only to those authorized to have
access
Integrity
•
safeguarding the accuracy and completeness of information and processing
methods
Availability
•
ensuring that authorized users have access to information and associated
assets when required
Information security is achieved by implementing a suitable set of controls, which could be policies, practices,
procedures, organizational structures, and computerized functions, such as:
•
security incident management
•
intrusion detection
•
server hardening (e.g., remove superfluous applications, tools, and blocking unused ports)
•
virus signature updates
•
considerations to origin of software (e.g., from approved suppliers)
•
disaster recovery planning
•
user access administration
More detailed information on security controls is given in Appendix 6 of this Guide.
6.4
Server Management
The objective of the server management process is to ensure that specified requirements for operational availability,
performance, and security are consistently fulfilled by the server. An important part of the process is to manage the
server configuration and changes needed to meet the objectives.
The handling and qualification of changes depend on the potential impact that a given change may have on the
served platforms and applications. If the change affects GxP applications, the extent of re-qualification required
should be considered.
Server management is further described in Appendix 9 of this Guide.
6.5
Client Management
The objective for the Client Management process is to ensure that specified requirements for operational
availability, performance, and security are consistently fulfilled by the client. An important part of the process is to
manage preparation, deliveries, adaptations, patching, and security issues for the multitude of stationary and mobile
units in use across the organization.
[PAGE 46]
Page 44
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
The Client Management Group is advised to use computerized tools where possible to centrally manage updates,
patches, and security scans to enforce corporate policies.
Client management is further described in Appendix 10 of this Guide.
6.6
Network Management
The objective of Network Management is to ensure that specified requirements for operational availability,
performance, and security are consistently fulfilled by the network. Fulfillment of this objective involves
identification and use of effective and reliable computerized tools, applications, and devices to assist network staff
in monitoring and maintaining network performance in support of other platforms and services.
Network diagrams should be updated when the topology changes during maintenance and the inventory list of
components should be updated to reflect the actual network configuration.
Network Management is further described in Appendix 11 of this Guide.
6.7
Problem Management
Problem Management includes control and active management of both problems and errors. A ‘problem’ is an
unknown underlying cause of one or more incidents, and a known error is a problem that is successfully diagnosed,
and for which a workaround has been identified.
An essential part of Problem Management is to provide users with an adequate method of recording perceived or
acknowledged problems. The Help Desk is an important point of contact and also may be a valuable source of
information
All filed problems should be tracked and resolved via approved channels; those that require changes should be input
to the Change Management Group.
Problem Management should trend problem reports and strive to counteract escalation of problems by providing
timely reports to the platform administration, e.g., to avoid severe service degradation caused by growing
congestion in a given network segment.
Standardized utility applications are available to support the Problem Management process, but smaller
organizations may use a manual logbook or similar to record and track problems.
6.8
Help Desk
The Help Desk process has the goal of providing the day-to-day support to users of the IT Infrastructure with
problems, questions, and general support needs. Staff employed in the Help Desk must be technically skilled with
respect to the actual platforms and technology used in the IT Infrastructure to support the business processes in the
company.
The Help Desk is typically contacted via a central point (e.g., telephone or using a web application), where the Help
Desk case is either solved immediately, or registered in a Help Desk system that manages the Help Desk process.
The Help Desk system may be the same as used in Problem Management (see Section 6.7 of this Guide) and also
serves as a historical record to facilitate fast response to contacts.
[PAGE 47]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 45
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Where a Help Desk case requires the involvement of subject matter experts, the Help Desk service forms the liaison
between the user and those experts.
6.9
Backup, Restore, and Archiving
The backup, restore, and archiving capability of data on any computer platform is essential to preserve the integrity
of the information contained on these systems in case of system failures.
Whether a given application (system/data) owner requires full or incremental types of backup, a Risk Assessment
process should be applied to achieve an appropriate frequency, commensurate with the acceptable residual risk of
losing data for a given period of time, and the resulting impact on business.
Archiving is a process that ensures long term availability of data by provisions of safe storage, indexing, and refresh
activities.
When a request to perform a restoration of backed up or archived data is received, consideration should be given to
whether the person requesting the restoration is authorized to do so, and whether they are authorized to view the
data being restored. Procedures also should ensure that the restore process does not inadvertently overwrite data that
must not be lost.
More detailed information on backup, restore, and archiving is given in Appendix 9 of this Guide.
GAMP® 4, Appendix O6 and Appendix O7, provide further guidance (see Appendix 13, reference 1).
6.10
Disaster Recovery
Loss of vital parts of the IT Infrastructure and business applications may have serious impact on the business of a
company. With the often complex configuration and interdependence of the infrastructure platforms and business
applications, business becomes sensitive to even smaller incidents in the IT Infrastructure and business applications.
Therefore, Disaster Recovery is an important part of the company’s Business Continuity Planning (outside the scope
of this Guide). The primary goal of Disaster Recovery is to reduce downtime of critical business applications to an
acceptable level following an incident.
Disaster recovery is closely related to the identified Configuration Items (CIs) within the Configuration
Management process as well as the backup, restore, and archiving process.
See GAMP® 4, Appendix O8, for further guidance (see Appendix 13, reference 1).
6.11
Performance Monitoring
The objective of performance monitoring of devices and services is to monitor and record satisfactory operation of
the IT Infrastructure as evidence in support of its continued qualification status, and secondarily, to ensure
fulfillment of the Service Level Agreement (SLA) and any other stated or implied expectations.
The review of results or alarms based on this monitoring activity will trigger maintenance, update, support, or
disaster recovery activities, and therefore, will form the basis for a fast and proactive infrastructure support service.
This approach also should ensure that the platform will be maintained in a state of control during its operational
lifetime.
[PAGE 48]
Page 46
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
To assure that platform performance requirements are continuously met, surveillance procedures should be
developed and alert and action limits defined.
Actual metrics and values should be defined by each company in the context of all relevant deciding factors. In
some instances, there may be less risk to product quality or critical records by allowing a higher known loading on a
server than embarking upon a project to replace it.
Monitoring frequency should be defined for all metrics taking risks and tool efficiency into consideration. A
baseline should be created at the time of installation (or during the Performance Qualification (PQ) of a supported
software application), and actual values should be considered based upon those readings.
When using complex process or system management applications, the monitoring and event reaction should be
automated to some extent.
Appendix 9 of this Guide lists some typical performance metrics from real life GxP regulated environments, and
suggests appropriate alert/actions limits.
Appendix 11 of this Guide provides further guidance on network management.
GAMP® 4, Appendix O5, provides further guidance (see Appendix 13, reference 1).
6.12
Supplier Management
The management of services and deliveries to the IT Infrastructure typically will follow the general policies of
supplier management in the regulated company including evaluation of suppliers, selection of suppliers and the
management of the relationships with the suppliers. Agreements between the regulated company and the supplier
should be documented in contracts, or SLAs, and reviewed at appropriate intervals.
The regulated company should maintain a list of approved or preferred suppliers to ensure that the suppliers meet
the company requirements regarding performance, cost, and quality of the delivered services. Company policies
often include evaluation of the supplier’s performance to meet the agreed services, and an assessment of the
availability of suppliers. To mitigate the risk of suffering from shortage or unacceptable deliveries from a supplier it
may be valuable to have more than one supplier of the same service/platform (e.g., various brands of clients and
servers from several suppliers), also known as ‘second sourcing.’
To support the rollout and service of IT Infrastructure platforms and to exploit the concept of building blocks, it
may be advantageous to set up requirements related to the supplier regarding availability, e.g., stock-size, of the
qualified IT Infrastructure building blocks (e.g., servers, clients, and SW-licenses).
The management of outsourced services are further described in Appendix 8 of this Guide, where the challenges of
outsourcing (e.g., responsibilities, contracts, SLAs, supplier audits) are described.
6.13
Periodic Review
Periodic Reviews should establish that procedures meeting current applicable GxP regulatory requirements are
approved and in use. The review should establish that qualification and operational records, and review reports are
complete, current, and accurate. Periodic Reviews are considered in further detail in Appendix 5 of this Guide.
[PAGE 49]
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Page 47
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
7
Retirement of Platforms
Business applications often outlive the underlying platforms, and in such circumstances, data needs to be migrated
onto the new platform(s). For example, a validated LIMS application may be operational for many years using
modified versions of application software until a desirable version is released which requires a server platform
update. Alternatively, the existing platform may no longer comply with company standards and become too
cumbersome or even impossible to maintain, as suppliers cease providing support on economically acceptable
terms.
When a platform is replaced, special consideration should be given to data migration, especially when conversion is
required as part of the process. Documented assurance should be provided that:
•
all data elements are migrated
•
all critical data attributes are preserved (e.g., security settings)
•
all supporting data are correctly transferred
•
no extra data elements are inadvertently introduced
•
any specified conversions have consistently produced the expected results
In many cases, it may be appropriate to apply statistical methods to obtain the required assurance; in other cases, it
may be necessary to devise computerized tools to provide a complete, automated verification; some suppliers
provide verification tools with the update package. The verification method should be determined by assessing and
documenting the risks involved.
The following documents provide further guidance on retirement of platforms:
•
GAMP® 4, Section 7.11.14 (see Appendix 13, reference 1)
•
GAMP® 4, Appendix O6 (see Appendix 13, reference 1)
•
GAMP® Good Practice Guide: A Risk Based Approach to Compliant Electronic Records and Signatures,
Appendix 3 (see Appendix 13, reference 2)
[PAGE 50]
Page 48
GAMP Good Practice Guide:
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance
Appendices
Appendix 1
Roles and Responsibilities
Appendix 2
Example of Risk Assessment and Controls
Appendix 3
Qualification Deliverables
Appendix 4
Standard Operating Procedures
Appendix 5
Periodic Reviews
Appendix 6
Infrastructure Security
Appendix 7
Upgrade and Patch Management
Appendix 8
Outsourcing
Appendix 9
Server Management
Appendix 10
Client Management
Appendix 11
Network Management
Appendix 12
Glossary
Appendix 13
References
[PAGE 51]
Appendix 1
