12.0 Appendix 2: Introduction of a New
Isolator System for Aseptic Fill
12.1 Background
Appendix 2 describes the introduction of improved technology for aseptic filling and the related assess-
ment of the impact to currently approved biological products. This example refers to the upgrade from
a legacy conventional-filling operation to an isolator technology for toxic, biologically active, geneti-
cally modified, cell-based, and/or protein therapeutics. The introduction of the new isolator aims to
enhance the quality of the product and reduce microbial, particulate, and chemical contamination as
well as increase the sterility safety level and/or operator-safety environment in the case of active biolog-
ics or genetically modified organisms.
12.2 Current Regulatory Filing Considerations—Improvements to Drug
Product Aseptic Filling
12.2.1 U.S. Filing Considerations
With respect to certain biologics, the FDA Guidance for Industry: Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Con-
trols Changes to an Approved Application: Certain Biological Products suggests that changes impacting
the transfer of manufacturing of an aseptically processed sterile drug substance or drug product into a
new or renovated aseptic processing area within the currently licensed building would be considered
a prior approval supplement (PAS). Likewise, the addition or modification to an approved filling line
that affects sterility assurance would be considered a PAS (1).
32 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
In the 1997 FDA Guidance for Industry: Changes to an Approved Application: Biological Products, “Section II.
Changes under §601.12(b) – Changes requiring supplement submission and approval prior to distribution
of the product made using the change (major changes),” item #11 discusses potentially related changes:
Major construction, or changes in location, involving or affecting environmentally controlled
manufacturing or related support areas, such as ***
• aseptic processing areas;
• modifications to support systems with significant potential to affect air, water, or steam quality;
• installation of a new HVAC system involving or affecting environmentally controlled manu-
facturing or related support areas; or
• modifications to an existing HVAC system that supplies aseptic processing areas (2).
In general, the process impact of changing the drug product filling process to replace the filling unit
and introduce an isolator system would be considered a major change and would require a PAS (four-
month review). Both the footprint of the existing filling suite and the HVAC system will be impacted.
The needed space may be reduced, as an isolator would have a Grade A chamber that can be placed in
a Grade C or D space, making a Grade B background no longer necessary. In addition, other adapta-
tions would be needed to accommodate material and airflow accessibility.
FDA offers general information about aseptic processing in Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products
Produced by Aseptic Processing – Current Good Manufacturing Practice and sets high-level expectations
for industry in Guideline for the Submission of Documentation for Sterilization Process Validation in Ap-
plications for Human and Veterinary Drug Products. Both documents summarize the types of data the
FDA and other regulatory authorities look for in aseptic filling processes; however, neither provides
specific guidelines about isolators or types of equipment (3, 4).
12.2.2 Canadian Filing Considerations
The Health Canada Guidance Document: Post-Notice of Compliance (NOC) Changes: Quality Docu-
ment, “Appendix III, Biologics, 3.2.P.3 Manufacture,” places the following changes in the “Notifiable
Change” reporting category:
40. Change involving a drug product manufacturer/manufacturing facility, such as:
*** b. replacement or addition of an equivalent formulation/filling suite, and ***
42. Change in the drug product manufacturing process, such as: *** b. addition or re-
placement of equipment [e.g., formulation tank, filter housing, filling line and head,
and lyophilizer] within the existing filling areas****
A notifiable change involves a seven-day screening and logging period, plus a 90-day target review (5).
The same guidance places the following changes in the supplemental new drug submission (SNDS)
reporting category:
Appendix III, Biologics, 3.2.P.3 Manufacture
40. Change involving a drug product manufacturer/manufacturing facility, such as:
***c. addition of a non-equivalent formulation/filling suite to an approved formula-
tion/filling facility****
Appendix I, Drugs, 3.2.P.3 Manufacture
25. Change in the drug product manufacturing process****
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 33

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
An SNDS (CMC only) involves a 45-day screening and logging period, plus a 180-day target review.
A separate filing is required for each product impacted; however, data from one filing may be leveraged
for other products if, for example, a range of vials and fill volume is considered.
12.2.3 EU Filing Considerations
According to Commission Regulation (EC) No 1234/2008 Guideline on the details of the various cat-
egories of variations to the terms of marketing authorizations for medicinal products for human use and vet-
erinary medicinal products [B.II.b.3, b], variations related to “substantial changes to the manufacturing
process, … which may have a significant impact on the quality, safety or efficacy of the medicinal prod-
uct” are classified as a major variation of Type II. That includes variations to the manufacturing process,
formulation, specifications, or impurity profile of an active substance or finished medicinal product.
Such major variations require approval of the relevant regulatory agency before implementation (6).
12.2.4 WHO Considerations
According to WHO Annex 4 – Guidelines on Procedures and Data Requirements for Changes to Approved
Vaccines [TRS No. 993], changes in the manufacturing process of a final product, such as the addition
or replacement of equipment, including filling lines, are indicated as a “moderate quality change”.
Implementation of changes in the moderate (or major) category requires reporting to the national
regulatory agency to supplement the information in the original marketing authorization or product
license. Major and moderate quality changes should be reviewed and approved by the regulatory au-
thority prior to implementation of that change (7).
This aligns with WHO Annex 3 – Guidelines on Procedures and Data Requirements for Changes to Ap-
proved Biotherapeutic Products [TRS No. 1011], which proposes that a change in a filling line would be
a moderate quality change that should be reviewed and approved by the national regulatory authority
prior to implementation (8).
12.3 Strategy
In this example, the current regulatory requirements versus the proposed requirements, leveraging
ICH Q12 principles (9), are summarized in Table 12.3-1.
34 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 12.3-1 Change in Filling Technology
Current Regulatory Requirements Future Regulatory Requirements
What supporting Any additional tests Justification, including
Existing Established
data are required (e.g., analytical, stability, Supporting Data
Conditions or Impacted What’s changing? Current Filing Category Proposed Filing Category
to demonstrate validation) required and Testing & Risk
Sections
equivalence? other than existing? Assessment
Manufacturing Process Replacement of See “Commitment and See detail below US: PAS (Tell, Wait and Provide PACMP as Follow up with post-
Development (3.2.P.2.3) Conventional Filler Implementation Plan” in Do) prior approval in each change commercial lot
with New Isolator the example below jurisdiction prior to data as Notification of
Description of EU: Type II (Tell, Wait
change implementation fulfilled commitment
Manufacturing Process and Do)
(Tell, Wait and Do) (Do and Tell)
and Process Controls
CAN: Notifiable Change
(3.2.P.3.3)
or SNDS (Tell, Wait,
Controls and Critical and Do)
Steps and Intermediates
(3.2.P.3.4)
Process Validation and/or
Evaluation (3.2.P.3.5)
Batch Analyses (3.2.P.5.4)
Stability (all sections
within 3.2.P.8)
Facilities and Equipment
(3.2.A.1)
The strategy summarized in Table 12.3-1 is intended to leverage the use of a post-approval change management protocol (PACMP, or comparability protocol) con-
sistent with ICH Q12 in order to modify the filing category for changes based on prior agreement between a firm and a regulatory agency. The PACMP will aim
to demonstrate to regulatory authorities how the proposed improvement in the filling manufacturing process generally affects the relevant quality attributes of the
product in order to demonstrate that the planned modifications do not adversely impact the final product quality, safety, and efficacy, as stated in ICH Q5E (10).
Acceptance of the PACMP would be subject to a prior approval review (four-month review, depending on jurisdiction), but may allow for shorter review periods for
each product subsequently affected (i.e., every product that is filled in an impacted suite).
In addition, requesting a presubmission meeting to obtain initial buy-in with the agency should be given consideration.
In this example of upgrading from conventional filler to isolator, consideration for processing capabilities between the previously used equipment compared to the
proposed equipment may be very informative.
35 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Post-Approval Change Management Protocol
For Introduction of a New Isolator
PURPOSE
This post-approval change management protocol (PACMP) describes the strategy and approach for
demonstrating the introduction of an isolator as an improvement to an aseptic filling suite for Ourfa-
voritebiologic (OFB).
This protocol outlines the proposed studies, test methods, and acceptance criteria that will be used to
assess the impact on OFB drug product when manufactured using the new isolator. The data from the
proposed studies will demonstrate that the quality of the OFB drug product is at least comparable to
the historical OFB drug product and that the new isolator is acceptable for manufacturing this product.
SCOPE OF CHANGE
Sterile drug product manufacturing is accomplished in various ways; traditionally, ISO-5 laminar air
flow (LAF) units with manual operations have been widely used. As the sterility of the product is of
the greatest concern, manual operations always have disadvantages over isolated systems. The overall
objective in the aseptic filling process is to attain the highest sterility assurance level by using an iso-
lated system. Currently, this site uses ISO-5 LAF conventional filling technology, an open restricted
access barrier system (RABS). To switch from LAF to any other isolated system for the filling of pro-
tein therapeutics as sterile solutions may require an extensive overhaul of the manufacturing process;
however, the increased control over the following critical areas (in order of importance) plays a major
role in maintaining the quality of the product (11):
• Microbial contamination
• Particulate contamination
• Chemical contamination
Isolated systems available in the industry to exercise that control are:
• Closed RABS (access by glove ports)
• Isolators (access by glove ports with automated decontamination)
• Aseptic work cell with robot (gloveless systems)
Critical quality attributes (CQAs) and critical process parameters (CPPs) affected by any fill–finish
process are illustrated in Figure 12-1 using a fishbone structure.
A thorough assessment was completed with the three options (i.e., RABS, isolator, aseptic work cell)
weighted against product impact, production needs, facility capabilities, and business needs. Moving
forward with the isolator technology was deemed best suited for meeting the needs of the business and
ensuring product quality.
The filling unit in the suite (i.e., conventional filler using LAF) used for production of OFB will be com-
pletely replaced with new equipment, including the introduction of an isolator. As part of this change,
the filling line would clearly separate the influences of the environment from the processing. The new
equipment will have a new pump (current filling uses a diaphragm pump; the proposed filling will use
a peristaltic pump that may be capable of increased output and greater filling accuracy than the cur-
36 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 12-1 Considerations and Critical Quality
Sterility/Decontamination Drug Quantity/Yield Particulates
Fill Weight Variation Product Contact Parts
Isolator Leak Product Hold Time
Product Container Air Flow/Velocity
Environment Monitoring Type of Pumps
Automated Manual Interventions Turbulent vs Unidirectional
Decontamination Fill Weight Check
Media Fill
Intrinsic vs Extrinsic
Vial Entry
Fill Weight Adjustment
Fill Time
First Air
Stopper Entry
Product Filtration Fill Weight Frequency
(i.e., in-process)
Machine Movements
Vial Sterilization
Disinfection vs HO
2 2
Fill Weight Process Capability
Stopper Sterilization Monitoring (Visual Inspection)
In-line Filtration
Fill Finish Critical
Process Parameters
Stopper Placement Time Shear Rate Method of Sterilization
Product storage
Residual Seal Force
Product Exposure Time Oxygen Level
Product container
Seal Change
Volume of HO Relative Humidity Single-use vs multi-use
2 2
Stopper Change
HO Residues Temperature Vial Change Extractables & Leachables
2 2
Oxidizable Substances Degradation Product Container Closure Integrity Testing Others (Impurities)
37 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
rently approved filling line. The new filling isolator will require modifications to the facility, including
the HVAC system and personnel and material flow, and will improve product isolation systems. This
is beneficial as automated integration will, in turn, provide additional process control and consistency,
minimizing human intervention, and provide the highest sterility assurance for the filling operations.
No change to change-over procedures, visual inspection procedures, release specification, or cleaning
procedures is proposed because of this new isolator. All of these are described in this PACMP. The
proposed isolator introduces automated decontamination via vapor phase hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂)
cycle between campaigns to decontaminate the isolator chamber. Both viable and nonviable particle
monitoring will be conducted inside the isolator. Further details will be reported in the process perfor-
mance qualification (PPQ).
To support the changes introduced by a new filling line, the following information is provided in this
proposed PACMP:
• Background and currently approved process and procedures
• Risk and product impact assessments
• Equipment used for the new isolator will be comparable to that used in the current aseptic filling suite;
specifically, a stainless-steel shell and frame for the isolator will continue to be used and all tubing will
still be silicone. The new pump, however, could potentially impact the product quality due to shear
forces. A laboratory study was performed to evaluate the pump and establish its operating parameters.
These studies demonstrated the new pump will not negatively impact the product quality and identi-
fied the filling parameters. The pump settings identified in these studies were used in the Engineering
runs. Information on the Laboratory and Engineering studies is provided later in this PACMP.
• Summary of CQAs and CPPs and plans for PPQ
• Justification for the change
All changes to the process, equipment, and facility will be qualified as described in the PACMP prior
to implementing manufacture of OFB.
BACKGROUND
Current Drug Product Manufacturing
The aseptic manufacturing process for OFB consists of sterile filtration, aseptic filling, capping or clos-
ing, inspection, labeling, packaging, and storage of the finished drug product. The filling areas used
for OFB are shared with other sterile liquid products. All products are manufactured on a campaign
basis so that only one product is present in the manufacturing or filling suite at a time. A validated
changeover procedure is implemented prior to the initiation of a new campaign.
All OFB product-contact manufacturing equipment is dedicated to OFB. Product-contact materi-
als are primarily stainless steel and silicone tubing, and other product-contact materials are glass and
acrylics. Elastomers used in the manufacturing process (e.g., gaskets, tubing) meet the specifications of
USP Class VI, as defined by USP <88> Biological Reactivity, In Vivo, and 21 CFR 177.2600 – Rubber
Articles Intended for Repeated Use (12, 13).
Lot Size(s)
There are two lot sizes for OFB: 450 L and 1250 L. The yield can vary from 50,000–225,000 vials and
135,000–625,000 vials, respectively. All products filled on this filling line use the same lot sizes and
are supported by media fills spanning these ranges.
38 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Fill Process
The currently approved process is provided in Table 12-1.
Table 12-1 Current Process
Manufacturing
Additions/Removals Steps In-Process Tests
Parameters
Filling Suite X
Bulk drug substance Pressure: ≤20 psi Pre-filtration bioburden:
Product Volume to ≤10 CFU/mL
Surface Area (V:SA):
Samples removed for QC Sterile filtration
≤175 mL/cm2
testing
Post-use filter-integrity
bubble point: ≥50 psi
Filling Suite – Aseptic Core (Grade A) – No Isolator
Line speed: Environmental monitoring
≤60 vials/min
Filling Weight check-in intervals
of ~5% of target batch
size
Fully stoppered vials Environmental monitoring
Stoppering
Capping Room
Samples removed for QC Capped vials with integral Environmental monitoring
testing Capping seals Finished product testing
(Release testing)
Packaging Suite
Packaging
Currently approved CQAs and CPPS are provided in Table 12-2 and Table 12-3, respectively. The
proposed process is provided in Table 12-5.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 39

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 12-2 Current Critical Quality Attributes
Critical Step Analytical Method Acceptance Criteria
Pre-sterile Filtration Bioburden ≤10 CFU/mL
Product Release Criteria
Identification Conforms to reference standard Meets criteria
Appearance Visual Solution is clear to colorless to
yellow-green; there may be a few
particulates.
Potency Biological Assay 75-125%
Purities/Impurities HPLC and GC Meets criteria
Particulates (subvisible) Light Obscuration (LO) ≥2 µm – N/A
≥5 µm – N/A
≥10 µm – ≤6000 particles/container
≥25 µm – ≤600 particles/container
pH pH meter 7.6 ± 0.2
Bacterial Endotoxin Turbidimetric LAL <5 EU/mL
Sterility Sterility Meets 21 CFR 610.12
Excipients: Assay 0.100 ± 0.050 mg/mL
Polysorbate 80
Table 12-3 Current Critical Process Parameters
Process Step Manufacturing Criteria Proven Acceptable Range
Sterile Filtration Pressure test: Post-use filter-integrity
≥50 psi
bubble point following WFI flush
Filling (Filling uniformity and Vial weight checks: Weight check in
±1.5%
homogeneity) intervals of ~5% of target batch size
Primary Packaging
OFB is packaged using a standard pharmaceutical container–closure system, specifically, Type 1 clear
glass vials and bromobutyl rubber stoppers, known to be safe and compatible with liquid protein
products. The same container–closure components are used for several sterile protein products on this
filling line as they do not interact and cause changes in the quality of the product.
Table 12-4 provides a general description of the materials used in the primary container–closure sys-
tem. No changes are proposed to the currently approved primary container–closure system due to the
proposed changes to the filling line.
40 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 12-4 Primary Container Closure System Used on Filling Line
Material Description Dimensions/Sizes
Type I glass Meets: 3 ml, 6 ml, and 10 ml
• USP <660>
(not sulfate or sulfate-treated)
• Ph. Eur. 3.2.1
Bromobutyl rubber stopper Meets: 20 mm
• USP <381>
(pre-siliconized)
• Ph. Eur. 3.2.9 (Type l closures)
• ISO 8871
Aluminum seal — —
Polypropylene and resin cap — —
Washing/Sterilization of Components
No changes are proposed to the currently approved washing and sterilization of components due to
the proposed changes to the filling line.
Vials
The processing of vials used for filling OFB and all drug products filled in this line consists of:
• Visual Inspection—100% of vials are visually inspected
• Sampling—Defined number of vials from any lot are sampled according to vial specifications to
be released for use in filling
• Cleaning—Vials for manufacturing use are washed by a validated cycle on the vial washer
• Sterilization—Washed vials are heat-sterilized and depyrogenated using a depyrogenation oven,
then fed through a dry-heat tunnel
• Filling and Closure—Sterilized vials are filled, stoppered, and capped
Stoppers
Stoppers are provided prewashed and siliconized. Stoppers are steam-sterilized and stored in sealed
containers until required for use.
Container Closure Integrity Testing
When new container–closure components or a change to the filling process that may impact container
closure are introduced, container–closure integrity assessments are performed. In order to confirm
comparability following the introduction of the isolator, container–closure integrity will be tested
to support this change. Container and closure system integrity testing includes performing validated
physical or chemical container and closure system integrity tests (e.g., bubble tests, pressure/vacuum
decay tests, trace gas permeation/leak tests, dye penetration tests, seal force or electrical conductivity
tests, and capacitance tests) or microbiological container and closure system integrity tests (e.g., micro-
bial challenge or immersion tests). Such tests may be more useful than sterility testing in demonstrat-
ing the potential for product contamination over the product’s shelf life or dating period. The con-
tainer and closure system integrity tests for OFB will be designed to detect a breach of the container
and/or closure system prior to product contamination.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 41

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Currently Approved Gowning Procedures
Personnel entering the manufacturing areas gown and degown according to specified requirements
following approved written procedures. Different levels of gowning occur according to the environ-
mental controls and to the type of operation being carried out in the manufacturing rooms. Gown-
ing garments might include safety shoes, shoe covers, hair cover, facial hair cover (as needed), safety
glasses, coveralls, booties, sterile gloves, sterile sleeves, or sterile mask in line with written procedures.
Personnel are required to wear gloves prior to handling any cleaned, sanitized, or in-process produc-
tion equipment.
An external laundry service may be used for cleaning and/or sterilization of reusable coveralls and
uniforms, where applicable.
Cleaning Procedures
The facility is cleaned and sanitized using primary disinfectants and sporicidal agents at defined inter-
vals to control mold, bacteria, and spore-forming microorganisms. All manufacturing areas are cleaned
and sanitized as required in written procedures, and all cleaning and sanitization activities are docu-
mented. The firm periodically reviews the data obtained from environmental monitoring to determine
if further modifications to the facility cleaning program are warranted. Bioburden is verified by two
testing methods: Contact surface samples and airborne samples for viable particulates.
Change-Out Procedures
The currently approved and the proposed filling line will be used on a campaign basis across several
protein therapeutics, all filled into glass vials in a multiproduct facility. Filling needles, gloves, all tub-
ing, connectors, and glass containers are single-use and replaced for each campaign. The manufactur-
ing area is dedicated to the production of only one product at any one time, with complete cleaning
and changeover between products.
Throughout the manufacturing process, appropriate measures are established to ensure the absence
of product contamination. Other methods used to prevent contamination include facility design fea-
tures, environmental monitoring, dedicated equipment, room air classification, air pressure differen-
tial, flow of personnel, materials and waste, and cleaning procedures.
With respect to the currently approved and proposed filling process, there are no reusable direct product-
contact materials. Multiuse product-contact equipment is cleaned following validated processes, and the
cleaning effectiveness is verified by total organic carbon methods. Process equipment is sterilized into the
aseptic core or proposed isolator by autoclave sterilization or dry-heat depyrogenation processes.
The product-contact components in the formulation (carboys, stir bars, sampling materials, filters, and
transfer tubing) are sterilized prior to use and are single-use, disposable materials. All product-contact
components in the filtration system (tubing and filters) and in the filtrate receiving-vessel (glass carboy,
tubing, and carboy ports) are sterilized prior to use and are single-use, disposable materials.
The currently approved process uses a diaphragm pump, and proposed filling lines use a peristaltic
pump system. The product-contact components (tubing, connectors, and filling nozzles) are sterilized
prior to use and are single-use, disposable materials. Parts of the filling machine and other equipment
that cannot be sterilized by thermal methods are sanitized by wiping external surfaces with approved
and validated germicidal or sporicidal agents. Such chemical sanitization procedures are restricted to
equipment that cannot be sterilized by other means and to equipment that is not in direct product
contact or in the direct process path.
42 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Media Fill Program
A media fill is one part of the validation of an aseptic manufacturing process. Media fills are performed
every six months and after any changes to the aseptic fill suite are made. Using a sterile microbiological
growth medium in place of the drug product, media fills are designed to simulate the filling process to
ensure the performance of the aseptic manufacturing procedure. Microbiological growth medium is
used in place of the drug solution during media fills to test whether the aseptic procedures are adequate
to prevent contamination during actual drug production.
The media fill program is designed to evaluate the aseptic assembly and operation of the critical (ster-
ile) equipment, qualify the operators and assess their technique, and demonstrate that the environ-
mental controls are adequate to meet the basic requirements necessary to produce a sterile drug by
aseptic processing. Data collected from media fills are compared to predefined acceptance criteria and
run against an approved protocol. The media fills cover the vial sizes specified for OFB (i.e., 3 mL, 6
mL, and 10 mL), ensuring that both the smallest and largest sizes are subject to the media fill.
To assess the impact of the new isolator on the filling suite, media fills will be completed with the new
equipment according to the procedures described here and as part of the comparability and PPQ as-
sessment of this change. The viable monitoring requirements during the filling period and the micro-
bial monitoring results for the media fills pre- and post-change will be provided.
DESCRIPTION OF PLANNED CHANGES
A new isolator will be introduced into the manufacturing suite used for the manufacture of OFB.
When the new isolator is introduced, the filling line will also be completely replaced using a new pump
that has greater throughput and accuracy.
Isolator
The isolator is a “Separative Device” that will provide assured protection by using physical and dynam-
ic barriers to create separation between operation and operator; it comes supplied with HEPA-filtered
air and will be decontaminated in a quantifiable and highly reproducible manner. When the system is
closed, it uses only decontaminated interfaces (11, 14).
This change will introduce new technology: a stainless steel–glass isolator and positive pressurization.
This design facilitates both aseptic and containment applications; however, it will be used primarily in
aseptic processing with the goal of excluding contaminants from the isolator. Construction materials
will be mechanically and chemically resistant (i.e., stainless-steel frame, glass). The operator interface
will require gloves, gauntlets, and appropriate gowning. The aseptic core will continue to be a HEPA-
filtered air supply with vertical, unidirectional air flow (open) and pressure differentials of no more
than 100 Pa. Pressure differentials between the exterior and the interior of the isolator will be moni-
tored continuously and integrated into the existing automated process control system.
Sterilization-in-place will be implemented for contact parts, such as fluid pathways. In areas where this
cannot be performed, all parts will be autoclaved to achieve sterilization and aseptically assembled pri-
or to processing. Parts of the filling machine and other equipment that cannot be sterilized by thermal
methods are sanitized by wiping external surfaces with approved and validated germicidal or sporicidal
agents. Such chemical sanitization procedures are restricted to equipment that cannot be sterilized by
other means and to equipment that is not in direct product contact or in the direct process path.
A full description of the proposed isolator will be available in the PPQ protocol.
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 43

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
The scope of this change is limited to the isolator, which consists of a sterilization tunnel, filling ma-
chine, and capping machine that will have the capability of processing 3 mL, 6 mL, 10 mL vials of
sterile, liquid, injectable drug products. Autoclaves and support utilities are excluded from the scope of
this change. (See Table 12-6 for the impact to process.) The PPQ will be designed according to USP
<1208> and will be validated before its use in sterility testing as part of a batch release (15). To verify
that the isolator system and all impacted equipment are suitable for aseptic processing, the following
validation studies will be completed: Factory acceptance testing (FAT), site acceptance testing (SAT),
installation qualification, operational qualification, and performance qualification. All changes will be
assessed in the PPQ, which will confirm that all identified CPPs and CQAs of the drug product are met.
The current manufacturing process is described in Table 12-1. The proposed process is provided in
Table 12-5. Further description of the manufacturing filling process CQAs (Table 12-2) and CPPs
(Table 12-3) are provided in the Fill Process and Validation sections.
Table 12-5 Proposed Process
Manufacturing
Additions/Removals Steps In-Process Tests
Parameters
Filling Suite X
Bulk drug substance Pressure: ≤20 psi Pre-filtration bioburden:
Product Volume to ≤10 CFU/mL
Samples removed for QC
Surface Area (V:SA):
testing Sterile filtration
≤175mL/cm2
Post-use filter- integrity
bubble point: ≥50 psi
Filling Suite – New Isolator
Line speed: Environmental monitoring
≤60 vials/min
Target Fill Volume:
Filling Target Fill is product- and
strength-dependent
Weight check-in intervals of
~1% of target batch size
Fully stoppered vials Environmental monitoring
Stoppering
Capping Room
Samples removed for QC Capped vials with integral Environmental monitoring
testing Capping seals Finished product testing
(Release testing)
Packaging Suite
Packaging
Table 12-6 highlights information about the manufacturing and filling of the product OFB and the
proposed changes. The changes will be assessed as per predefined PPQ, taking into consideration the
CQAs, CPPs, and lifecycle knowledge management of the product and process.
44 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 12-6 Process Change Impact Assessment
Description (in order of operation) Change Impact
Manufacturing Site Same filling suite will be used; however, gowning
areas and space will be reduced. Proposed isolator
chamber is Grade A, proposed into a Grade C space.
HVAC changes, air flow), material flow, waste flow,
and personnel flow changes will be captured in PPQ.
Processing Rooms and Equipment (product-contact No change proposed
and non-product-contact) are sanitized
Environmental Monitoring sampling for equipment No change proposed
set-up is initiated
Sterile Equipment is set up; sterile filtration is started Will be confirmed via validation as part of change
Environmental Monitoring is initiated for filling Will be confirmed via validation as part of change
operations
Vials are transferred from sterilization tunnel into vial Sterilization tunnel is a new feature; washed
feed and depyrogenated vials will be fed through the
sterilization tunnel
Target Fill May be less based on new-found efficiencies; will be
confirmed via validation as part of change in equipment
Nominal Fill Volume No change proposed; will be confirmed via validation
as part of change
Stoppers are loaded No change proposed
Caps are loaded No change proposed
Sterile, empty Vials will be fed through filling machine No change proposed
with 100% weight check
Filled Vials will be stoppered and capped or sealed
automatically
100% Visual Inspection of filled vials per USP <790> No change proposed
Hold Times Will be confirmed via validation as part of change
Processing Times No change proposed; however, will be confirmed via
validation as part of change in equipment
Batch Size(s) No change proposed; more vials may be available
based on reduced target fill and new-found
efficiencies. Will be confirmed via validation as part of
change in equipment
Consistent with ICH Q12, the sections of the Common Technical Document (CTD) that will be as-
sessed to evaluate the impact to ECs are listed in Table 12-7 (9).
Technical Report No. 91 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 45

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 12-7 Impacted CTD Sections and/or Established Conditions
CTD Section Section Title Established Conditions
Manufacturing Process
3.2.P.2.3 Update based on final PPQ
Development
Description of Manufacturing
3.2.P.3.3 Update based on final PPQ
Process and Process Controls
Controls and Critical Steps and
3.2.P.3.4 Update based on final PPQ
Intermediates
For more details on PPQ
parameters being assessed, see
“Process Validation”
CPPs to be assessed will include:
Sterilization tunnel: Conveyor speed
and time, temperature, pressure,
airflow
Filler: Conveyor speed, pump
operation, tubing
Capping: Conveyor speed,
compression
Formulation: Filtered bulk drug
Process Validation and/or
3.2.P.3.5 product homogeneity, filtered bulk
Evaluation
drug product hold time
Sterile filtration: Filter validation
Filling: Drug product filling
uniformity (fill volume)
CQAs to be assessed will include:
Sterilization tunnel: Bioburden and
endotoxin
Filler: Bioburden and weight
Capping: Container closure integrity
Product: Final drug product release
specifications
Release data, as per currently
approved drug product
3.2.P.5.4 Batch Analysis specifications for three historical
commercial lots compared to three
commercial lots post-change
At least six months of stability data
from three Engineering runs under
nominal, accelerated, and stressed
conditions Propose to put at least
3.2.P.8.1
Stability Summary and Conclusions the first lot from PPQ run into the
long-term stability program. Real-
time data available at time of filing
will be provided. Product has a
three-year shelf life at 2–8 °C.
46 © 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 91

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
(Table 12-7 continued)
CTD Section Section Title Established Conditions
Commitment to continue stability
studies for first three PPQ runs
and Engineering runs per currently
approved storage conditions and shelf
3.2.P.8.2 Stability Commitment life (0, 3, 6, 9, 12, 24, and 36 months
at 2–8 °C, and accelerated conditions
for 3 months). Thereafter, at least one
batch per year will be placed into an
ongoing long-term stability program.
3.2.P.8.3 Stability Data See Section 3.2.P.8.1.
Updates to the facility and suites
involved in the manufacture of the
drug product, specifically, current
state vs proposed new state with
new filling equipment and impact
on the following, will be provided:
Complete set of floor plans and flow
charts (drawings, room classifications,
water systems, HVAC systems), as
appropriate and/or as impacted
Cleaning validation, as appropriate
Results of the environmental
3.2.A.1 Facilities and Equipment
monitoring studies in classified areas
Cleaning procedures (including
data in a summary validation
report) demonstrating lack of carry-
over or cross-contamination for
new filling process if impacted by
new equipment
Information describing the change-
over procedures for the shared
product-contact equipment, if
impacted by new filling process in
line with new equipment
