=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial Prior to 2013
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-B9A1739F-E171-4E11-A0C7-E43A318EA17F_1_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99835_01_01
DOI Ref:
b6e2i
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈1116〉 MICROBIOLOGICAL CONTROL AND MONITORING OF ASEPTIC
PROCESSING ENVIRONMENTS
Microbiologically controlled environments are used for a variety of purposes within the healthcare industry. This general information
chapter provides information and recommendations for environments where the risk of microbial contamination is controlled through
aseptic processing. Products manufactured in such environments include pharmaceutical sterile products, bulk sterile drug substances,
sterile intermediates, excipients, and, in cer tain cases, medical devices. Aseptic processing environments are far more critical in terms of
patient risk than controlled environments used for other manufacturing operations—for example, equipment and component preparation,
limited bioburden control of nonsterile products, and processing of terminally sterilized products. In this chapter, the type of aseptic
processing is differentiated by the presence or absence of human operators. An advanced aseptic process is one in which direct intervention
with open product containers or exposed product contact surfaces by operators wearing conventional cleanroom garments is not required
and never permitted. [Note—A description of terms used in this chapter can be found in the Glossary at the end of the chapter.]
The guidance provided in this chapter and the monitoring parameters given for microbiological evaluation should be applied only to clean
rooms, restricted-access barrier systems (RABS), and isolators used for aseptic processing. ISO-classi«ed environments used for other
purposes are not required to meet the levels of contamination control required for aseptically produced sterile products. The environments
used for nonsterile applications require different microbial control strategies.
A large propor tion of products labeled as sterile are manufactured by aseptic processing rather than terminal sterilization. Because
aseptic processing relies on the exclusion of microorganisms from the process stream and the prevention of microorganisms from entering
open containers during processing, product bioburden as well as the bioburden of the manufacturing environment are impor tant factors
governing the risk of unacceptable microbial contamination. The terms aseptic and sterile are not synonymous. Sterile means having a
complete absence of viable microorganisms or organisms that have the potential to reproduce. In the purest microbiological sense, an
aseptic process is one that prevents contamination by the exclusion of microorganisms. In contemporary aseptic healthcare-product
manufacturing, aseptic describes the process for handling sterilized materials in a controlled environment designed to maintain microbial
contamination at levels known to present minimal risk.
In any environment where human operators are present, microbial contamination at some level is inevitable. Even the most cautious clean-
room environment design and operation will not eliminate the shedding of microorganisms if human operators are present. Thus, an
expectation of zero contamination at all locations during every aseptic processing operation is technically not possible and thus is
unrealistic. There are no means to demonstrate that an aseptic processing environment and the product-contact surfaces within that
environment are sterile. Monitoring locations should be determined based upon a assessment of risk. Although manufacturers should review
environmental monitoring results frequently to ensure that the facility operates in a validated state of control, monitoring results can neither
prove nor disprove sterility. Because of the limitations of monitoring, manufacturers cannot rely directly on monitoring, statistics, or periodic
aseptic-processing simulations to ensure a sterility assurance level.
Environmental monitoring is usually performed by personnel and thus requires operator intervention. As a result, environmental monitoring
can both increase the risk of contamination and also give false-positive results. Thus, intensive monitoring is unwarranted, par ticularly in the
ISO 5 environments that are used in the most critical zones of aseptic processing.
A number of sampling methods can be used to assess and control the microbiological status of controlled environments for aseptic
processing. At present, nearly all of these methods rely on the growth and recovery of microorganisms, many of which can be in a damaged
state caused by environmental stress and therefore may be di­cult to recover. The numerical values for air, surface, and personnel
monitoring included in this chapter are not intended to represent limits or speci«cations but are strictly informational. Because of the variety
of microbiological sampling equipment and methods, it is not scienti«cally reasonable to suggest that the attainment of these values
guarantees microbial control or that excursions beyond values in this chapter indicate a loss of control. The assessment of risks associated
with manufacturing environments must be made over a signi«cant period; and in each case, the contamination recovery rate metric should
be established on the basis of a review of actual «ndings within the facility. The objective of each user should be to use contamination
recovery rates to track ongoing performance and to re«ne the microbiological control program to foster improvements. When optimum
operational conditions are achieved within a facility, contamination recovery rate levels typically become relatively stable within a normal
range of variability.
There are no standard methods for air sampling, and available literature indicates that air-sampling methods are highly variable. It should
not be assumed that similar sample volumes taken by different methods will produce similar rates of recovery. Many factors can affect
microbial recovery and survival, and different air sampler suppliers may have designed their systems to meet different requirements. Also,
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 2 ===
sample-to-sample variation in microbial sampling can be extensive. Limited data are available regarding the accuracy, precision, sensitivity,
and limits of detection of monitoring methods used in the aseptic processing of healthcare products.
Surface sampling methods are also not standardized. Different media are employed, and in the case of swabs, different results have been
repor ted for wet and dry swab methods and contact plates. Replicate sample contact plates should be expected to give similar results under
identical conditions, but rates of recovery have been repor ted to be both lower than expected and highly variable. In general, surface
monitoring has been found to recover <50%, even when used with relatively high inoculum levels on standardized coupons. In actual
production environments where organisms are stressed to varying degrees, recovery rates may be lower.
ADVANCED ASEPTIC TECHNOLOGIES
Advanced aseptic technologies can be de«ned as those that do not rely on the direct intervention of human operators during processing.
At present, technologies such as isolators, blow/«ll/seal, and closed RABS (designs that are never opened during setup or operation) may be
considered advanced aseptic technologies, provided that direct intervention by gowned personnel is disallowed during processing. In recent
years, isolator technology has found a broad acceptance in healthcare manufacturing. Isolators and closed RABS effectively separate the
operator from the critical aseptic processing environment. Because these systems substantially reduce contamination risk, their
microbiological control levels are higher than those of conventional clean rooms that have comparable par ticulate air classi«cation level, for
example, ISO 5.
CLEAN ROOM CLASSIFICATION FOR ASEPTIC PROCESSING ENVIRONMENTS
The design and construction of clean rooms and controlled environments are covered in ISO 14644 series. This standard de«nes the
performance of a clean environment with respect to the concentration of total par ticulates per unit volume. ISO 14644-1 stipulates the total
par ticulate counts allowed for a clean environment to meet the de«ned air quality classi«cations. The reader is referred to this standard
regarding the design characteristics and cer ti«cation of clean environments.
Pharmaceutical manufacturers are concerned with nonviable par ticulate contamination in injectable products (see Par ticulate Matter in
Injections 〈788〉). Unlike microbial contamination in which experimental data suggest that humans are the only signi«cant source, nonviable
par ticulates can arise both from humans and from processing equipment. Studies indicate that gowned humans slough par ticulate and
microbial contamination at a rather consistent rate. However, the relationship between microbial (viable) and nonviable contamination does
not hold for par ticulates shed by processing equipment. Where equipment is the primary source of par ticulate matter, the resulting
par ticulates are essentially all nonviable.
The argument that if fewer total par ticulates are present in a clean room, it is less likely that airborne microorganisms will be present is
true only if human operators are the source of par ticulate matter. It is not possible to clearly distinguish between background total
par ticulate contamination generated largely by mechanical operations and the total par ticulates contributed by personnel. Thus, it is both
commonplace and proper for clean-room environmental monitoring programs to consist of both a total par ticulate component and a
microbiological component. Table 1 describes the clean room classi«cations commonly used in the pharmaceutical industry. In aseptic
processing, clean environments of ISO 14644-1 Classes 5–8 are typically used.
T
able 1. Airborne T
otal Par ticulate Cleanliness Classes
a
ISO Class
b
Par ticles ≥0.5 µm/m
3
ISO 5
3520
ISO 6
35,200
ISO 7
352,000
ISO 8
3,520,000
a
Taken from ISO International Standard 14644 Par t 1, published by the International Organization for Standardization, May 1999.
b
The four ISO 14644-1 classes correspond closely to former U.S. Federal Standard 209E classi«cations. The relationships are ISO
5/Class 100, ISO 6/Class 1000, ISO 7/Class 10,000, and ISO 8/Class 100,000.
Isolators and closed RABS present a different picture, because personnel are excluded from the aseptic processing environment and
manipulations are made using glove-and-sleeve assemblies and half-suits made of thick, ¬exible plastic (such as polyvinyl chloride or
synthetic rubber). Personnel have far less effect on the microbial quality of the environment within an isolator enclosure than in clean room
environments. Some users have chosen to operate RABS in a manner that allows open, direct human intervention. In an open operational
state, these systems are more similar in operation to conventional clean rooms and therefore cannot be considered advanced aseptic
processing systems. In an open RABS, the ability of operators to adversely affect microbial contamination risk is higher than with closed
RABS or isolators.
Speci«cations for air changes per hour and air velocities are not included in ISO 14644, nor were they included in Federal Standard 209E.
Typically, ISO Class 8/Class 100,000 rooms are designed to provide a minimum of 20 air changes per hour; ISO Class 7/Class 10,000 rooms
are designed to provide more than 50 air changes per hour; and ISO Class 5/Class 100 clean rooms provide more than 100 air changes per
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 3 ===
hour. The design of some facility criteria may differ. By diluting and removing contaminants, large volumes of air are likely to reduce airborne
contamination in aseptic production. Optimum conditions vary considerably, depending on process characteristics, par ticularly the amount
of contamination derived from personnel. These speci«cations should be used only as a guide in the design and operation of clean rooms,
because the precise correlations among air changes per hour, air velocity, and microbial control have not been satisfactorily established
experimentally.
Manufacturers should maintain a predominantly unidirectional ¬ow of air (either ver tical or horizontal) in a staffed Class 5 clean room
environment, par ticularly when products, product containers, and closures are exposed. In the evaluation of air movement within a clean
room, studying air¬ow visually by smoke studies or other suitable means is probably more useful than using absolute measures of air¬ow
velocity and change rates. Risk assessment models are another useful way of reducing contamination risk and should be considered.
Air velocity and change rates are far less impor tant in isolators or closed RABS than in clean rooms because personnel are more carefully
separated from the product, product containers, and closures. Air velocities substantially lower than those used in human-scale clean rooms
have proved adequate in isolator systems and may be appropriate in RABS as well. In zones within isolators where par ticulate matter poses
a hazard to product quality, predominantly ver tical or horizontal unidirectional air¬ow can be maintained. Experience has shown that well-
controlled mixing or turbulent air¬ow is satisfactory for many aseptic processes and for sterility testing within isolators (see Sterility Testing
—Validation of Isolator Systems 〈1208〉).
IMPORTANCE OF A MICROBIOLOGICAL EVALUATION PROGRAM FOR CONTROLLED ENVIRONMENTS
Monitoring of total par ticulate count in controlled environments, even with the use of electronic instrumentation on a continuous basis,
does not provide information on the microbiological content of the environment. The basic limitation of par ticulate counters is that they
measure par ticles of 0.5 µm or larger. While airborne microorganisms are not free-¬oating or single cells, they frequently associate with
par ticles of 10–20 µm. Par ticulate counts as well as microbial counts within controlled environments vary with the sampling location and the
activities being conducted during sampling. Monitoring the environment for nonviable par ticulates and microorganisms is an impor tant
control function because they both are impor tant in achieving product compendial requirements for Foreign and Par ticulate Matter and
Sterility in Injections and Implanted Drug Products 〈1〉.
Total par ticulate monitoring may provide a better means of evaluating the overall quality of the environment in isolators and closed RABS
than in most conventional clean rooms. The superior exclusion of human-borne contamination provided by an isolator results in an increased
propor tion of nonviable par ticulates. Total par ticulate counting in an isolator is likely to provide an immediate indicator of changes in
contamination level. Microbial monitoring programs should assess the effectiveness of cleaning and sanitization practices by and of
personnel who could have an impact on the bioburden. Because isolators are typically decontaminated using an automatic vapor or gas
generation system, microbial monitoring is much less impor tant in establishing their e­ciency in eliminating bioburden. These automatic
decontamination systems are validated directly, using an appropriate biological indicator challenge, and are controlled to de«ned exposure
parameters during routine use to ensure consistent decontamination.
Microbial monitoring cannot and need not identify and quantify all microbial contaminants in these controlled environments.
Microbiological monitoring of a clean room is technically a semiquantitative exercise, because a truly quantitative evaluation of the
environment is not possible, given the limitations in sampling equipment. Both the lack of precision of enumeration methods and the
restricted sample volumes that can be effectively analyzed suggest that environmental monitoring is incapable of providing direct
quantitative information about sterility assurance. Analysts should remember that no microbiological sampling plan can prove the absence
of microbial contamination, even when no viable contamination is recovered. The absence of growth on a microbiological sample means
only that growth was not discovered; it does not mean that the environment is free of contamination.
Routine microbial monitoring should provide su­cient information to demonstrate that the aseptic processing environment is operating in
an adequate state of control. The real value of a microbiological monitoring program lies in its ability to con«rm consistent, high-quality
environmental conditions at all times. Monitoring programs can detect changes in the contamination recovery rate that may be indicative of
changes in the state of control within the environment.
Environmental microbial monitoring and analysis of data by quali«ed personnel can assist in ensuring that a suitable state of control is
maintained. The environment should be sampled during normal operations to allow the collection of meaningful, process-related data.
Microbial sampling should occur when materials are in the area, processing activities are ongoing, and a full complement of personnel is
working within the aseptic processing environment.
Microbial monitoring of manufacturing clean rooms, RABS, and isolators should include compressed gases, surfaces, room or enclosure
air, and any other materials and equipment that might produce a risk of contamination. The analysis of contamination trends in an aseptic
environment has long been a component of the environmental control program. In aseptic processing environments and par ticularly in ISO
Class 5 environments, contamination is infrequently observed. In isolator enclosures, contamination is rarer still because of superior
exclusion of human-borne contamination. Because of the criticality of these environments, even minor changes in the contamination incident
rates may be signi«cant, and manufacturers should frequently and carefully review monitoring data. In less critical environments, microbial
contamination may be higher, but changes in recovery rates should be noted, investigated, and corrected. Isolated recoveries of
microorganisms should be considered a normal phenomenon in conventional clean rooms, and these incidents generally do not require
speci«c corrective action, because it is almost cer tain that investigations will fail to yield a scienti«cally veri«able cause. Because sampling
itself requires an aseptic intervention in conventional clean rooms, any single uncorrelated contamination event could be a false positive.
When contamination recovery rates increase from an established norm, process and operational investigation should take place.
Investigations will differ depending on the type and processing of the product manufactured in the clean room, RABS, or isolator.
Investigation should include a review of area maintenance documentation; sanitization/decontamination documentation; the occurrence of
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 4 ===
nonroutine events; the inherent physical or operational parameters, such as changes in environmental temperature and relative humidity; and
the training status of personnel.
In closed RABS and isolator systems, the loss of glove integrity or the accidental introduction of material that has not been
decontaminated are among the most probable causes of detectable microbial contamination. Following the investigation, actions should be
taken to correct or eliminate the most probable causes of contamination. Because of the relative rarity of contamination events in modern
facilities, the investigation often proves inconclusive. When corrective actions are under taken, they may include reinforcement of personnel
training to emphasize acceptable gowning and aseptic techniques and microbial control of the environment. Some additional
microbiological sampling at an increased frequency may be implemented, but this may not be appropriate during aseptic processing
because intrusive or overly intensive sampling may entail an increased contamination risk. When additional monitoring is desirable, it may be
more appropriate during process simulation studies. Other measures that can be considered to better control microbial contamination
include additional sanitization, use of different sanitizing agents, and identi«cation of the microbial contaminant and its possible source.
In any aseptic environment, conventional or advanced, the investigation and the rationale for the course of action chosen as a result of the
investigation must be carefully and comprehensively documented.
PHYSICAL EVALUATION OF CONTAMINATION CONTROL EFFECTIVENESS
Clean environments should be cer ti«ed as described in ISO 14644 series in order to meet their design classi«cation requirements. The
design, construction, and operation of clean rooms vary greatly, so it is di­cult to generalize requirements for parameters such as «lter
integrity, air velocity, air patterns, air changes, and pressure differential. In par ticularly critical applications such as aseptic processing, a
structured approach to physical risk assessment may be appropriate.
One such method has been developed by Ljundqvist and Reinmüller. This method, known as the L-R method, challenges the air ventilation
system by evaluating both air¬ow and the ability of an environment to dilute and remove airborne par ticles. In the L-R method, a smoke
generator allows analysts to visualize the air movements throughout a clean room or a controlled environment, including vor tices or
turbulent zones, and the air¬ow pattern can be «ne-tuned to minimize these undesirable effects. Following visual optimization of air¬ow,
par ticulate matter is generated close to the critical zone and sterile «eld. This evaluation is done under simulated production conditions but
with equipment and personnel in place. This type of test can also be used to evaluate the ability of RABS and isolator systems, par ticularly
around product exit por ts in these systems, to resist the effects of contamination.
Visual evaluation of air movement within clean rooms is a subjective process. Complete elimination of turbulence or vor tices is not
possible in operationing clean rooms that contain personnel and equipment. Air visualization is simply one step in the effor t to optimize
clean room operations and is not a de«nitive pass/fail test, because acceptable or unacceptable conditions are not readily de«nable.
Proper testing and optimization of the physical characteristics of the clean room, RABS, or isolator are essential before implementation of
the microbiological monitoring program. Assurance that the clean room, RABS, or isolator is in compliance with its predetermined
engineering speci«cations provides con«dence that the ability of the facility systems and operating practices to control the bioburden and
nonviable par ticulate matter are appropriate for the intended use. These tests should be repeated during routine cer ti«cation of the clean
room or advanced aseptic processing systems, and whenever signi«cant changes are made to the operation, such as personnel ¬ow,
equipment operation, material ¬ow, air-handling systems, or equipment layout.
TRAINING OF PERSONNEL
Good personnel performance plays an essential role in the control of contamination, proper training and supervision are central to
contamination control. Aseptic processing is the most critical activity conducted in microbiological controlled environments, and
manufacturers must pay close attention to details in all aspects of this endeavor. Rigorous discipline and strict supervision of personnel are
essential in order to ensure a level of environmental quality appropriate for aseptic processing.
Training of all personnel working in controlled environments is critical. This training is equally impor tant for personnel responsible for the
microbial monitoring program, because contamination of the clean working area could inadver tently occur during microbial sampling. In
highly automated operations, monitoring personnel may be the employees who have the most direct contact with the critical surfaces and
zones within the processing area. Microbiological sampling has the potential to contribute to microbial contamination caused by
inappropriate sampling techniques or by placing personnel in or near the critical zone. A formal training program is required to minimize this
risk. This training should be documented for all personnel who enter controlled environments. Interventions should always be minimized,
including those required for monitoring activities; but when interventions cannot be avoided, they must be conducted with aseptic technique
that approaches perfection as closely as possible.
Management of the facility must ensure that personnel involved in operations in clean rooms and advanced aseptic processing
environments are well versed in relevant microbiological principles. The training should include instruction about the basic principles of
aseptic technique and should emphasize the relationship of manufacturing and handling procedures to potential sources of product
contamination. Those supervising, auditing, or inspecting microbiological control and monitoring activities should be knowledgeable about
the basic principles of microbiology, microbial physiology, disinfection and sanitation, media selection and preparation, taxonomy, and
sterilization. The staff responsible for supervision and testing should have academic training in medical or environmental microbiology.
Sampling personnel as well as individuals working in clean rooms should be knowledgeable about their responsibilities in minimizing the
release of microbial contamination. Personnel involved in microbial identi«cation require specialized training about required laboratory
methods. Additional training about the management of collected data must be provided. Knowledge and understanding of applicable
standard operating procedures are critical, especially those procedures relating to corrective measures taken when environmental conditions
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 5 ===
require. Understanding of contamination control principles and each individual's responsibilities with respect to good manufacturing
practices (GMPs) should be an integral par t of the training program, along with training in conducting investigations and in analyzing data.
The only signi«cant sources of microbial contamination in aseptic environments are the personnel. Because operators disperse
contamination and because the ultimate objective in aseptic processing is to reduce end-user risk, only healthy individuals should be
permitted access to controlled environments. Individuals who are ill must not be allowed to enter an aseptic processing environment, even
one that employs advanced aseptic technologies such as isolators, blow/«ll/seal, or closed RABS.
The impor tance of good personal hygiene and a careful attention to detail in aseptic gowning cannot be overemphasized. Gowning
requirements differ depending on the use of the controlled environment and the speci«cs of the gowning system itself. Aseptic processing
environments require the use of sterilized gowns with the best available «ltration proper ties. The fullest possible skin coverage is desirable,
and sleeve covers or tape should be considered to minimize leaks at the critical glove–sleeve junction. Exposed skin should never be visible
in conventional clean rooms under any conditions. The personnel and gowning considerations for RABS are essentially identical to those for
conventional clean rooms.
Once employees are properly gowned, they must be careful to maintain the integrity of their gloves, masks, and other gown materials at all
times. Operators who work with isolator systems are not required to wear sterilized clean-room gowns, but inadequate aseptic technique and
employee-borne contamination are the principal hazards to safe aseptic operations in isolators, as well as RABS, and in conventional clean
rooms. Glove-and-sleeve assemblies can develop leaks that can allow the mechanical transfer of microorganisms to the product. A second
glove, worn either under or over the primary isolator/RABS glove, can provide an additional level of safety against glove leaks or can act as a
hygienic measure. Also, operators must understand that aseptic technique is an absolute requirement for all manipulations performed with
gloves within RABS and isolator systems.
The environmental monitoring program, by itself, cannot detect all events in aseptic processing that might compromise the
microbiological quality of the environment. Therefore, periodic media-«ll or process simulation studies are necessary, as is thorough ongoing
supervision, to ensure that appropriate operating controls and training are effectively maintained.
CRITICAL F
ACTORS IN THE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF A MICROBIOLOGICAL ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING
PROGRAM
Since the advent of comprehensive environmental monitoring programs, their applications in capturing adverse trends or drifts has been
emphasized. In a modern aseptic processing environment—whether an isolator, RABS, or conventional clean room—contamination has
become increasingly rare. Never theless, a monitoring program should be able to detect a change from the validated state of control in a
facility and to provide information for implementing appropriate countermeasures. An environmental monitoring program should be tailored
to speci«c facilities and conditions. It is also helpful to take a broad perspective in the interpretation of data. A single uncorrelated result on a
given day may not be signi«cant in the context of the technical limitations associated with aseptic sampling methods.
Selection of Growth Media
A general microbiological growth medium such as soybean–casein digest medium (SCDM) is suitable for environmental monitoring in
most cases because it suppor ts the growth of a wide range of bacteria, yeast, and molds. This medium can be supplemented with additives
to overcome or to minimize the effects of sanitizing agents or of antibiotics. Manufacturers should consider the speci«c detection of yeasts
and molds. If necessary, general mycological media such as Sabouraud’s, modi«ed Sabouraud’s, or inhibitory mold agar can be used. In
general, monitoring for strict anaerobes is not performed, because these organisms are unlikely to survive in ambient air. However, micro-
aerophilic organisms may be observed in aseptic processing. Should anoxic conditions exist or if investigations warrant (e.g., identi«cation
of these organisms in sterility testing facilities or Sterility Tests 〈71〉 results), monitoring for micro-aerophiles and organisms that grow under
low-oxygen conditions may be warranted. The ability of any media used in environmental monitoring, including those selected to recover
speci«c types of organisms, must be evaluated for their ability to suppor t growth, as indicated in 〈71〉.
Selection of Culture Conditions
Time and incubation temperatures are set once the appropriate media have been selected. Typically, for general microbiological growth
media such as SCDM, incubation temperatures in the ranges of approximately 20°–35° have been used with an incubation time of not less
than 72 hours. Longer incubation times may be considered when contaminants are known to be slow growing. The temperature ranges given
above are by no means absolute. Mesophilic bacteria and mold common to the typical facility environment are generally capable of growing
over a wide range of temperatures. For many mesophilic organisms, recovery is possible over a range of approximately 20°. In the absence
of con«rmatory evidence, microbiologists may incubate a single plate at both a low and a higher temperature. Incubating at the lower
temperature «rst may compromise the recovery of Gram-positive cocci that are impor tant because they are often associated with humans.
Sterilization processes for preparing growth media should be validated. When selective media are used for monitoring, incubation
conditions should re¬ect published technical requirements. Contamination should not be introduced into a manufacturing clean room as a
result of using contaminated sampling media or equipment. Of par ticular concern is the use of aseptically prepared sampling media.
Wherever possible, sampling media and their wrappings should be terminally sterilized by moist heat, radiation, or other suitable means. If
aseptically prepared media must be used, analysts must carry out preincubation and visual inspection of all sampling media before
introduction into the clean room. The reader is referred to Microbiological Best Laboratory Practices 〈1117〉 for fur ther information regarding
microbiology laboratory operations and control.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 6 ===
ESTABLISHMENT OF SAMPLING PLAN AND SITES
During initial star tup or commissioning of a clean room or other controlled environment, speci«c locations for air and surface sampling
should be determined. Locations considered should include those in proximity of the exposed product, containers, closures, and product
contact surfaces. In aseptic processing, the area in which containers, closures, and product are exposed to the environment is often called
the critical zone—the critical zone is always ISO 5. For aseptic operations the entire critical zone should be treated as a sterile «eld. A
nonsterile object, including the gloved hands of clean room personnel or an RABS/isolator glove, should never be brought into contact with a
sterile product, container closure, «lling station, or conveying equipment before or during aseptic processing operations. Operators and
environmental monitoring personnel should never touch sterile par ts of conveyors, «lling needles, par ts hoppers, or any other equipment that
is in the product-delivery pathway. This means that surface monitoring on these surfaces is best done at the end of production operations.
The frequency of sampling depends on the manufacturing process conducted within an environment. Classi«ed environments that are
used only to provide a lower overall level of bioburden in nonsterile product manufacturing areas require relatively infrequent environmental
monitoring. Classi«ed environments in which closed manufacturing operations are conducted, including fermentation, sterile API processing,
and chemical processes, require fewer monitoring sites and less frequent monitoring because the risk of microbial contamination from the
surrounding environment is comparatively low. Microbiological monitoring of environments in which products are «lled before terminal
sterilization is generally less critical than the monitoring of aseptic processing areas. The amount of monitoring required in «lling operations
for terminal sterilization depends on the susceptibility of the product survival and the potential for proliferation of microbial contamination.
The identi«cation and estimated number of microorganisms that are resistant to the subsequent sterilization may be more critical than the
microbiological monitoring of the surrounding manufacturing environments.
It is not possible to recommend microbial control levels for each type of manufacturing environment. The levels established for one ISO
Class 7 environment, for example, may be inappropriate for another ISO Class 7 environment, depending on the production activities
under taken in each. The user should conduct a prospective risk analysis and develop a rationale for the sampling locations and frequencies
for each controlled environment. The classi«cation of a clean room helps establish control levels, but that does not imply that all rooms of
the same classi«cation should have the same control levels and the same frequency of monitoring. Monitoring should re¬ect the
microbiological control requirements of manufacturing or processing activities. Formal risk assessment techniques can result in a
scienti«cally valid contamination control program.
Table 2 suggests frequencies of sampling in decreasing order of frequency and in relation to the criticality or product risk of the area being
sampled. This table distinguishes between aseptic processing where personnel are aseptically gowned and those where a lesser gowning is
appropriate. Environmental monitoring sampling plans should be ¬exible with respect to monitoring frequencies, and sample plan locations
should be adjusted on the basis of the observed rate of contamination and ongoing risk analysis. On the basis of long-term observations,
manufacturers may increase or decrease sampling at a given location or eliminate a sampling location altogether. Oversampling can be as
deleterious to contamination control as undersampling, and careful consideration of risk and reduction of contamination sources can guide
the sampling intensity.
T
able 2. Suggested Frequency of Sampling for Aseptic Processing Areas
a
Sampling Area/Location
Frequency of Sampling
Clean Room/RABS
Critical zone (ISO 5 or better)
Active air sampling
Each operational shift
Surface monitoring
At the end of the operation
Aseptic area adjacent critical zone
All sampling
Each operating shift
Other nonadjacent aseptic areas
All sampling
Once per day
Isolators
Critical zone (ISO 5 or better)
Active air sampling
Once per day
Surface monitoring
At the end of the campaign
Nonaseptic areas surrounding the isolator
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 7 ===
Sampling Area/Location
Frequency of Sampling
All sampling
Once per month
a
All operators are aseptically gowned in these environments (with the exception of background environments for isolators). These
recommendations do not apply to production areas for nonsterile products or other classi«ed environments in which fully aseptic gowns are
not donned.
SELECTION OF SAMPLE SITES WITHIN CLEAN ROOMS AND ASEPTIC PROCESSING AREAS
ISO 14644 suggests a grid approach for the total par ticulate air classi«cation of clean rooms. This approach is appropriate for cer tifying
the total par ticulate air quality performance against its design objective. Grids may also have value in analyzing risk from microbial
contamination, although in general, grids that have no personnel activity are likely to have low risk of contamination. Microbial contamination
is strongly associated with personnel, so microbiological monitoring of unstaffed environments is of limited value.
Microbiological sampling sites are best selected with consideration of human activity during manufacturing operations. Careful
observation and mapping of the clean room during the quali«cation phase can provide useful information concerning the movement and
positioning of personnel. Such observation can also yield impor tant information about the most frequently conducted manipulations and
interventions.
The location and movement of personnel within the clean room correlate with contamination risk to the environment and to the processes
conducted within that environment. Sample sites should be selected so that they evaluate the impact of personnel movement and work
within the area, par ticularly interventions and manipulations within the critical zone.
The most likely route of contamination is airborne, so the samples most critical to risk assessment are those that relate to airborne
contamination near exposed sterile materials. Other areas of concern are entry points where equipment and materials move from areas of
lower classi«cation to those of higher classi«cation. Areas within and around doors and airlocks should be included in the monitoring
scheme. It is customary to sample walls and ¬oors, and indeed sampling at these locations can provide information about the effectiveness
of the sanitization program. Sampling at these locations can take place relatively infrequently, because contamination there is unlikely to
affect product. Operators should never touch ¬oors and walls, so mechanical transmission of contamination from these surfaces to critical
areas where product is exposed should not occur.
Manufacturers typically monitor surfaces within the critical zone, although this should be done only at the end of operations. Residues of
media or diluent from wet swabs should be avoided on surfaces, because they could lead to microbial proliferation. Also, cleaning surfaces
to remove diluent or media requires personnel intervention and movements that can result in release of microbial contamination into the
critical zone and can disrupt air¬ow.
MICROBIOLOGICAL CONTROL P
ARAMETERS IN CLEAN ROOMS, ISOLATORS, AND RABS
Since the early 1980s, manufacturers have established aler t and action levels for environmental monitoring. In recent years the numerical
difference between aler t and action levels has become quite small, especially in ISO 5 environments. Growth and recovery in microbiological
assays have normal variability in the range of ±0.5 log
. Studies on active microbiological air samplers indicate that variability of as high as
tenfold is possible among commonly used sampling devices. As a result of this inherent variability and indeterminate sampling error, the
supposed differences between, for example, an aler t level of 1 cfu and an action level of 3 cfu are not analytically signi«cant. Treating
differences that are within expected, and therefore, normal ranges as numerically different is not scienti«cally valid and can result in
unwarranted activities. In a practical sense, numerical values that vary by as much as «ve- to tenfold may not be signi«cantly different.
Because of the limited accuracy and precision of microbial growth and recovery assays, analysts can consider the frequency with which
contamination is detected rather than absolute numbers of cfu detected in any single sample. Also, a cfu is not a direct enumeration of
microorganisms present but rather is a measure of contamination that may have originated from a clump of organisms.
Mean contamination recovery rates should be determined for each clean room environment, and changes in contamination recovery rate
at a given site or within a given room may indicate the need for corrective action. Within the ISO 5 critical zone, airborne and surface
contamination recovery rates of 1% or less should be attainable with current methods. Contamination recovery rates for closed RABS and
isolator systems should be signi«cantly lower still and can be expected to be <0.1%, on the basis of published monitoring results.
Contamination observed at multiple sites in an environment within a single sampling period may indicate increased risk to product and
should be carefully evaluated. The appearance of contamination nearly simultaneously at multiple sites could also arise from poor sampling
technique, so careful review is in order before drawing conclusions about potential loss of control. Resampling an environment several days
after contamination is of little value, because the conditions during one sampling occasion may not be accurately duplicated during another.
Surface samples may also be taken from clean room garments. Personnel sampling should be emphasized during validation and is best
done at the completion of production work in order to avoid adventitious contamination of the garments. In this case the average should be
<1% for these sample sites as well. Gloves on closed RABS and isolators should meet the more rigorous expectation of <0.1% contamination
recovery rates.
Because of the inherent variability of microbial sampling methods, contamination recovery rates are a more useful measure of trending
results than is focusing on the number of colonies recovered from a given sample. Table 3 provides recommended contamination recovery
rates for aseptic processing environments. The incident rate is the rate at which environmental samples are found to contain microbial
contamination. For example, an incident rate of 1% would mean that only 1% of the samples taken have any contamination regardless of
colony number. In other words, 99% of the samples taken are completely free of contamination. Contamination recovery rates that are higher
10
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 8 ===
than those recommended in Table 3 may be acceptable in rooms of similar classi«cation that are used for lower-risk activities. Action should
be required when the contamination recovery rate trends above these recommendations for a signi«cant time.
T
able 3. Suggested Initial Contamination Recovery Rates in Aseptic Environments
a
Room Classi«cation
Active Air
Sample
(%)
Settle Plate (9 cm) 4 h
Exposure (%)
Contact Plate or Swab (%)
Glove or Garment (%)
Isolator/Closed RABS
(ISO 5 or better)
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
ISO 5
<1
<1
<1
<1
ISO 6
<3
<3
<3
<3
ISO 7
<5
<5
<5
<5
ISO 8
<10
<10
<10
<10
a
All operators are aseptically gowned in these environments (with the exception of background environments for isolators). These
recommendations do not apply to production areas for nonsterile products or other classi«ed environments in which fully aseptic gowns are
not donned.
Detection frequency should be based on actual monitoring data and should be retabulated monthly. Action levels should be based on
empirical process capability. If detection frequencies exceed the recommendations in Table 3 or are greater than established process
capability, then corrective actions should be taken. Corrective actions may include but are not limited to the following:
Revision of the sanitization program, including selection of antimicrobial agents, application methods, and frequencies
Increased surveillance of personnel practices, possibly including written critiques of aseptic methods and techniques
Review of microbiological sampling methods and techniques
When higher-than-typical recovery levels for glove and garment contamination are observed, additional training for gowning practices may
be indicated.
SIGNIFICANT EXCURSIONS
Excursions beyond approximately 15 cfu recovered from a single ISO 5 sample, whether from airborne, surface, or personnel sources,
should happen very infrequently. When such ISO 5 excursions do occur, they may be indicative of a signi«cant loss of control when they
occur within the ISO 5 critical zone in close proximity to product and components. Thus, any ISO 5 excursion >15 cfu should prompt a careful
and thorough investigation.
A key consideration for an abnormally high number of recovered colonies is whether this incident is isolated or can be correlated with
other recoveries. Microbiologists should review recovery rates for at least two weeks before the incident of abnormally high recovery so that
they can be aware of other recoveries that might indicate an unusual pattern. Microbiologists should carefully consider all recoveries,
including those that are in the more typical range of 1–5 cfu. The identity of the organisms recovered is an impor tant factor in the conduct of
this investigation.
In the case of an isolated single excursion, establishing a de«nitive cause probably will not be possible, and only general corrective
measures can be considered. It is never wise to suggest a root cause for which there is no solid scienti«c evidence. Also, there should be an
awareness of the variability of microbial analysis. Realistically, there is no scienti«c reason to treat a recovery of 25 cfu as statistically
different from a recovery of 15 cfu. A value of 15 cfu should not be considered signi«cant in terms of process control, because realistically
there is no difference between a recovery of 14 cfu and one of 15 cfu. Microbiologists should use practical scienti«c judgment in their
approach to excursions.
FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT DATA INTERPRETATION
In the high-quality environments required for aseptic processing, detection frequency typically is low. As can be seen from the rates
recommended in Table 3, the majority of samples taken in an aseptic processing area will yield a recovery of zero contamination. In the most
critical areas within an aseptic processing operation, it is expected that less than 1% of the samples will yield any recoverable contamination.
In the most advanced of modern aseptic operations that use separative technologies such as isolators or closed RABS, the recovery rate will
approach zero at all times.
The microbiologist responsible for environmental control or sterility assurance should not take this to mean that the environmental quality
approaches sterility. The sensitivity of any microbial sampling system in absolute terms is not known. In environmental monitoring, a result
of zero means only that the result is below the limit of detection of the analytical system. A false sense of security should not be derived
from the infrequency of contamination recovery in aseptic processing.
Sterility assurance is best accomplished by a focus on human-borne contamination and the facility design features that best mitigate risk
from this contamination. Greatest risk mitigation can be attained by reducing or eliminating human interventions through proper equipment
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 9 ===
design and by providing su­cient air exchanges per hour for the intended personnel population of the facility. Other risk mitigation factors
include effective personnel and material movement and the proper control of temperature and humidity. Secondary factors for risk mitigation
include cleaning and sanitization. Risk analysis models that analyze processes prospectively to reduce human-borne contamination risk by
minimizing operator interventions are more powerful tools for sterility assurance than monitoring. Environmental monitoring cannot prove or
disprove in absolute terms the sterility of a lot of product. Environmental monitoring can only assure those responsible for a process that a
production system is in a consistent, validated state of control. Care should be taken to avoid drawing inappropriate conclusions from
monitoring results.
SAMPLING AIRBORNE MICROORGANISMS
Among the most commonly used tools for monitoring aseptic environments are impaction and centrifugal samplers. A number of
commercially available samplers are listed for informational purposes. The selection, appropriateness, and adequacy of using any par ticular
sampler are the responsibility of the user.
Slit-to-Agar Air Sampler (STA)
The unit is powered by an attached source of controllable vacuum. The air intake is obtained through a standardized slit below which is
placed a slowly revolving Petri dish that contains a nutrient agar. Airborne par ticles that have su­cient mass impact the agar surface, and
viable organisms are allowed to grow. A remote air intake is often used to minimize disturbance of unidirectional air¬ow.
Sieve Impactor
This apparatus consists of a container designed to accommodate a Petri dish that contains a nutrient agar. The cover of the unit is
perforated with openings of a predetermined size. A vacuum pump draws a known volume of air through the cover, and airborne par ticles
that contain microorganisms impact the agar medium in the Petri dish. Some samplers feature a cascaded series of sieves that contain
perforations of decreasing size. These units allow determination of the size range distribution of par ticulates that contain viable
microorganisms based on the size of the perforations through which the par ticles landed on the agar plates.
Centrifugal Sampler
The unit consists of a propeller or turbine that pulls a known volume of air into the unit and then propels the air outward to impact on a
tangentially placed nutrient agar strip set on a ¬exible plastic base.
Sterilizable Microbiological Atrium
The unit is a variant of the single-stage sieve impactor. The unit's cover contains uniformly spaced ori«ces approximately 0.25 inch in size.
The base of the unit accommodates one Petri dish containing a nutrient agar. A vacuum pump controls the movement of air through the unit,
and a multiple-unit control center as well as a remote sampling probe are available.
Surface Air System Sampler
This integrated unit consists of an entry section that accommodates an agar contact plate. Immediately behind the contact plate is a
motor and turbine that pulls air through the unit's perforated cover over the agar contact plate and beyond the motor, where it is exhausted.
Multiple mounted assemblies are also available.
Gelatin Filter Sampler
The unit consists of a vacuum pump with an extension hose terminating in a «lter holder that can be located remotely in the critical space.
The «lter consists of random «bers of gelatin capable of retaining airborne microorganisms. After a speci«ed exposure time, the «lter is
aseptically removed and dissolved in an appropriate diluent and then plated on an appropriate agar medium to estimate its microbial
content.
Settling Plates
This method is still widely used as a simple and inexpensive way to qualitatively assess the environments over prolonged exposure times.
Published data indicate that settling plates, when exposed for 4- to 5-hour periods, can provide a limit of detection for a suitable evaluation of
the aseptic environment. Settling plates may be par ticularly useful in critical areas where active sampling could be intrusive and a hazard to
the aseptic operation.
One of the major drawbacks of mechanical air samplers is the limited sample size of air being tested. When the microbial level in the air of
a controlled environment is expected to contain extremely low levels of contamination per unit volume, at least 1 cubic meter of air should be
tested in order to maximize sensitivity. Typically, slit-to-agar devices have an 80-L/min sampling capacity (the capacity of the surface air
system is somewhat higher). If 1 cubic meter of air were tested, then it would require an exposure time of 15 min. It may be necessary to use
sampling times in excess of 15 min to obtain a representative environmental sample. Although some samplers are repor ted to have high
sampling volumes, consideration should be given to the potential for disruption of the air¬ow patterns in any critical area and to the creation
of turbulence.
Technicians may wish to use remote sampling systems in order to minimize potential risks resulting from intervention by environmental
samplers in critical zones. Regardless of the type of sampler used, analysts must determine that the extra tubing needed for a remote probe
does not reduce the method's sensitivity to such an extent that detection of low levels of contamination becomes unlikely or even
impossible.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 10 ===
SURF
ACE SAMPLING
Another component of the microbial-control program in controlled environments is surface sampling of equipment, facilities, and
personnel. The standardization of surface sampling methods and procedures has not been as widely addressed in the pharmaceutical
industry as has the standardization of air-sampling procedures. Surface sampling can be accomplished by the use of contact plates or by the
swabbing method.
Contact plates «lled with nutrient agar are used for sampling regular or ¬at surfaces and are directly incubated for the appropriate time
and temperature for recovery of viable organisms. Specialized agar can be used for the recovery of organisms that have speci«c growth
requirements. Microbial estimates are repor ted per contact plate.
The swabbing method can be used to supplement contact plates for sampling of irregular surfaces, especially irregular surfaces of
equipment. The area that will be swabbed is de«ned with a sterile template of appropriate size. In general, it is in the range of 24–30 cm
2
.
After sample collection the swab is placed in an appropriate diluent or transpor t medium and is plated onto the desired nutrient agar. The
microbial estimates are repor ted per swab of de«ned sampling area.
Surface monitoring is used as an environmental assessment tool in all types of classi«ed environments. In ISO 5 environments for aseptic
processing, surface monitoring is generally performed beside critical areas and surfaces. Component hoppers and feed chutes that contact
sterile surfaces on closures and «lling needles can be tested for microbial contamination. Often in conventional staffed clean rooms, these
product contact surfaces are steam sterilized and aseptically assembled. The ability of operators to perform these aseptic manipulations are
evaluated during process stimulations or media «lls, although true validation of operator technique in this manner is not possible. Surface
monitoring on surfaces that directly contact sterile par ts or product should be done only after production operations are completed. Surface
sampling is not a sterility test and should not be a criterion for the release or rejection of product. Because these samples must be taken
aseptically by personnel, it is di­cult to establish with cer tainty that any contamination recovered is product related.
CUL
TURE MEDIA AND DILUENTS
The type of medium, liquid or solid, used for sampling or plating microorganisms depends on the procedure and equipment used. Any
medium used should be evaluated for suitability for the intended purpose. The most commonly used all-purpose solid microbiological
growth medium is soybean–casein digest agar. As previously noted, this medium can be supplemented with chemicals that counteract the
effect of various antimicrobials.
IDENTIFICATION OF MICROBIAL ISOLATES
A successful environmental control program includes an appropriate level of identi«cation of the ¬ora obtained by sampling. A knowledge
of the ¬ora in controlled environments aids in determining the usual microbial ¬ora anticipated for the facility and in evaluating the
effectiveness of the cleaning and sanitization procedures, methods, agents, and recovery methods. The information gathered by an
identi«cation program can be useful in the investigation of the source of contamination, especially when recommended detection
frequencies are exceeded.
Identi«cation of isolates from critical and immediately adjacent areas should take precedence over identi«cation of microorganisms from
noncritical areas. Identi«cation methods should be veri«ed, and ready-to-use kits should be quali«ed for their intended purpose.
CONCLUSION
Environmental monitoring is one of several key elements required in order to ensure that an aseptic processing area is maintained in an
adequate level of control. Monitoring is a qualitative exercise, and even in the most critical applications such as aseptic processing,
conclusions regarding lot acceptability should not be made on the basis of environmental sampling results alone. Environments that are
essentially free of human operators generally have low initial contamination rates and maintain low levels of microbial contamination.
Human-scale clean rooms present a very different picture. Studies conclusively show that operators, even when carefully and correctly
gowned, continuously slough microorganisms into the environment. Therefore, it is unreasonable to assume that samples producing no
colonies, even in the critical zone or on critical surfaces, will always be observed. Periodic excursions are a fact of life in human-scale clean
rooms, but the contamination recovery rate, par ticularly in ISO 5 environments used for aseptic processing, should be consistently low.
Clean-room operators, par ticularly those engaged in aseptic processing, must strive to maintain suitable environmental quality and must
work toward continuous improvement of personnel operations and environmental control. In general, fewer personnel involved in aseptic
processing and monitoring, along with reduction in interventions, reduces risk from microbial contamination.
GLOSSARY
Airborne Par ticulate Count (also referred to as T
otal Par ticulate Count):
The total number of par ticles of a given size per unit volume of air.
Airborne Viable Par ticulate Count (also referred to as T
otal Airborne Aerobic Microbial Count):
The recovered number of colony-forming units (cfu) per unit volume of air.
Air Changes:
The frequency per unit of time (minutes, hours, etc.) that the air within a controlled environment is replaced. The air can be recirculated
par tially or totally replaced.
Air Sampler:
Devices or equipment used to sample a measured amount of air in a speci«ed time to quantitate the par ticulate or microbiological status of
air in the controlled environment.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 11 ===
Aseptic:
Technically, the absence of microorganisms, but in aseptic processing this refers to methods and operations that minimize microbial
contamination in environments where sterilized product and components are «lled and/or assembled.
Aseptic Processing:
An operation in which the product is assembled or «lled into its primary package in an ISO 5 or better environment and under conditions that
minimize the risk of microbial contamination. The ultimate goal is to produce products that are as free as possible of microbial contamination.
Barrier System:
Physical barriers installed within an aseptic processing room to provide par tial separation between aseptically gowned personnel and critical
areas subject to considerable contamination risk. Personnel access to the critical zone is largely unrestricted. It is subject to a high level
disinfection.
Bioburden:
Total number and identity of the predominant microorganisms detected in or on an ar ticle.
Clean Room:
A room in which the concentration of airborne par ticles is controlled to meet a speci«ed airborne par ticulate cleanliness Class. In addition,
the concentration of microorganisms in the environment is monitored; each cleanliness Class de«ned is also assigned a microbial level for air,
surface, and personnel gear.
Commissioning of a Controlled Environment:
Cer ti«cation by engineering and quality control that the environment has been built according to the speci«cations of the desired cleanliness
Class and that, under conditions likely to be encountered under normal operating conditions (or worst-case conditions), it is capable of
delivering an aseptic process. Commissioning includes media-«ll runs and results of the environmental monitoring program.
Contamination Recovery Rate:
The contamination recovery rate is the rate at which environmental samples are found to contain any level of contamination. For example, an
incident rate of 1% would mean that only 1% of the samples taken have any contamination regardless of colony number.
Controlled Environment:
Any area in an aseptic process system for which airborne par ticulate and microorganism levels are controlled to speci«c levels, appropriate
to the activities conducted within that environment.
Corrective Action:
Actions to be performed that are according to standard operating procedures and that are triggered when cer tain conditions are exceeded.
Critical Zone:
Typically the entire area where product and the containers and closures are exposed in aseptic processing.
Detection Frequency:
The frequency with which contamination is observed in an environment. Typically expressed as a percentage of samples in which
contamination is observed per unit of time.
Environmental Isolates:
Microorganisms that have been isolated from the environmental monitoring program.
Environmental Monitoring Program:
Documented program implemented via standard operating procedures that describes in detail the methods and acceptance criteria for
monitoring par ticulates and microorganisms in controlled environments (air, surface, personnel gear). The program includes sampling sites,
frequency of sampling, and investigative and corrective actions.
Equipment Layout:
Graphical representation of an aseptic processing system that denotes the relationship between and among equipment and personnel. This
layout is used in the Risk Assessment Analysis to determine sampling site and frequency of sampling based on potential for microbiological
contamination of the product/container/closure system. Changes must be assessed by responsible managers, since unauthorized changes in
the layout for equipment or personnel stations could result in increase in the potential for contamination of the product/container/closure
system.
Isolator for Aseptic Processing:
An aseptic isolator is an enclosure that is over-pressurized with HEPA «ltered air and is decontaminated using an automated system. When
operated as a closed system, it uses only decontaminated interfaces or rapid transfer por ts (RTPs) for materials transfer. After
decontamination they can be operated in an open manner with the ingress and/or egress of materials through de«ned openings that have been
designed and validated to preclude the transfer of contamination. It can be used for aseptic processing activities or for asepsis and
containment simultaneously.
Material Flow:
The ¬ow of material and personnel entering controlled environments should follow a speci«ed and documented pathway that has been
chosen to reduce or minimize the potential for microbial contamination of the product/closure/container systems. Deviation from the
prescribed ¬ow could result in increase in the potential for microbial contamination. Material/personnel ¬ow can be changed, but the
consequences of the changes from a microbiological point of view should be assessed by responsible managers and must be authorized and
documented.
Media Fill:
Microbiological simulation of an aseptic process by the use of growth media processed in a manner similar to the processing of the product
and with the same container/closure system being used.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 12 ===
Media Growth Promotion:
Procedure that references Growth Promotion Test of Aerobes, Anerobes, and Fungi in Sterility Tests 〈71〉 to demonstrate that media used in the
microbiological environmental monitoring program, or in media-«ll runs, are capable of suppor ting growth of indicator microorganisms and of
environmental isolates from samples obtained through the monitoring program or their corresponding ATCC strains.
Product Contact Areas:
Areas and surfaces in a controlled environment that are in direct contact with either products, containers, or closures and the microbiological
status of which can result in potential microbial contamination of the product/container/closure system.
Restricted Access Barrier System (RABS):
An enclosure that relies on HEPA «ltered air over-spill to maintain separation between aseptically gowned personnel and the operating
environment. It is subject to a high level of disinfection prior to use in aseptic process. It uses decontaminated (where necessary) interfaces or
RTPs for materials transfer. It allows for the ingress and/or egress of materials through de«ned openings that have been designed and
validated to preclude the transfer of contamination. If opened subsequent to decontamination, its performance capability is adversely
impacted.
Risk Assessment Analysis:
Analysis of the identi«cation of contamination potentials in controlled environments that establish priorities in terms of severity and
frequency and that will develop methods and procedures that will eliminate, reduce, minimize, or mitigate their potential for microbial
contamination of the product/container/closure system.
Sampling Plan:
A documented plan that describes the procedures and methods for sampling a controlled environment; identi«es the sampling sites, the
sampling frequency, and number of samples; and describes the method of analysis and how to interpret the results.
Sampling Sites:
Documented geographical location, within a controlled environment, where sampling for microbiological evaluation is taken. In general,
sampling sites are selected because of their potential for product/container–closure contacts.
Standard Operating Procedures:
Written procedures describing operations, testing, sampling, interpretation of results, and corrective actions that relate to the operations that
are taking place in a controlled environment and auxiliary environments. Deviations from standard operating procedures should be noted and
approved by responsible managers.
Sterile or Aseptic Field:
In aseptic processing or in other controlled environments, it is the space at the level of or above open product containers, closures, or
product itself, where the potential for microbial contamination is highest.
Sterility:
Within the strictest de«nition of sterility, an ar ticle is deemed sterile when there is complete absence of viable microorganisms. Viable, for
organisms, is de«ned as having the capacity to reproduce. Absolute sterility cannot be practically demonstrated because it is technically
unfeasible to prove a negative absolute. Also, absolute sterility cannot be practically demonstrated without testing every ar ticle in a batch.
Sterility is de«ned in probabilistic terms, where the likelihood of a contaminated ar ticle is acceptably remote.
Swabs for Microbiological Sampling:
Devices used to remove microorganisms from irregular or regular surfaces for cultivation to identify the microbial population of the surface.
A swab is generally composed of a stick with an absorbent tip that is moistened before sampling and is rubbed across a speci«ed area of the
sample surface. The swab is then rinsed in a sterile solution to suspend the microorganisms, and the solution is transferred to growth medium
for cultivation of the microbial population.
Trend Analysis:
Data from a routine microbial environmental monitoring program that can be related to time, shift, facility, etc. This information is periodically
evaluated to establish the status or pattern of that program to ascer tain whether it is under adequate control. A trend analysis is used to
facilitate decision-making for requali«cation of a controlled environment or for maintenance and sanitization schedules.
APPENDIX
Additional Resources
Agalloco J, Akers J. Risk analysis for aseptic processing: The Akers-Agalloco method. Pharm Technol. 2005; 29(11):74–88.
Agalloco J, Akers J. The simpli«ed Akers-Agalloco method for aseptic processing risk analysis. Pharm Technol. 2006; 31(7)60–72.
Akers, J. The proper role of environmental monitoring in aseptic processing. Am Pharm Rev. 2006; 9(4):24–28.
CDC, Healthcare Infection Control Advisory Committee. Guidelines for environmental control in healthcare facilities. MMWR 2003; 52(No.
RR-10):1–42.
Favero MS, Puleo JR, Marshall JH, Oxborrow GS. Microbiological sampling of surfaces. J Appl Bacteriol. 1968; 31:336–346.
Hussong D, Madsen R. Analysis of environmental microbiology data from clean room samples. Pharm Technol. 2004; Aseptic Processing
Suppl:10–15.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 14644-1, Clean rooms and associated environments, par t 1: classi«cation of air
cleanliness. Geneva: ISO; 1999.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 14644-2, Clean rooms and associated environments, par t 2: speci«cations for testing
and monitoring to prove continued compliance with 14644 par t 1. Geneva: ISO; 2000.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments


=== PAGE 13 ===
Jensen PA, Todd WF
, Davis GN, Scarpino PV
. Evaluation of eight bioaerosol samplers challenged with aerosol of free bacteria. Am Ind Hyg
Assoc J. 1992; 53:660–667.
Ljungqvist B. Active sampling of airborne viable par ticulate in controlled environments: a comparative study of common instruments. Eur J
Parenter Sci. 1998; 3:59–62.
Ljungqvist B, Reinmüller B. Interaction between air movements and the dispersion of contaminants: clean zones with unidirectional air
¬ow. J Parenter Sci Technol. 1993; 47(2):60–69.
Ljungqvist B, Reinmüller B. Airborne viable par ticles and total number of airborne par ticles: comparative studies of active air sampling.
PDA J Sci Technol. 2000; 54:112–116.
Maruyama M, Matsuoka T
, Deguchi M, Akers J. The application of robotics to aseptic surface monitoring. Pharm Technol. 2007; 32(7):40–
44.
Process simulation testing for sterile bulk pharmaceutical chemicals. PDA Technical Repor t No. 28. J Parenter Sci Technol. 1998; 52 S3.
Reinmüller B. Dispersion and risk assessment of airborne contaminants in pharmaceutical cleanrooms. Building Serv Eng Bull (Sweden).
2001; Bulletin No. 56.
Stewar t SL, Grinshpun SA, Willeke K, Terzieva S, Ulevicius V
, Donnelly J. Effect of impact stress on microbial recovery on an agar surface.
Appl Environ Micro. 1995; 61:1232–1239.
Whyte W. Reduction of microbial dispersion by clothing. J Parenter Sci Technol. 1985; 39(1):51–60.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<1116> MICROBIOLOGICAL EVALUATION OF
CLEAN ROOMS AND OTHER CONTROLLED
ENVIRONMENTS
Leslie Furr
Associate Scienti«c Liaison
GCM2022
General Chapters - Microbiology
2022
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. PF 36(6)
Current DocID: GUID-B9A1739F-E171-4E11-A0C7-E43A318EA17F_1_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99835_01_01
DOI ref: b6e2i
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:16 PM
USP-NF 〈1116〉 Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments
