IV.  Regulatory
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
33
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Q 4-1:  How will regulatory authorities pivot between on-site and 
remote inspections?
Background
The COVID-19 pandemic necessitated a change in the world’s working habits, and pharmaceutical in-
dustry regulators were no exception. To maintain regulatory oversight of both GMP and good clinical 
practice (GCP) activities, regulators worldwide adopted remote assessments, using video-conferencing 
software and devices to enable continuity of compliance oversight. Such technologies enabled remote 
inspections, evaluations, and assessments of certain activities and sites, even as the world was locked 
down with social distancing and travel restrictions.
To accommodate the changes made by regulators, manufacturing sites had to be prepared for desktop 
audits and/or remote interactive evaluations and remote audits, if requested. Tools (e.g., virtual glasses, 
translators) should be kept available should regulators wish to continue with these inspection methods 
in the future (1). Desktop audits (a high-level documentary review of policies and procedures) have 
been conducted prior to the COVID-19 outbreak; however, FDA has created new tools that can be 
used in combination with the desktop audits to better evaluate the sites and products in scope.
The FDA limiting unnecessary contact by conducting only prioritized domestic and foreign facility 
inspections and those that are deemed mission-critical (2). 
When a planned inspection is not mission-critical, is not a prioritized domestic inspection, or is impacted by 
travel restrictions resulting from the public health emergency, the FDA will use other available methods and 
information to support regulatory decisions and the oversight of facilities, and it will supplement the inspec-
tion with other available tools. The FDA has developed a Guidance for Industry: Remote Interactive Evaluations 
of Drug Manufacturing and Bioresearch Monitoring Facilities During COVID-19 Public Health Emergency that 
describes the various remote interactive tools that the industry may request be used to conduct an evalua-
tion. Within the guidance, any combination of these interactive tools can be used in a remote interactive 
evaluation. The FDA may ask to conduct a remote interactive evaluation prior to or following other types of 
regulatory oversight activities (e.g., an inspection or a request for records or other information) (3). 
Lessons Learned
International regulatory authorities adapted their inspection approaches to ensure regulatory oversight 
of GxP activities, especially for high-priority products. Due to restrictions to protect public health, regu-
latory authorities used digital technologies, such as video-conferencing software and devices, to enable 
continuity of compliance oversight. The International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities 
(ICMRA) established the COVID-19 Working Group: Remote GCP and GMP Regulatory Oversight 
Inspections to review the adaptation of both GCP and GMP inspections during the pandemic to 
evaluate remote approaches. The team was chaired by the United Kingdom’s Medicines and Healthcare 
products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) and had representatives of global regulatory agencies from the 
FDA, EMA, Health Canada, Swissmedic, HPRA Ireland, AEMPS Spain, ANSM France, PEI Germa-
ny, MHLW/PMDA Japan, TGA Australia, ANVISA Brazil, HSA Singapore, WHO, and Saudi-FDA. 
The reflection paper from this working group presents the various factors that were considered by the 
inspectorates to assess the need for inspection on a case-by-case basis and apply established quality 
risk management principles and tools in their decisions on their regulatory oversight approach. This 
decision-making process has typically been performed by the lead inspector in consultation with op-
erational management following discussions with the company being inspected. Factors considered by 
regulatory authorities during the pandemic have included:
•	
Local or international restrictions that have been in place to deal with the public health emergency
•	
The need to protect the health and safety of the inspector, inspectorate staff, and staff at the 
inspected facility, including reducing burden while dealing with the pandemic itself
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
34
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
•	
The regulatory compliance history of the inspected; for example, considering if there have been 
repeat deficiencies identified or issues associated with information provided that could have 
potentially been misleading to an inspector
•	
The scope and objectives (preapproval, routine, or for cause) of the inspection
•	
The type of site (e.g., investigator, bioanalytical, sterile manufacturing) and intrinsic risks/suit-
ability for remote assessment in order to fulfill the inspection objective
•	
The complexity of the activities of the site in terms of how challenging it may be to observe and 
adequately assess these remotely and by considering factors that may indicate regulatory compli-
ance-related risks associated with the site
•	
How recently the site was inspected on site as well as the findings from that inspection
•	
Changes at the site since the previous inspection
•	
Activities delegated to contract research organizations (CROs) and service providers
•	
Accessibility of electronic systems owned and managed by service providers, CROs, and spon-
sors and whether these are accessible remotely owing to confidentiality rules 
•	
Access to source documents (e.g., validation methods, process performance qualification data) 
while complying with applicable regulations and/or institutional policies
•	
Where redaction of documents must be performed to safeguard privacy and confidentiality
•	
The inherent risk associated with the activities conducted by the site, the types of products, and 
the need for the product (e.g., high unmet medical need)
•	
Ability of inspectors and the inspected facility to conduct inspections remotely considering 
resources, technical proficiency, and suitability of the site
•	
Whether the location of the site to be inspected made it more efficient or practical to use the 
remote approach to enable regulatory compliance verification (4)
If the risk assessment determined that the use of the remote oversight approaches was not suitable for 
regulatory compliance activities, two approaches were typically taken. Either the inspection or regula-
tory compliance activity was postponed until the risk assessment changed or the pandemic conditions 
ensured that an on-site approach was suitable; or a hybrid approach was adopted. The primary factor 
that altered the initial risk assessment was the change in national or local rules to manage the public-
health emergency, which typically resulted in the postponement of the inspection until the rules were 
changed.
The inspectorates have thus prioritized mission-critical domestic inspections, which might generally 
include preapproval, prelicense, surveillance, and for-cause inspections. The relevant agency will pre-
announce such prioritized domestic inspections to the company to be inspected to help ensure the 
safety of the investigator and the firm’s employees. This will provide the safest possible environment 
to accomplish the agency’s regulatory activities, while also ensuring the appropriate staff are on site to 
assist the agency staff with inspection activities. In-person foreign inspections would be placed on hold 
as long as it was necessary and mandated by local pandemic restrictions (2–3).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
35
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Based on the experiences of the authorities in 2020-2021, the ICMRA COVID-19 Working Group 
stated that remote inspections were an “enabling tool” that allowed the maintenance of “at least a 
minimal regulatory oversight during the pandemic, it is not the view of the group that remote inspec-
tions would fully replace an on-site inspection programme” (1). They explained that is because of 
limitations with the current technologies that hampered remote assessment of compliance. Using the 
remote approach to supplement typical in-person visits could be beneficial in post-pandemic times, 
but the extent of its use in situations outside of a public-health emergency would need to be evaluated.
Remote inspection tools have been adopted by several national regulatory authorities (e.g., MHRA, 
TGA Australia, EMA, Russia’s Roszdravnadzor, ANVISA Brazil), though other regulatory agencies 
may not align with them. Companies should communicate in advance with the relevant national 
regulatory authority (NRA) about recertification inspections to learn if desktop audits and/or remote 
interactive evaluations will be acceptable. Until on-site inspections resume, manufacturing sites should 
discuss the determination of certification extensions with both local and national regulators if desktop 
audits and remote inspections are not feasible.
Manufacturers may also want to consider using the Mutual Reliance regulatory tool, where one au-
thority can unilaterally rely on another authority’s inspection reports, as promoted by the Pharmaceu-
tical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S). The WHO has been a major supporter of regulatory 
reliance and defines it as
…the act whereby a NRA in one jurisdiction may take into account and give significant 
weight to assessments performed by another authority or trusted institution, or to any other 
authoritative information in reaching its own decision. The relying authority remains inde-
pendent, responsible, and accountable regarding the decisions taken, even when it relies on 
the decisions and information of others (5).
The WHO Guidance on Good Reliance Practices, published in June 2021, is a comprehensive key docu-
ment that elaborates on these principles further and provides greater detail on reliance in the “Quality” 
section of the document (5). 
As part of trade agreements, Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRA) between the FDA and foreign 
NRAs allow drug inspectors to rely upon information from drug inspections conducted within each 
other’s borders. Under the U.S. Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act, enacted 
in 2012, the FDA has the authority to enter into agreements to recognize drug inspections conducted 
by foreign regulatory authorities if the FDA determines those authorities are capable of conducting 
inspections that meet U.S. requirements (6). This concept has been used, and firms have received 
extensions of recognition based on these principles.
When an MRA or Mutual Reliance tool is employed, sites should propose to the NRA the use of 
the agreements to continue supply. Since the COVID-19 outbreak, MRAs have been used by several 
regulatory agencies that have resulted in waiving of audits.
References
1.	 European Medicines Agency. Guidance related to GMP/GDP and PMF distant assessments; EMA: 
London, 2020.
2.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Manufacturing, Supply Chain, and 
Drug and Biological Product Inspections During COVID-19 Public Health Emergency Ques-
tions and Answers; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2021.
3.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Remote Interactive Evaluations 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
36
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
of Drug Manufacturing and Bioresearch Monitoring Facilities During the COVID-19 Public 
Health Emergency; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2021.
4.	 International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities. Reflections on the regulatory experi-
ence of remote approaches to GCP and GMP regulatory oversight during the COVID-19 Pandemic; 
ICMRA: Online, 2021. https://www.icmra.info/drupal/sites/default/files/2021-12/remote_in-
spections_reflection_paper.pdf (accessed 27 May 2022).
5.	 World Health Organization. Annex 10: WHO general guidance on variations to multisource 
pharmaceutical products (TRS No. 966); WHO: Geneva, 2016.
6.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act 
(FDASIA), Title VII. FDASIA Title VII Overview. https://www.fda.gov/regulatoryinformation/
lawsenforcedbyfda/significantamendmentstothefdcact/fdasia/ucm366058.htm (accessed Apr 24 
2019).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
37
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Q 4-2:  How did global regulators collaborate during the pandemic?
Background
An unprecedented global pandemic of the twenty-first century required international regulatory agen-
cies to take unprecedented collaborative actions. These collaborations played a momentous role in 
bringing the necessary countermeasures to the global population. 
The ICMRA is an international executive-level coalition of key regulators from almost every region in 
the world. In 2021, it comprised 30 separate NRAs—including those of the United States, European 
Union, Canada, Australia, Japan, Singapore, and Brazil to name a few—with the WHO as an observer 
(1). The ICMRA provides a global strategic focus for medicine regulators and offers strategic leadership 
on shared regulatory issues and challenges. Priorities include a coordinated response to crisis situations.
During the pandemic, ICMRA played a key role and acted as a forum to support strategic coordina-
tion and to promote international cooperation among global medicine regulatory authorities. The aim 
of these activities was to expedite and streamline the development, authorization, and availability of 
COVID-19 treatments and vaccines worldwide. ICMRA members also worked towards increasing the 
efficiency and effectiveness of regulatory processes and decision-making (2).
During this period, other groups were also actively bringing together both industry and regulators such 
as the Regulatory Advisory Group (RAG) established by COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access (COVAX) 
and co-led by the WHO and the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) (3).
Lessons Learned
The COVID-19 pandemic emphasized the importance of regulatory cooperation and information-
sharing, which are essential elements of mutual recognition and mutual reliance. In early 2020, IC-
MRA emphasized the relevance of reliance in streamlining responses and facilitating efforts to multiple 
regulatory activities during public-health emergencies. For example, ICMRA and the WHO pub-
lished reports, described agreements on common approaches from workshops, and discussed regula-
tory considerations related to the development of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine candidates and treatments 
among its members.
The following were some of the industry topics raised to regulators at the ICMRA workshop on En-
abling Manufacturing Capacity in the COVID-19 Pandemic in 2021:
•	
Expanding reliance practices to include on-site inspection alternatives (e.g., virtual inspections)
•	
Adopting reliance practices for NRA-issued queries and associated manufacturer responses for 
supplements/variations
•	
Establishing collaborative review arrangements, similar to ACCESS and Project Orbis, for the 
review of supplements/variations for post-approval changes (PAC) of COVID-19 therapeutics 
and vaccines, as well as for non-COVID-19 products impacted by the pandemic
•	
Reducing the need for duplicative import and release testing (4)
As many vaccines and therapeutics were rolled out beginning in early 2021, ICMRA further espoused 
the reliance principles among global regulators for efficient quality and manufacturing lifecycle man-
agement of these products (5). This included support for establishing a collective pharmaceutical qual-
ity knowledge management capability that could have the following benefits:
•	
Transitioning to harmonized, structured, and standardized electronic formats across regulatory 
authorities
•	
Sharing secure information about pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities, which can be con-
tributed to, and accessed by, multiple participating regulators
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
38
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
•	
Developing a framework that might, in time, support full harmonization of data elements 
submitted in the quality modules of the common technical document. This could pave the way 
for sponsors to make simultaneous submissions within a marketing authorization application to 
all associated NRAs and provide improved capabilities for both industry and regulators in the 
management of PACs 
•	
Enabling more extensive mutual reliance among regulators by working to harmonize specific 
data expectations for sponsors and standards for review among regulators, so that regulators can 
be assured of the comparability of the assessments and related determinations of other regulatory 
authorities on whom they intend to rely (6)
Beyond ICMRA, several regional collaborations among the regulators were also seen, such as in the 
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) region (7). Several global organizations, such as the In-
ternational Council for Harmonisation (ICH) and International Medical Device Regulators Forum 
also aided global collaboration and harmonization (8). There was also unprecedented regulator en-
gagement with manufacturers developing pandemic vaccines and therapeutics from the beginning of 
the pandemic, as well as support offered in terms of regulatory expectations and abridged approvals.
References
1.	 International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities. Fact Sheet. ICMRA Structure. 
https://www.icmra.info/drupal/sites/default/files/2021-06/icmra_fact_sheet_2021.pdf (accessed 
27 May 2022).
2.	 International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities. COVID-19. https://www.icmra.
info/drupal/en/covid-19 (accessed 27 Sep 2022).
3.	 The Global Health Network. COVAX Regulatory Advisory Group. Epidemic Preparedness In-
novations. https://epi.tghn.org/covax-overview/regulatory-advisory-group/ (accessed 9 Oct 2023).
4.	 International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities. ICMRA-Industry Virtual Workshop 
Report on Enabling Manufacturing Capacity in the COVID19 Pandemic; ICMRA: Online, 2021.
5.	 Doerr, P; Valentin, M, et al. Reliance: a smarter way of regulating medical products - The IPRP 
survey. Expert Review of Clinical Pharmacology 2021, 14 (1), 173-77.
6.	 International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities. Global Pharmaceutical Quality 
Knowledge Management: Enhancing Regulatory Reliance and Agility. Pharmaceutical Quality 
Knowledge Management System (PQKMS). https://www.icmra.info/drupal/strategicinitatives/
pqkms/statement (accessed 26 May 2022).
7.	 Chong, S; Limoli, M, et al. Measuring Progress of Regulatory Convergence and Cooperation 
Among Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Member Economies in the Context of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic. Ther Innov Regul Sci 2021, 55, 786–98.
8.	 World Trade Organization. Summary Session 4: Promoting Transparency and Convergence in the 
Regulatory Landscape, Presented at COVID-19 Vaccine Supply Chain and Regulatory Transpar-
ency Technical Symposium, Online, 29 Jun 2021; World Trade Organization: 2021.
Additional Reading
McGoldrick, M, et al. How to Accelerate the Supply of Vaccines to All Populations Worldwide? Part 
1: Initial Industry Lessons Learned and Practical Overarching Proposals Leveraging the COVID-19 
Situation. Vaccine 2022, 40 (9), 1215-22.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
39
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
McGoldrick, M, et al. How to Accelerate the Supply of Vaccines to All Populations Worldwide? Part 
II: Initial Industry Lessons Learned and Detailed Technical Reflections Leveraging the COVID-19 
Situation. Vaccine 2022, 40 (9), 1223-30.
The Global Health Network. COVAX Regulatory Advisory Group. Epidemic Preparedness Innova-
tions. https://epi.tghn.org/covax-overview/regulatory-advisory-group/ (accessed 9 Oct 2023)
World Health Organization. Technical Brief: Regulation of COVID-19 Vaccines, Synopsis from the 
August 2020-February 2021 COVAX RAG Meetings; WHO: Geneva, 2021.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
40
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 4-3:  How do you manage the reporting of deviations and other 
changes to the regulatory agencies during a pandemic? 
Background
As a result of the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, there were many unexpected emergency situ-
ations for which many firms were not prepared. The ensuing staff and material shortages significantly 
impacted manufacturing operations. 
After operations resumed, performing site-wide and organization-wide risk assessments with a cross-func-
tional team helped many firms identify, group, and prioritize investigations. Deviations were resolved and 
reported based on their criticality and priority in terms of public health and manufacturing continuity. The 
existing knowledge on processes, products, quality by design, established conditions, quality metrics trends, 
and annual report information helped firms avoid reporting specific deviations and shortened the length of 
time needed for deviation investigations. The types of deviations companies encountered included a broad 
range of situations and areas impacted (e.g., suppliers, warehousing, manufacturing, quality, distribution).
Companies revised deviation procedures to adapt to the new normal of the pandemic in regard to criticality 
and priority in terms of public health and manufacturing continuity, reducing the burden on the internal 
quality function as well as on regulatory authorities. For the deviations or events identified as low risk, devia-
tion reporting procedures and categories were revised to acknowledge (or log) and proceed or to document 
and proceed. These deviations were captured within the PQS. Some companies regularized specific events 
for short periods of time either through temporary change controls or by amending the procedures. 
Deviations that were identified as moderate risk were in many cases reported as expected events and 
investigated with prior knowledge, requiring minimal new investigation activities. In general, if re-
porting was required, these deviations were reported in annual reports. Deviations that were identified 
as high risk were evaluated for their severity using existing knowledge where possible. If reporting was 
required, these deviations were generally reported as post-approval supplements. 
To assist the industry, most regulatory agencies released guidances and Q&A documents or posted 
information on their websites related to deviation management and deviation-and-change reporting 
relief during the pandemic. These actions took time to implement, which created some challenges, 
especially during the initial phases of the pandemic. 
Regulatory authorities eased up on PAC reporting about suppliers and manufacturing or control sites not 
listed in the existing regulatory filings, allowing for rapid implementation when it was critical to prevent or 
mitigate drug product shortages. For example, the EMA provided guidance under the Exceptional Change 
Management Process (ECMP) to cover regulatory strategies during pandemics to continue supply in the 
market. “The ECMP will permit the swift implementation of changes to suppliers and/or manufacturing/
control sites necessary to reduce the risks of shortages under certain conditions intended to ensure the 
quality of the medicinal product while deferring the full assessment of the variation” (1).
Lessons Learned
Responding to a pandemic quickly and providing the flexibility needed in regard to deviation manage-
ment and deviation and change reporting is critical for ensuring product supply. Several elements that 
should be considered are:
•	
Inclusion of the regulatory and quality functions in the BCPs
The quality and regulatory functions should be included in the BCPs with a focus on the types 
of adjustments in processes related to deviations, as well as to deviation and change reporting, 
based on expected impacts caused by a pandemic. For many manufacturers, these areas were not 
a significant focus in past BCPs and, as such, plans were not readily available regarding the types 
of changes needed. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
41
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
•	
Rapid issuance or activation by regulatory authorities of temporary guidance and Q&A documents 
This includes specific information on changes in the regulatory reporting and handling of devia-
tions.
Most major regulatory authorities released temporary guidances and Q&A documents but, as 
was industry, they were not prepared for the speed at which changes occurred and industry’s 
urgent need for direction from the regulatory authorities.
Of particular importance is the reporting of changes in suppliers and manufacturing control sites 
not listed in the regulatory filings, as this can have a significant impact on product availability.
•	
Development of process to allow manufacturers to meet with authorities at an early stage when 
issues arise to understand regulatory expectations and propose innovative strategies for PAC 
submission and approvals
While it is important for regulatory authorities to take broad actions, such as the issuance of 
temporary guidances, a process also needs to be put in place to allow the marketing authoriza-
tion holder (MAH) to closely engage with those authorities early on about specific issues so they 
understand regulatory expectations and can propose innovative strategies for PAC submission 
and approval. This could involve such strategies as lower reporting categories, use of flexible sub-
mission strategies (e.g., ECMPs), reduced submission data requirements based on a risk assess-
ment evaluation, and expedited assessments. Manufacturing operations within the pharmaceuti-
cal industry are diverse due to the diverse nature of the products; as such, situations will emerge 
during a pandemic that are specific and unique to any given product and will require unique 
solutions that can only be resolved on a case-by-case basis.
•	
Regulatory authority acceptance of temporary changes in quality controls 
MAHs facing difficulties performing the quality controls recorded in the regulatory filings, for 
example, due to a significant increase of manufacturing capacity to meet the demands of patients 
or other circumstances related to a pandemic, should contact the responsible regulatory authori-
ties to seek temporary relief. They should be prepared to present an adapted control scheme, 
founded on a risk-based approach, with the goal of reaching agreement with the regulatory 
authority on the proposed strategy and the needed documentation to implement it. 
•	
Regulatory authority acceptance of bundling changes for regulatory filings
To reduce the resources needed to prepare, review, and approve individual submissions, regula-
tory authorities should allow for and encourage MAHs to bundle any changes, with the needed 
supporting rationale and data, to allow them to be implemented more rapidly. 
•	
Regulatory authorities granting relief from specific routine reporting requirements 
MAHs, for justified reasons relating to a pandemic, may be unable to continue the expected 
full reporting requirements for specific items (e.g., full pharmacovigilance reporting, report of 
temporary disruptions/closures). In cases where the regulatory agency has not published relief 
through issuance of a temporary guidance or other document, the MAH should contact the 
regulatory authorities to explain the proposed temporary changes in reporting and request relief 
based on circumstances related to the pandemic. Relief may be in the actual reporting require-
ment or the method of reporting.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
42
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
•	
Regulatory authorities granting temporary acceptance status of specific anticipated deviations
To assist the industry, regulatory agencies should consider granting acceptance status of specific 
types of anticipated deviations allowing companies to focus their resources on their manufactur-
ing activities. A few examples are the drug supply chain security requirements waiver provided 
by FDA, extension of shelf life, or usage of expired product in clinical trials (2).
•	
Comprehensive risk assessment processes to determine deviation criticality and reporting
Manufacturers should plan on carrying out a comprehensive risk assessment to evaluate the 
deviations being generated, allowing them to be divided into low-, medium-, and high-risk cat-
egories with decisions on reporting being made for medium- and high-risk deviations only. 
—	 Deviations classified as low risk could be handled as acknowledged (or log) and proceed, or 
document and proceed (e.g., missing process checks, second-individual in-person checking, 
annual reports filing, missing calibrations if equipment is found compliant in the subse-
quent schedule).
—	 Deviations classified as medium-risk events may be grouped and addressed under a single 
deviation and, where required, reported to the respective regulatory authority as a grouped 
submission (e.g., FDA has provided clearance to, and faster approval time for, MAHs’ filing 
for alternate lab and manufacturing sites for several applications grouped together).
—	 Deviations classified as a major-risk category are handled case by case (e.g., change in source 
for an API, change in manufacturing site for vaccine or sterile-product manufacturing).
References
1.	 European Commission. Notice to Stakeholders: Questions and answers on regulatory expecta-
tions for medicinal products for human use during the COVID-19 pandemic European Com-
mission/European Medicines Agency: Brussels, 2021.
2.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Exemption and Exclusion from 
Certain Requirements of the Drug Supply Chain Security Act During the COVID-19 Public 
Health Emergency; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2020.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
43
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
