III.  Quality
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
24
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 3-1:  How should companies assess their risk ahead of their next 
regulatory authority inspection?
Background
During the pandemic, the majority of global regulatory authorities eliminated most on-site inspec-
tions. Those that were conducted focused on new-product approvals, “high-risk” production sites, or 
inspections required to facilitate emergency authorization of COVID-19-related products. Because 
of this, the routine inspection schedule to which many organizations were accustomed did not occur. 
During this period, two other factors impacted manufacturing facilities and their traditional operating 
model: 
1.	 Manufacturing facilities that were involved with COVID-19 vaccine production were required, in 
some cases, to rapidly scale up facilities, people, and processes in order to respond to the pandem-
ic. The speed at which this was required created circumstances that made it difficult at times to op-
erate in full compliance with all current expectations regarding quality processes and procedures.
2.	 The change in the staffing model—to have all employees work remotely except those deemed 
essential for on-the-floor manufacturing operations, combined with an overall shortage of work-
ers—created challenges to the manufacturing process quality systems that led to an increase in 
nonconformances to established processes and procedures. 
Lessons Learned
Companies must remain aware of the actions that must be taken in their efforts to continue to supply 
the market with necessary pharmaceutical products. As operations return to a more normal, pre-pan-
demic state and in preparation for the return of regulatory authority inspections, companies should 
review the nonconformances and changes that have occurred and ensure there is adequate documenta-
tion to describe the event, the assessment made in its evaluation, the final decision, and any follow-up 
actions taken. Where there are gaps, identified action should be taken to eliminate or reduce those 
gaps. In many cases, this may include adding detail to the description, assessment, decision, and 
follow-up actions present in the original nonconformance. Any additions should be made as amend-
ments to the original documentation. Where appropriate, if not already included, the documentation 
should clearly identify the pandemic as being the cause of or a contributing factor in the noncon-
formance. In addition, companies should perform a gap assessment of their current process against 
the applicable regulations and expectations. Any gaps identified should be closed or a plan should be 
established to close these gaps. These reviews and assessments, as well as the plans for closing any gaps, 
should be available for review during the regulatory authority inspections if needed.
Companies that are required to rapidly scale up, should perform a comparative assessment, if ap-
propriate, against existing facilities, personnel, and processes to understand the similarities and differ-
ences in the approach used to bring the new capabilities online. Any differences should be evaluated 
and, where compliance gaps are identified, plans should be developed to close these gaps. These plans 
should be available for review during regulatory authority inspections if needed.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
25
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Q 3-2:  How will the “remote inspection” and/or “remote 
assessment” paradigm shift impact the industry?
Background
During the pandemic, regulators adapted their GMP and good distribution practices (GDP) inspec-
tion routines due to travel restrictions and safety concerns. In March 2020, the FDA paused most in-
person inspections to safeguard its employees, according to a Government Accounting Office report. 
To continue to provide oversight, in many cases, the FDA began performing remote assessments (1). 
Similar reductions in on-site inspections were noted in the European Union with the relevant lo-
cal agencies moving to more remote and hybrid inspections (2). Per regulations in place at the time 
of this publication, remote inspections of pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities by FDA were not 
permitted, as regulations require inspectors to be physically on site within the facility as part of any 
inspection.
This shift to remote assessments and inspections provided many advantages in terms of planning and 
flexibility but, as with all major shifts made within very narrow timelines, unanticipated challenges 
were encountered.
Lessons Learned
During the initial stages of the pandemic in 2020, it quickly became apparent that remote assessments 
and inspections required more thorough preparation than on-site inspections. From an operational 
perspective, some of the challenges GMP/GDP remote inspections and assessments can present are 
related to:
•	
Planning: Preparatory conference calls, connectivity tests, and a redundancy strategy are very im-
portant.
•	
Qualification Audits: Brand new manufacturing sites have no historical background on the GMP 
compliance level of the site being inspected.
•	
Communications: Cultural issues, poor clarity in requests from inspectors lacking local knowl-
edge, and the quality of electronic connections can present obstacles.
•	
Online Tools: The use of different tools to share confidential documents, data, and information 
and use of mobile phones to capture live images from potentially hazardous manufacturing areas 
may be needed. 
•	
Overall Conduct and Compliance to Agenda: Adapting to different time zones can be easily over-
come; however, in many circumstances, the difference can lead to longer meetings.
As highlighted in the results of the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associa-
tions’ annual regulatory inspection survey, both industry and regulators are on a learning curve when 
applying virtual tools (3). From the experiences gained over the duration of the pandemic, companies 
will continue to benefit from investments they have made in facilities, equipment, and procedures for 
hosting live remote interactions with regulatory authorities. Nonetheless, firms may need to refine 
their hosting capabilities as they gain experience and as the approaches of global regulators evolve 
(2,4). In preparation for future pandemics, regulators should revise regulations and develop proce-
dures that allow for a rapid shift to remote inspections if needed.
References
1.	 Denigan-Macauley, M. Drug Safety: FDA‘s Future Inspection Plans Need to Address Issues Pre-
sented by COVID-19 Backlog, Statement of Mary Denigan-Macauley, Director, Health Care; 
U.S. Government Accountability Office: www.gao.gov, 2021.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
26
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
2.	 European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare. EDQM and real-time remote 
GMP inspections of API manufacturers during the COVID-19 pandemic: Innovation overcom-
ing adversity. EDQM. https://www.edqm.eu/en/edqm-and-real-time-remote-gmp-inspections-
of-api-manufacturers-during-the-covid-19-pandemic-innovation-overcoming-adversity (accessed 
27 May 2022).
3.	 MQEG Inspections Topic Team. Annual Regulatory GMP/GDP Inspection Survey, 2020 Data. 
efpia. https://www.efpia.eu/media/602634/efpia-2020-reg-inspection-survey_v1a.pdf (accessed 
27 May 2022).
4.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Points to Consider for Remote and Hybrid GMP/GDP Inspec-
tions; Bethesda, Md., 2021.
Additional Reading
European Medicines Agency. Guidance Related to GMP/GDP and PMF Distant Assessments; EMA: 
London, 2020. 
Cox, B. World’s Pharmaceutical Inspectorates Prepare for Post-Pandemic Remote Site Assessments. 
Pink Sheet: Informa Pharma Intelligence 2021, 03 May 2021 | Analysis.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
27
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Q 3-3:  What cybersecurity changes have become necessary because 
of COVID-19?
Background
The increased level of digitalization in the pharmaceutical industry over the last decade has been 
unparalleled as computer-controlled processes, electronic batch records, information management 
systems, documentation and investigations systems, and the like have been implemented. With the 
increase in digitalization has come the increased risk of cybersecurity threats.
Due to the commercial benefits of new technologies developed during the COVID-19 pandemic, a 
surge of cybersecurity attacks directly related to acquiring COVID-19 information from regulatory 
bodies ensued. This affected both regulators, such as the European Medicines Agency (EMA), and 
private companies involved in the development of COVID-19 vaccines (1-2). Cybersecurity experts 
saw a 63 percent increase in cyberattacks related to the pandemic (3). From a human-error standpoint, 
even the change in environment has led to increases in successful phishing scams with a reported 47 
percent of individuals being taken in by a phishing scam while working at home (4). 
The rapid implementation of nonmanufacturing employees working remotely during the pandemic 
presented unanticipated challenges to corporate cybersecurity. A few of the many examples include:
•	
Instituting a “Bring Your Own Device,” or maybe a better term would be “Use Your Own De-
vice,” approach enabled employees to access corporate data using their personal devices, which 
bypassed the standard “Corporate Owned Personally Enabled” approach.
•	
The use of new and, in most cases, rapidly evolving web-conferencing and information-sharing 
platforms has become commonplace. The emergence and rapid adoption of these new platforms 
was needed to keep pace with the proliferation of remote workers—a productive situation, but 
one that presented new cybersecurity risks. 
•	
The vulnerability of home networks presented challenges as the security and reliability of these 
networks varied greatly.
•	
Sophisticated IT systems are susceptible to human error, especially systems that require a repeti-
tive manual step like connecting to a company’s virtual private network (VPN) before sending 
data. Simple errors can leave a system open to potential threats. 
Lessons Learned
Based on the issues that arose during the COVID-19 pandemic, plans related to cybersecurity need to 
be developed so action can be taken early. Because situations can change rapidly, a strong cybersecurity 
plan should be in place long before a pandemic occurs and updated routinely. Likewise, risk assess-
ments should be conducted that can direct priority actions, which should be reviewed regularly and 
updated with more pandemic-specific information as circumstances emerge. 
Specific points relevant to a pandemic that should be considered for inclusion in risk assessments 
include:
•	
The expected increase in the number and complexity of cyberattacks related to external interest 
in new pandemic-related technologies the company may be developing 
•	
Any changes in the way employees will work and interact with the company’s electronic systems 
that may concern cybersecurity systems 
•	
The current level of cybersecurity surveillance and its ability to rapidly identify cyberattacks 
based on expected changes due to the pandemic conditions
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
28
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
•	
The preparedness of the company to respond to and contain a cyberattack based on expected 
changes in the way employees work and their locations (remote vs. in-person) due to the pandemic
•	
A review of the respective business continuity and crisis management plans should a successful 
cyberattack occur that shuts down critical systems, which should take into account the expected 
changes in the way employees work and their locations (remote vs. in-person) due to the pandemic
References
1.	 European Medicines Agency, “Cyberattack on EMA – Update 5, 2021.” www.ema.europa.eu/en/
news/cyberattack-ema-update-5.
2.	 Pfizer, “Statement on EMA Cyberattack, 2020.” https://www.pfizer.com/news/announcements/
statement-ema-cyberattack.
3.	 Help Net Security, “The COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on cybersecurity - Help Net Secu-
rity, 2020.” https://www.helpnetsecurity.com/2020/08/03/pandemic-impact-cybersecurity/.
4.	 Deloitte, “Impact of COVID-19 on Cybersecurity.” https://www2.deloitte.com/ch/en/pages/
risk/articles/impact-covid-cybersecurity.html.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
29
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Q 3-4:  What new data-integrity risks are present because of a more 
remote workforce?
Background
Many work activities shifted from in-person to remote access because of the pandemic. This trend 
continues even though workers have been allowed to return to the workplace. This hybrid mode 
of working involves the application of various information and communication technologies (ICT) 
that are used for gathering, storing, retrieving, processing, analyzing, and transmitting information. It 
comprises the variety of software and hardware that drives ICT, for example, smartphones, handheld 
devices, laptop computers, desktop computers, video cameras, and wearable technology. ICT enables 
the remote work environment that allows employees to perform activities using remote access, and 
many of its components act as temporary or long-term depositories of data. 
The increase in remote work activities utilizing ICT presents an inherent increase in risk as workers 
have moved from company-owned office equipment and a structured environment to home offices 
where the company has less control over the ICT. This increase in the use of ICT by remote workers 
adds more layers of data-handling and storage which, in turn, increases the risk of potential data-integ-
rity issues. The risk to data integrity has been further impacted by the increasing number of audits and 
inspections taking place remotely; with these, a high number of external personnel and stakeholders 
require access to critical data, each using their own ICT, adding to the complexity. Companies have 
faced numerous challenges as a result of the sudden transition of having to assess—in many cases after 
the fact—potential risks and the available mitigation strategies available to address them. 
Lessons Learned
Based on these challenges, some companies need to proactively evaluate the ICT currently in use 
within the company or those being planned to enable both in-person and remote work. A set of read-
ily available ICT solutions approved for use by a company’s IT units should be readily available and 
updated on a periodic basis. Senior leadership needs to ensure adequate resources (headcount and 
funding) are available for this activity. For this to be effective, it must be applied not only within the 
company but also to cross-company activities. 
For example, prior to a remote audit, assessment, or inspection where external entities are involved, 
an agreement on mutually approved ICT solutions should be in place to minimize the risk of data-
integrity issues. While this requires additional effort prior to the event, it greatly reduces the risk of 
issues occurring during or after the event.
Finally, in situations where paper-based systems remain (e.g., parts of or even the entire pharmaceuti-
cal quality system (PQS), additional attention should be placed on changing them over to electronic 
systems. Where that is not possible or practical, developing a process for how to ensure paper-based 
systems can be effectively performed remotely will minimize the potential for data-integrity issues, for 
example, how the ICT and related procedures generate the PDF-type documents to implement ap-
propriate e-signature solutions.
Additional Reading 
Parenteral Drug Association. Points to Consider for Remote and Hybrid GMP/GDP Inspections; Bethesda, 
Md., 2021.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
30
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 3-5:  How can companies ensure optimal performance of business 
continuity plans during a pandemic?
Background
As an immediate response to the pandemic crisis, business continuity plans (BCPs) were activated, and 
their specific actions were implemented in order to shorten recovery time and mitigate the correspond-
ing impact on respective pharmaceutical operations and activities. For many companies, the level of 
disruption created by the pandemic had not been envisioned in their existing BCPs. For example, 
few BCPs for companies with multiple manufacturing and warehousing locations envisioned a set of 
circumstances where all locations would be significantly impacted at the same time or one where the 
majority of personnel would need to work remotely. The situations and responses the BCPs detailed 
and how those related to the issues that occurred during the pandemic is a critical issue that needs to 
be assessed to ensure their future applicability in similar situations.
Prior to the pandemic, the development of detailed and executable plans in BCPs varied greatly among 
companies. In some cases, very robust BCPs were in place and, in other cases, their scope and detail 
were very limited; the need and requirements for BCPs were primarily driven by the business owner. 
For specific areas of BCPs, robust plans were required based on expectations from regulatory agencies 
and insurers. In the case of some regulatory authorities, a limited checkbox exercise was conducted in 
regard to the BCP and product supply. Before the pandemic, these types of reviews were logical; BCPs 
were not expected to be in place for a global disruption no one could have foreseen. 
One interesting point related to the designs of prepandemic BCPs is that their structures differed 
greatly. Some were holistic and well-integrated across functions; many were not, with each function 
having its own standalone BCP. Some were focused more on the health and safety aspects, while oth-
ers were aimed more on recovery of the IT infrastructure. These different BCP designs had a direct 
impact not only on the speed of response, but on the overall effectiveness of the response of the various 
pharmaceutical organizations. 
Also, BCPs impacted whether the activities of the affected corporate organizations were disrupted 
or if they were able to implement the already formalized actions. It identified the need to conduct 
mock-up actions prior to the actual challenge in a defined frequency, providing the opportunity to the 
effectiveness of the arrangements in place, and to confirm that they remain robust and fit for use. This 
evaluation should be documented and justified.
As a result of the pandemic, the pressure put on the respective pharmaceutical organizations to develop 
or update BCPs had a direct impact on the overall activities performed. Even organizations that lacked 
BCPs or had very basic, though outdated, plans were forced to develop actions to ensure manufactur-
ing continuity under pressure while developing or upgrading their BCPs. This led to testing BCPs in 
the field, which were developed, matured, and implemented in a very short period of time. This was by 
no means an efficient method, nor one developed with a full understanding of all the potential impacts 
it might have on the process, on other parts of the organization, or on larger operations.
Lessons Learned
While BCPs cannot cover all situations, they are critical in providing contingency plans for what ac-
tions to take when unexpected events occur. In the case of the pandemic, companies that had robust 
BCPs in place were better prepared to address the unexpected and unplanned situations that were not 
covered while implementing the actions for those that were. Companies that had not prepared had to 
build robust BCPs and test them in the field as the events were occurring, which is never the desired 
state as it may result in unanticipated consequences. 
The pandemic provided a clear understanding of how critical BCPs are for an organization and indi-
vidual companies. BCPs need to be holistic and, while different functions may have their own BCPs, 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
31
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
they all need to fit together into one overarching BCP. For regulated aspects of the business, the BCPs 
need to consider how the requirements will be met for the actions being implemented, for example, 
how the requirements of the PQS will be met to ensure GMP compliance. BCPs must have built-in 
flexibility and adaptability, where appropriate, as well as a defined governance structure to oversee its 
implementation. The fact is that all remediation actions applied at every step, apart from ensuring 
the health and safety aspects, must sustain the respective GMP-compliance levels. This dual scope of 
compliance and adaptability needs to be highlighted in each step involved.
The recommendations below are designed to fill gaps about BCPs learned during the pandemic; the 
list is not intended to be all-encompassing, but these items should be considered. BCPs need to: 
•	
Be developed, accessible, and ready for use
•	
Be detailed, reflective of current operations, and holistic
•	
Be flexible and adaptable with a defined governance structure to oversee its implementation; it is 
not possible to plan for every event, but it is important to have a plan for how to adjust the plan 
based on unforeseen challenges
•	
Take regulatory requirements into consideration to ensure the actions implemented continue to 
meet those requirements
•	
Take into consideration that the location of the workforce may be disrupted and the computer 
systems, hardware, and support that will be needed to enable it
•	
Include actions to be taken to keep employees safe in the event of a regional, national, or global 
outbreak of a pathogen (e.g., virus)
•	
Include detailed actions to be taken related to sustainability of suppliers, service providers, and 
the supply chain
•	
Be reviewed periodically and updated appropriately
Numerous references are available that can be of assistance when developing a BCP. One such docu-
ment is standardISO 22301:2019: Security and resilience — Business continuity management systems 
— Requirements (1).
References
1.	 International Organization for Standardization. ISO 22301:2019: Security and resilience — Busi-
ness continuity management systems — Requirements; ISO: Geneva, 2019.
Additional Reading
Shivji, R, et al. Considerations for the Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls (CMC) - Qual-
ity Package for COVID-19 Vaccines – Interim Lessons Learnt by the European Medicines Agency 
(EMA). Vaccine 2022, 40 (38), 5539-41.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
32
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
