II.  People
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
14
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 2-1:  How do we overcome the workforce shortage induced by 
COVID-19?
Background
The pandemic created an unexpected and prolonged shortage of workers. This shortage occurred be-
cause companies were neither prepared or equipped to ensure that workers could return to a safe 
environment. The initial worker shortage continued through the pandemic due, in part, to the impact 
of unvaccinated essential workers not being able to return to the workplace. Compounding this in 
some countries was government-augmented unemployment and housing benefits for workers, which 
created an economic driver for some vaccinated workers to delay their return to the workforce. The 
decreased availability of workers was largely also due to:
•	
Lack of available childcare causing parents to stay at home
•	
People voluntarily leaving the workforce entirely
•	
People going into early retirement
•	
People choosing to move from an essential job to a nonessential job
Low vaccination rates lengthened the severity of the pandemic as virus mutations (e.g., Beta, Delta, 
and Omicron) developed and moved through the population. This phenomenon of vaccine hesitancy 
was not limited to the United States but was also seen in many other countries where vaccines were 
available. In addition to the low vaccination rates, breakthrough infections of individuals who were 
vaccinated also resulted in a high infection rate and absence from work. 
The pandemic has been emotionally challenging for many people and has changed many aspects of every-
day life in unprecedented ways. One positive method to encourage employees and decrease worker short-
ages is to protect employees and create an atmosphere of safety. Companies began reimplementing certain 
aspects of their safety plans, such as wearing masks, social distancing, and frequent hand-sanitizing. Main-
taining flexibility is important during transitional times while the right policies and support for workers 
are identified. Communicating with employees to ensure their needs are addressed is extremely important.
As a result of the worker shortages, companies began offering bonuses and other incentives to entice 
existing workers to return and to attract new workers during the pandemic. While this was effective, 
with the shift to remote working, it also created an opportunity for employees to change jobs for in-
creased pay and presented opportunities outside their local areas without the need to relocate. Many 
called this phenomenon “the great resignation.” Another form of enticement, once legally allowed, 
was a provision that permitted companies in the United States and select other countries the ability to 
mandate that workers be vaccinated and return to work or lose their employment. Some companies 
used a combination of requiring vaccination or weekly testing. This was an effective tool in that it 
incentivized many employees to take the vaccine and return to work.
Lessons Learned
To reduce the level of pandemic-induced worker shortages, companies should have plans in place to 
minimize employee risk in the face of potential pandemics, not only for an initial outbreak but also 
for the recurring waves of a pandemic that might be expected. The external environment should then 
be continually evaluated to determine what specific steps need to be taken to minimize the risk to em-
ployees, such as returning to specific requirements, like wearing masks and social distancing, that were 
implemented during the initial wave of the pandemic and then relaxed as the initial wave subsided. 
Ensuring that workers feel safe in the workplace is essential to maintaining the workforce.
As needed, there are also other approaches that companies can use to entice workers to return, thus 
reducing worker shortages. One such approach is the use of special bonuses to entice workers to return 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
15
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
as well as to attract new employees to fill openings. To further encourage workers, companies should 
consider other added benefits such as more flexible work-from-home options (hybrid models seem 
to be the most accepted in the industry when nonessential work can be done from home a few days 
a week), childcare funding, company cell phones, and college tuition assistance. These were all used 
effectively by various companies as the pandemic progressed. 
Companies may require disclosure of employee vaccination status, where allowed, to encourage work-
ers to get vaccinated. In the United States, requiring the disclosure of COVID-19 vaccination status 
was allowed (1-2). Ultimately, companies may mandate that workers return to work or forfeit their 
employment if no remote work opportunities are available.
References
1.	 Vasconcellos, S; Zadikany, R, et al. Can Employers Ask for Proof of COVID-19 Vaccination 
Status Under HIPAA? Benefits & Compensation Blog. https://www.usbenefits.law/2021/10/
can-employers-ask-for-proof-of-covid-19-vaccination-status-under-hipaa/#more-2552 (accessed 
27 May 2022).
2.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. HIPAA, COVID-19 Vaccination, and the 
Workplace. Health Information Privacy. https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/
guidance/hipaa-covid-19-vaccination-workplace/index.html (accessed 21 Jul 2022).
Additional Reading
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Summary of the HIPAA Privacy Rule. Health 
Information Privacy. https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/index.html (accessed 27 
May 2022). 
Craven, M, et al. Not the last pandemic: Investing now to reimagine public-health systems; McKinsey & 
Company: New York, 2020.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
16
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 2-2:  What restrictions should be considered for essential workers 
to ensure continued operation?
Background
At the start of the pandemic, few companies outlined what roles were considered essential for ensuring 
continued operations or what actions should be taken to protect those individuals. 
Disruptions caused some companies to lose weeks and even months of manufacturing productivity 
as operations were shut down, limiting the spread of the virus. Even companies manufacturing the 
vaccine, such as Pfizer and Moderna, announced a worker shortage and difficulty recruiting people in 
Boston, Massachusetts (1). 
The lack of personnel created a strain on the activities required to support production and batch release 
in the following areas:
•	
Lack of trained and qualified operators on the manufacturing lines
•	
Lack of trained technical support for setup and changeover 
•	
Lack of qualified personnel for batch-records review
Without the required personnel, the operations will be interrupted and items like changeovers, techni-
cal support, and batch disposition cannot be provided or performed. Additionally, batch records can-
not be reviewed, manufacturing processes are interrupted, product testing will not be completed, and 
product is held in the warehouse and cannot be released.
Lessons Learned
To prevent a strain on activities supporting production and batch release, sites must be ready to quickly 
apply new approved technologies (e.g., cameras to replace second-person verifications, implementation 
of electronic signatures for approval of batch records, augmented reality (AR) glasses or handheld de-
vices for problem-solving on the line). New technologies, such as cameras and AR glasses, can support 
manufacturing-line operations by reducing the number of staff who need to be physically at the factory. 
Because of this, the qualified personnel can provide instructions remotely. The remote support could be 
used for such functions as line clearance, second-person approval, and on-the-job training. Dispensing 
of raw materials can be performed by having the second operator perform the verification remotely. 
A risk assessment would define what activities can be performed remotely and what activities cannot.
Automation of dispensing and filling lines can continue to be performed with a very limited number 
of resources on site and can ensure continued manufacturing using these principles.
Additionally, companies should have plans in place that outline and define what roles are considered 
essential for manufacturing operations. The plan should outline the emergency procedures to be im-
plemented to protect those essential workers and account for any possible governmentally mandated 
regulations. While the exact characteristics of the infectious agent and its mode of transmission may 
not be known with all certainty, common-sense measures should be put in place, such as: 
•	
Use of face coverings (if not already in place) in GMP areas
•	
Increased cleaning of facilities and equipment
•	
Nonessential workers working remotely
•	
Cafeteria, conference rooms, and other common areas closed, or the number of personnel allowed 
to be present restricted 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
17
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
A review of how essential workers commute to work should be evaluated. Where the normal mode of 
transportation is via mass transportation (e.g., trains, buses, subways) or carpools, alternative modes of 
transportation to reduce the chance of workers being exposed should be considered. Plans to provide 
written documentation for employees to keep on their person for transit should be in place to comply 
with local, state, and federal requirements. All actions should be aligned with official government guid-
ance (local, state, country). 
During a company’s evaluation of the risk, measures that may be more stringent than those outlined 
in official guidances may be warranted. Based on the critical nature of the products produced, a con-
servative approach should be used. Consideration should be given to scheduling groups of employees 
in shifts or units (i.e., having a defined group of people working together, while the other group is 
working from home and vice versa). If the shifts or units remain unchanged, the risk of the entire team 
being impacted is reduced. Personnel movement should be restricted to specific buildings or areas to 
minimize the possibility of a super-spreader event occurring. In some cases, personnel should be reas-
signed to minimize movement between buildings or areas.
Social distancing, visual cues of vaccination status, floor markers for the flow of personnel, and dis-
tance between individuals, should be implemented. If possible, electronic proximity detectors should 
be used to alert individuals when they are too close to one another. Physical barriers, such as plexiglass, 
should be installed to minimize exposure between individuals. Additionally, the speed of programs to 
screen workers on site should be established quickly (e.g., temperature, contact-tracing, quarantine 
requirements, daily health questionnaires). Considerations should be made during building design or 
renovations to ensure adequate air exchanges, and appropriate filtrations can be utilized if needed. In 
cases where the facility has not been designed with this in mind, other changes should be considered, 
such as upgrading the type of filters used or adding local filtration units.
References
1.	 Kansteiner, F. Pfizer, Moderna and Alnylam flag pharma labor shortage in Massachusetts–and 
the people bottleneck doesn’t stop there. Manufacturing. https://www.fiercepharma.com/manu-
facturing/pfizer-moderna-and-alnylam-flag-pharma-labor-shortage-ma-and-people-bottleneck-
doesn (accessed 27 May 2022).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
18
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 2-3:  What actions can be taken to minimize the risk of spreading 
contagions in the workplace?
Background
At the onset of the pandemic, the steps taken to minimize the spread of infection varied regionally. 
Companies referred to the guidance from public officials, world regulatory authorities, and regional 
health departments in an attempt to minimize the spread of COVID-19. In many cases, workplaces 
were temporarily closed, or the occupancy was limited to try and slow the spread of the infection in 
the population. Some companies also limited the operations to only essential workers, with supporting 
personnel working from home.
Some workers were classified as “essential” to the continuation of critical functions for society, and 
thus were required to be physically present to conduct business activities. Individuals with functions 
directly related to the manufacturing, testing, warehousing, and distribution of critical supplies, such 
as medicines, medical treatments, and medical supplies (including raw materials and test reagents), 
were classified in this way and continued to enter the workplace throughout the pandemic. Many 
workplaces instituted measures to try to minimize the spread of infectious agents. Workers who were 
deemed “nonessential” could, in many cases, continue to conduct their responsibilities virtually and 
were only permitted access on site when deemed absolutely necessary.
Lessons Learned
Manufacturers of pharmaceutical and medical-device products already have robust contamination 
controls in place for their manufacturing areas. These controls (e.g., gowning, high airflow and ex-
change, documented cleaning, disinfection programs) are already effective strategies to reduce the risk 
of spreading contaminants in the manufacturing area. A greater risk of transmission is in the office 
space and other communal areas, where controls are not commonly in place to minimize the spread of 
contaminants within the area or between personnel. 
To be prepared for another such event, companies should have a health and safety plan for their of-
fice spaces and other areas that follows the guidance of the World Health Organization (WHO), 
U.S. Centers for Disease Prevention and Control (CDC), U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Ad-
ministration (OSHA), or other regional government agencies. These plans should be based on risk 
assessments identifying contamination risks in the manufacturing process. A hazard analysis should be 
conducted as part of the development of the safety plan to identify where and how workers might be 
exposed to an infectious agent.
Work activities and common areas should be identified where employees come into close contact with 
others—for example, open-space workplaces, laboratories, meeting rooms, break rooms, cafeterias, lock-
er rooms, and routes of entry and exit—where staff may congregate, or where a bottleneck might occur.
Actions that can be taken to help minimize the risk of spreading infectious agents in a workplace are 
outlined below. These actions should be taken as preventive steps at the beginning of the pandemic, 
even before the means of transmission is widely understood.
Engineering Controls
•	
Modify seat or workstation placement
•	
Construct physical separations, such as plexiglass partitions
•	
Install floor markers for flow of personnel with the required distancing between individuals
•	
Close or impose restrictions (number of allowable personnel present) on cafeterias, common 
areas, and conference rooms areas
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
19
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
•	
Mandate the use of electronic proximity detectors to alert individuals when they are too close to 
one another (e.g., watches or other devices that will vibrate when workers get to within a speci-
fied distance of one another)
•	
Disinfect shared filing or storage spaces between uses
•	
Replace high-touch communal items, such as coffee pots or bulk snacks, with prepackaged single 
servings or encourage staff to bring in their own items
•	
Improve ventilation in the building and consider air-filtration systems
•	
Consider local filtration systems where the HVAC system cannot be improved or modified 
•	
Ensure that adequate ventilation, air changes, and appropriate filtration can be used during the 
design of new facilities or those being renovated
•	
Open windows frequently in office spaces with windows that are not connected to controlled manu-
facturing facilities and keep doors open for as long as possible in office spaces without windows
Administrative Controls
•	
Mandate face coverings
•	
Require staff to stay home if they or a family member at home are ill; consider requiring testing 
before a return to site is permitted
•	
Limit maximum occupancy in common areas such as breakrooms
•	
Add additional shifts or stagger shifts, start times, and break times to reduce worker density
•	
Restrict personnel movement to specific buildings or areas and/or segregate working groups to avoid 
unnecessary interaction of personnel to minimize the possibility or impact of a super-spreader event 
•	
Reassign personnel to minimize movement between buildings or areas
•	
Provide personnel training on correct masking, hand sanitization, and social distancing
•	
Implement programs to screen workers upon entering the site (e.g., temperature check, quick 
evaluation of health status using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or antigen, and completion of 
daily health questionnaires)
•	
Establish infection notification, contact-tracing, and quarantine requirements
•	
Institute a cleaning and disinfection program for common areas and office areas
•	
Clean daily high-touch surfaces, such as door handles, desks, light switches, faucets, toilets, 
workstations, keyboards, telephones, handrails, printer/copier machines, and drinking fountains
•	
Post instructions and reminders at entrances and strategic places in the building on masking, 
hand sanitization, and cough-and-sneeze etiquette
Consideration should also be given to sanitation concerns, such as hand hygiene and surface disinfec-
tion. The strategic placement of hand-hygiene stations should be reviewed to reduce the spread of 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
20
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
contaminants. Hand-hygiene stations should be placed at the entry and exits of high-traffic areas and 
in communal areas. Employees should be encouraged to sanitize their hands regularly.
The cleaning and disinfection of communal areas and workspace surfaces should be reviewed to ensure 
that it is adequate and effective against contagions of concern. The frequency of disinfection should be 
based on risk. For example, high-contact points (e.g., door handles, communal equipment, common 
areas) are likely to require more frequent disinfection compared to a dedicated office or workstation. 
Proof of cleaning and disinfection of common areas, workstations, and desks should be made evident 
with use of status cards or color indicators. The cleaning and disinfection regime should be made avail-
able to any personnel with interest or concern.
Having a cleaning and disinfectant program in place is not enough. The products used should be 
efficacious. Product efficacy against a specific virus can often be provided from the biocide supplier, 
health regulatory authority, or other governmental agency, for example, the Environmental Protec-
tion Agency in the United States. As the SARS-CoV-2 was a novel virus, none of the biocides on the 
market had label claims for efficacy against the virus at the beginning of the pandemic. However, the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency issued a list (List N) of all products that the agency expected 
to kill the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus (COVID-19) when used in accordance with label directions until 
the disinfectant claims could be obtained (1). In cases where a new infectious agent is detected for 
which the biocide supplier does not have data, it is important for companies to look at other sources 
to identify if a specific biocide is expected to be effective.
When selecting products for use in an office setting, efficacy is of high importance and, during a 
pandemic, virucidal efficacy continues to be a key consideration. In addition to efficacy, consideration 
should be given to the format, health and safety requirements, material compatibility, and residues left 
behind by any disinfectants that are used. As these products are likely to be used on many different 
surfaces and material types, it is important to have a full understanding of how the biocides are to be 
applied (e.g., impregnated wipe, spray-and-wipes) and the material compatibility of the products to 
prevent adverse effects to surfaces (e.g., electronic touch pads, metals).
Requiring nonessential-worker vaccination was not commonly considered by companies until the 
COVID-19 vaccines were made widely available. Assuming that a vaccine is commercially available, 
before allowing workers to physically return to the workplace, it is recommended that the vaccine sta-
tus of employees is cataloged for business continuity and safety purposes. Vaccine status is considered 
private information; however, in many countries, employers can require vaccine-status declaration 
without violating privacy laws by using either their company health care professionals or a privatized 
source. To improve their vaccine uptake rate, some companies provided space on site for health care 
professionals to administer vaccinations to employees. 
Due to the long-term social-distancing already experienced by employees, it is recommended that 
companies discuss this with their employees and share the measures that will be taken to control the 
spread of infectious agents.
Employees and companies may prefer a staggered return to work. This can be achieved by surveying 
employees on when and how they would like to return to the workplace setting. Staggering the return 
of employees will also allow the company to evaluate the effectiveness of their control measures in place.
References
1.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Community, Work, and School. COVID-19. 
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/index.html (accessed 27 May 2022).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
21
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Q 2-4:  Who gets the vaccine first?
Background
As the first vaccines were developed and approved for emergency use, the number of doses available 
were limited. The question of who should receive the first doses was a topic of great discussion and de-
bate. After health care workers and those at greatest risk, such as the elderly in long-term care facilities, 
came essential workers and those over 65. It was not clear during the vaccine roll-out exactly where 
pharmaceutical manufacturing personnel stood in regard to their priority in receiving the vaccine.
Lessons Learned
As the continued supply of pharmaceutical products is critical, it is important that the pharmaceuti-
cal industry workers within the manufacturing facility who are directly supporting the manufacturing 
floor operations and whose jobs cannot be performed remotely should be on the list to receive the 
vaccine early, and they should be the first vaccinated within the company based on their importance 
to the manufacturing operations. The line of workers that comprise manufacturing-floor operations 
should include the technicians directly performing testing of the products, the warehousing and ship-
ping personnel responsible for moving and shipping the product, and other individuals who must be 
present for the product to be produced, released, and shipped. These workers are essential to ensure 
product supply. Companies should have plans in place to quickly identify these individuals in the 
event of another pandemic.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
22
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 2-5:  How do safety and human resource policies change after a 
vaccine is readily available?
Background
As the pandemic progressed and vaccines became widely available, a significant percentage of the 
population refused to receive the vaccination. There were multiple underlying reasons for this, among 
them, religious beliefs, general fear of vaccinations, and fears specific to the COVID-19 vaccine due to 
the lack of long-term clinical data. Compounding these challenges was a preexisting and active anti-
vaccination movement that caused many individuals to avoid receiving the vaccine based on incorrect 
safety information. A strain on the availability of vaccinated employees resulted. 
Because the COVID-19 virus is highly infectious, the percentage of the population required to obtain 
“herd immunity” to the virus would be expected to be very high. Adding to the percentage required to 
achieve this is the question of the vaccine’s protection against infection over time as well as the poten-
tial of reinfection over time (See Q 3-5). Based on these factors, governments have taken the unusual 
step of allowing employers to request the vaccination status of workers, apply restrictions and, in some 
countries, require vaccinations as a term of continued employment. 
For many, this was a paradigm shift and a significant change in expectations between employers and 
employees.
Lessons Learned
When on-site workers or visitors test positive for SARS-CoV-2, certain preventive measures need to 
take place. It is important to have processes in place for contact-tracing to let other employees know 
that they have been in contact with this individual, that they are at risk, and that they need to quaran-
tine as well. The infected person should stay at home until they are no longer infectious. The duration 
may vary depending on the strain. Companies should follow the quarantine durations established 
by their public health authorities. The work area where this person was located needs to be cleaned 
and disinfected with an effective disinfectant. People identified through contact-tracing may need to 
provide a negative COVID-19 test result prior to returning to work. Personnel should be trained on 
masking, hand sanitization, and social distancing to lower the risk of future outbreaks and potential 
super-spreader events.
Companies should put processes in place where legally permitted to restrict the access to individuals 
(employees and visitors) who have not been vaccinated. For employees who have chosen not to receive 
the vaccination, companies should consider requiring a PCR or antigen test no older than 48 or 72 
hours to be shown or, in some cases, should seek to replace them with employees who have been vac-
cinated. The vaccination status of all employees and visitors should be verified, and the records of the 
verification should be kept on file. Any exceptions should be rare and specific restrictions should be 
applied.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
23
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
