Introduction 
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, many industries–the pharmaceutical industry included–went 
through a substantial disruption. Some of these disruptions included facility shutdowns, unprecedent-
ed supply chain challenges, worker availability, and quality system limitations (e.g., physical signa-
tures, investigations, document originals, risk assessments, audits). For many pharmaceutical compa-
nies, challenges increased as they raced to provide a vaccine or a therapeutic treatment for COVID-19. 
Their manufacturing operations were changed over to accommodate the creation of the vaccine and, 
in order to get the vaccine to patients quickly, many logistical challenges arose. 
As the pandemic has progressed, our understanding of the virus, its control, and treatment options 
have changed and advanced. When reading this document, it is important to remember that its intent 
is to describe the lessons learned for future benefit, especially at times when the understanding of the 
virus and treatment options were extremely limited. Even today, as we enter what is believed to be the 
last phase of the pandemic, moving into an endemic state, it is difficult to comprehend the amount 
of anxiety and risk that existed during the initial 12 to 16 months. During that time, some types of 
government-imposed state of emergency were mandated in many countries that restricted the move-
ment of individuals and closed nonessential businesses. Hospitals operated at capacity, a significant 
number of Covid-related deaths occurred, and a limited amount of personal protective equipment 
(e.g., mask, gloves) was available.
The specifics of the pandemic or the COVID-19 virus are not detailed here, as that information 
is widely available. One point that does need to be made is that this pandemic, like the pandemic 
of 1918, went through waves, and the exact timing of each wave and the number of waves experi-
enced varied by country. Provided below is an example of the COVID-19 waves for the United States 
(Figure 1), published in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, that shows the seven-day mov-
ing average number of cases in the United States over a two-year period (1). These waves were not 
unexpected but how the operation of manufacturing facilities should react to these first waves was not 
immediately clear; that developed over time. This document intends to convey the understanding and 
evolution of thought in response to the new data and observations presented as we worked our way 
through 2019, 2020, 2021, and 2022. 
Scope
This document applies lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic to pharmaceutical manufactur-
ing. Areas covered include manufacturing, people, quality, regulatory, and supply chain.
Figure 1	 	
Seven-day moving average number of COVID-19 cases, emergency department visits, hospital admissions, 
and deaths, December 1, 2020–January 15, 2022 (1)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
References
1.	 Juliano, A; Brunkard, J, et al. Trends in Disease Severity and Health Care Utilization During 
the Early Omicron Variant Period Compared with Previous SARS-CoV-2 High Transmission 
Periods - United States, December 2020-January 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2022 
Jan 28;71 (4), 146-52.
Additional Reading
Cacciapaglia, G, et al. Multiwave pandemic dynamics explained: how to tame the next wave of infec-
tious diseases. Sci Rep 2021, 11, 6638.
Gouglas, D, et al. The 100 Days Mission—2022 Global Pandemic Preparedness Summit. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2023, 29 (3). https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2903.221142 
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 89: Strategies for Vaccine Development and Lifecycle 
Management; PDA: Bethesda, MD, 2023.
Popkin, M E, et al. Chemistry Manufacturing and Controls Development, Industry Reflections on 
Manufacture, and Supply of Pandemic Therapies and Vaccines. The AAPS Journal 2022, 24 (101). 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9514697/pdf/12248_2022_Article_751.pdf
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
3
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
I.  Manufacturing
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 1-1:  Are GMP controls sufficient to protect the product?
Background
Due to the novelty of the coronavirus, at the start of the pandemic, the potential impact to the safety and 
quality of the drugs produced as a result of infected manufacturing employees was uncertain. The virus 
was found to spread very efficiently, which resulted in a much higher percentage of the population being 
infected than with common or seasonal viral infections. As a result, the risk of a manufacturing process 
being exposed to the coronavirus was considered to be higher than usual, depending on the process. 
Therefore, most drug manufacturers moved quickly to perform risk assessments to evaluate the established 
good manufacturing practices (GMP) controls in their manufacturing facilities with respect to the new 
potential contaminant. The expectation of risk mitigation was also later reflected in a COVID-19-specific 
guidance published by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) that stated “as a consequence of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, drug manufacturers were also expected to perform these risk assessments to ensure 
that product quality and safety, including employees’ safety, are not impacted due to the pandemic” (1). 
Fortunately for the industry, and for most of the manufacturing operations that would be considered 
at risk, careful implementation of GMP principles and practices are likely to protect product against 
the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19, as well as mitigate the risk caused by asymptomatic 
SARS-CoV-2-infected personnel. Some of these include:
•	
General hygiene measures and procedures in case of illness, feeling sick, open lesions, or sneezing 
and coughing
•	
Procedures for thorough handwashing and subsequent hand sanitization before entering produc-
tion areas, and regular glove disinfection during production
•	
Use of environmentally controlled rooms within GMP-classified areas with specific gowning re-
quirements (e.g., cleanroom gowns, overalls, lab coats, gloves, mask, gowning procedures) based 
on the operation performed
•	
Restriction of access to production areas to authorized personnel only
•	
Frequent cleaning cycles of the manufacturing areas and process equipment
•	
Design of general process equipment to ensure manufacturing areas are as closed as possible to 
prevent the potential entry of contamination
•	
Use of closed systems and, where product is exposed, use of isolators, restricted access barrier 
systems, and HEPA-filtered laminar airflow to protect the product
•	
Frequent cleaning cycles of the area and of the processing equipment to further prevent con-
tamination from spreading
•	
Environmental and personnel monitoring to ensure strict adherence to GMP processes
•	
Use of air cascades and pressure differentials to allow air to flow from critical to less-critical areas 
•	
Production flow in facilities designed to allow efficient movement and control of materials, per-
sonnel, products, equipment, and waste to prevent contamination
•	
Use of gamma-irradiated, single-use process equipment interconnected with aseptic connections 
and typically designated as functionally closed systems
•	
Stainless-steel equipment processes typically being cleaned and connected, followed by an in-situ 
steam sterilization cycle
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
•	
Process venting points outfitted with hydrophobic-membrane filters that act as barriers to poten-
tial ingress into the process
Additional considerations are also taken when working with mammalian cell lines: 
•	
Industry is expected to conduct adventitious-agent testing of a typical panel at the end of pro-
duction cell bank. Additional risk assessment may need to be considered for banks manufactured 
after 2019.
•	
Measures to prevent and avoid viral cross-contamination during processing are well established, 
including deactivation and removal of viruses. These measures are likely to prove effective against 
COVID-19 as well. The large size of the COVID-19 virus makes it a prime candidate for removal 
by a 20-nm viral filter. Reports of the stability of COVID-19 over a wide range of pH values cre-
ates some potential concern around the effectiveness of a low-pH step for viral deactivation; thus, 
relying fully on this step for clearance is not recommended (2-4). Further studies in this area will 
enhance confidence in the effectiveness of the current processing steps. Alternatively, detergent 
or solvent deactivation is effective (4). Clearance of viruses through protein-A chromatography-
capture and/or anion exchange are both functions of viral particle properties as well as protein 
and solution conditions. Using a panel of viruses that incorporates the physical characteristics of 
a coronavirus provides assurance of viral safety.
All these measures reduce the likelihood of an impact to product quality and safety due to pathogenic 
contamination to acceptable levels. 
Learnings
The emergence of a pandemic or similar disaster must mobilize industry to assess the continued abil-
ity of their processes and quality systems to protect product quality and patient safety. Industry must 
be prepared to rapidly perform such assessments in the future when a similar situation emerges. In 
the case of SARS-CoV-2, manufacturing processes employing strict GMP adherence in their design, 
personnel controls, and the environments in which they are performed likely present an extremely low 
risk for possible SARS-CoV-2 product contamination. In most cases, when conforming to existing 
GMP, no additional measures are necessary to protect product and patient. In the event of an employ-
ee operating within the GMP manufacturing environment testing positive, a specific risk assessment 
should be performed to identify, analyze, and evaluate hazards that might need to be considered based 
on the specific circumstances. 
References
1.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Good Manufacturing Practice Consid-
erations for Responding to COVID-19 Infection in Employees in Drug and Biological Products 
Manufacturing; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2020.
2.	 Chin, A W H; Chu, J T S, et al. Stability of SARS-CoV-2 in Different Environmental Condi-
tions. Lancet Microbe 2020, May, 1 (1).
3.	 Michen, B; Graule, T. Isoelectric Points of Viruses. J Appl Microbiol 2010, Aug, 109 (2), 388-97.
4.	 Miriam, E R; Darnell, M E, et al. Evaluation of inactivation methods for severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus in noncellular blood products. Transfusion 2006, Oct; 46 (10), 1770-7.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 1-2:  How do you develop a mRNA/gene therapy drug product 
rapidly (Part 1)?
Background
Using messenger RNA (mRNA) to encode proteins for vaccination or protein replacement received its 
first in-vivo validation in 1990, when Wolff et al. demonstrated the production of a target protein after 
intramuscular injection in mice (1). The exact advantages of using mRNA products were discovered 
later, including: 
•	
Allowing human post-translational modification of protein products with the potential for less 
immunogenicity and full functionality
•	
Permitting multimeric proteins that are not amendable to production in a bioreactor to be trans-
lated, folded, and assembled correctly in the patient’s cells
•	
Producing transmembrane and intracellular proteins and trafficking them to their appropriate 
site in the cellular environment (2)
Learnings
The preparation of plasmid DNA (pDNA) is the first step in the production of mRNA, where func-
tional synthetic mRNA is obtained by the in-vitro transcription of a pDNA template. The pDNA 
template is transcribed into the mRNA mixture containing RNA polymerase and nucleoside triphos-
phates. Then, a cap may be performed during the reaction, or it can be added enzymatically post-tran-
scription. Capping improves translation initiation by recruiting translation-initiation factors, thereby 
protecting the synthetic mRNA against degradation. Post-transcription, the pDNA template and bac-
terial DNA is digested by DNase. To be used as a drug substance, mRNA has to be purified to remove 
contaminating transcripts, which can be done by using a single chromatographic step that will separate 
the mRNA based on size and result in a pure, single mRNA product. 
Two forms of mRNA are being studied for use in vaccines: nonreplicating (traditional) mRNA and 
self-amplifying mRNA. The traditional mRNA form presents two advantages: the molecule is quite 
simple and small, and the possibility of an unwanted immune response is lowered because there are 
no other proteins encoded. However, the traditional mRNA form is limited by its transient nature. 
The advantage of self-amplifying mRNA is that it performs self-replication and creates high levels of 
the antigen not found with traditional mRNA. The self-amplifying RNA vaccine was found to show 
a 64-fold lower dose required for an immunologic response compared to its mRNA counterpart (2).
References
1.	 Wolff, J; Malone, R, et al. Direct Gene Transfer into Mouse Muscle in Vivo. Science 1990, 247 
(4949), 1465-68.
2.	 Barbier, A; Jiang, A, et al. The clinical progress of mRNA vaccines and immunotherapies. Nat 
Biotechnol 2022, 40, 840–54.
Additional Reading
Rosa, S, et al. mRNA vaccines manufacturing: Challenges and bottlenecks. Vaccine 2021, 39 (16), 
2190-200. 
Fang, E, et al. Advances in COVID-19 mRNA Vaccine Development. Signal Transduction and 
Targeted Therapy 2022, 7 (94). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8940982/
pdf/41392_2022_Article_950.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Understanding How COVID-19 Vaccines Work. CO-
VID-19. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/different-vaccines/how-they-work.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
7
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
html#mrna (accessed 9 Oct 2023). https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/different-
vaccines/how-they-work.html#mrna
Schlake, T, et al. Developing mRNA-Vaccine Technologies. RNA Biol 2012, 9 (11), 1319–30. 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Human Gene Therapy Products Incorpo-
rating Human Genome Editing; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 
2022. https://www.fda.gov/media/144886/download.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
8
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 1-3:  How do you develop a mRNA/gene therapy drug product 
rapidly (Part 2)?
Background
Gene therapy products seek to insert genetic material into a patient’s cells to treat or prevent a specific 
disease state. There are several types of gene-therapy products, which includes plasmid DNA, viral vec-
tors, bacterial vectors, human gene-editing technology, and patient-derived cellular gene therapy (1). 
In much the same way, mRNA therapy products seek to insert mRNA material into a patient’s cells to 
induce the production of a specific protein to treat or prevent a specific disease state. 
The COVID-19 mRNA vaccine, for example, is made of mRNA and, to allow introduction into the 
cell, is encompassed by lipid nanoparticles. Once in the cells, it works by instructing the cells to make 
a protein that will trigger an immune response to COVID-19 (2). While there is no specific formula 
for the creation of a successful mRNA lipid nanoparticle (LNP) vaccine, there are items to keep in 
mind when designing such a product. 
The mRNA LNP design is characterized by three main elements:
•	
mRNA sequence design and nucleotide modification choice
•	
Optimization of a LNP formulation to encapsulate and deliver mRNA
•	
Long-term storage (3)
The first step in developing a mRNA therapy product is focusing on the API, as it is the most important 
part of the formulation. Considerations for designing or choosing the mRNA sequence should include 
the expression of encoded mRNA, immunogenicity due to recognition of mRNA as a foreign entity 
by intracellular RNA sensors, and mRNA stability. Nucleotide modification is equally important for 
this, as nonmodified mRNA molecules are recognized by the cellular RNA sensors, which nulls the 
effect of their expression. The translation efficiency and intracellular-mRNA stability can be increased 
substantially by mRNA capping. Additionally, the decay and translation efficiency are greatly affected 
by the untranslated region selection as well as the open-reading-frames sequence design. 
The purpose of the LNP formulation is to design a nanoparticle that will shield the mRNA from 
degradation and enable efficient delivery into targeted cells. These formulations typically comprise a 
neutral structural lipid, cholesterol, a PEG-lipid, and an ionizable lipid. The ionizable lipid is incred-
ibly important for enhancing the expression and provides the most-optimal immune response. The 
PEG-lipid component is helpful in increasing the shelf life of the solution by preventing aggregation. 
Considerations for PEG-lipids used in these formulations should take into account that, at high con-
centrations, they can prevent delivery of the mRNA. 
The speed at which knowledge regarding mRNA vaccine development was gained during the pan-
demic was significant. This was a clear result of the unprecedented amount of global private and gov-
ernment funding that was made available for vaccine development. 
Throughout the process of formulation, long-term storage and stability should be major considerations 
in design. The ultra-low storage requirement currently approved for mRNA vaccines due to instability 
at room temperature is a system constraint. To freeze LNPs, a cryoprotectant such as sucrose or trehalose 
should be added to the formulation. When added, these cryoprotectants preserve the physiochemical 
properties of the particles and allow maintenance of in-vivo delivery efficacy for three months.
Lessons Learned
In the case of a future pandemic, the availability of global and private funding to advance the develop-
ment of research for a potential vaccine will again be critical. Governmental agencies globally should 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
9
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
develop or revise plans related to the emergency funding of such research should the need arise. Where 
possible, governments should work together on such plans. 
While the most desired mRNA vaccine would be one that could be provided in a lyophilized or a 
liquid formulation stored under refrigerated or room-temperature conditions, such formulations can 
take significant periods of time to develop, if even possible. Under pandemic conditions, when a 
vaccine is needed quickly, the initial use of an ultra-low storage condition should be considered as it 
removes many of the formulation challenges that would otherwise need to be overcome. 
References
1.	 ASGCT Staff. COVID-19 Vaccine Candidates Show Gene Therapy is a Viable Strategy. COV-
ID Symposium. https://asgct.org/research/news/november-2020/covid-19-moderna-nih-vaccine 
(accessed 27 May 2022).
2.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Understanding mRNA COVID-19 Vaccines. 
COVID-19. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/different-vaccines/mrna.
html#print (accessed 27 May 2022).
3.	 Kon, E; Elia, U, et al. Principles for designing an optimal mRNA lipid nanoparticle vaccine. 
Curr Opin Biotechnol 2022, 73, 329-36.
Additional Reading
Singhai, M; Bhattacharya, S. Polysarcosine: The Best Alternative of Poly (Ethylene Glycol). Current 
Applied Polymer Science 2020, 4, 1-5. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
10
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 1-4:  How did the route of administration of the vaccine impact 
the manufacturing operations needed and how did companies work 
together to allow rapid commercialization?
Background
The COVID-19 vaccine is considered a biologic parenteral drug formulated as a solution with the 
route of administration being sterile injections. Therefore, manufacturing of a parental drug is much 
more complex than the production of solid oral dosage forms such as tablets for oral ingestion. Apart 
from the significant differences in manufacturing a solution versus a tablet, there are many more con-
trols required to ensure the product remains entirely sterile, including the control and use of sterile 
components such as vials and stoppers. 
A vital step for these types of parenteral drugs that cannot be terminally sterilized is the aseptic fill–fin-
ish process in which solution is filled into containers, such as vials, and sealed with an aseptic closure, 
such as a stopper, as the final step before the product is packaged and shipped for patients. For several 
of the vaccine products developed, rapid freezing and long-term, ultra-low storage was also required. 
The formulation of a drug product can have a significant impact on the sterile fill–finish capabilities of 
the system. For instance, a product may require different sizes and composition of filters (membranes) 
to achieve sterilization of the product. Different characteristics of the drug product will also affect the 
parameters of the system used to fill the vials, such as flow rate and pressure. In many cases, the filling 
process requires specialized equipment due to specific product characteristics, such as solubility, viscos-
ity, and the tendency of a product formulation to foam. 
The fill–finish of millions of doses of vaccines is no small task; it requires significant manufacturing 
capacity, technical capabilities, and rigorous quality-control measures to ensure product quality. To 
achieve the volume of production needed, smaller pharmaceutical companies developing the vaccine 
teamed up with larger companies that had the capacity and technical expertise needed to produce it. 
Moderna, for example, utilized the sterile fill–finish capabilities of the contract manufacturer Thermo 
Fisher Scientific to aid in this incredibly important part of the manufacturing process (1). BioNTech 
partnered with Pfizer, an expert in the manufacture of sterile drug products (2).
Lessons Learned
One very valuable learning point during the pandemic was the importance and willingness of com-
panies to partner with one another to rapidly develop the manufacturing process needed for vaccine 
production. In the event of a future pandemic, this will again be a crucial factor in the speed with 
which a novel vaccine can be commercialized.
References
1.	 Higgins-Dunn, N. On a roll, Moderna taps Thermo Fisher for fill-finish duties and Lonza for 
booster shot manufacturing. Fierce Pharma. https://www.fiercepharma.com/pharma/a-role-
moderna-taps-thermo-fisher-to-help-covid-19-vaccine-fill-finish-packaging-and (accessed 17 Jul 
2022).
2.	 Etherington, D. Pfizer and BioNTech announce joint development of a potential COVID-19 
vaccine. TechCrunch. https://techcrunch.com/2020/03/17/pfizer-and-biontech-announce-joint-
development-of-a-potential-covid-19-vaccine/ (accessed 17 Jul 2022).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
11
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Q 1-5:  Can vaccine manufacturing capacities be scaled up rapidly?
Background
Technology is rapidly evolving. Since 1990, when mRNA was first used in vivo, decades of research 
have gone into understanding mRNA–LNPs, so much was already known about mRNA before the 
start of the 2020 pandemic. Consequently, when the need for a COVID-19 vaccine arose, it did not 
take nearly as long as it would have if researchers were starting from scratch. Moderna’s vaccine took 
only two days to finalize the sequence, 25 days to manufacture the first dose, and 63 days to be made 
available for the first patient to be dosed in a Phase 1 Clinical Study (1-3). Although the vaccine was 
made quickly, it was held to rigorous standards by the FDA as stated in Guidance for Industry: Develop-
ment and Licensure of Vaccines to Prevent COVID-19 (2). 
To be effective, scaling up manufacturing of the novel drug product required a platform technology 
approach and available facilities in which to perform the operations. Such was the case with the CO-
VID-19 vaccines.
Without considering process validation and regulatory approval timelines, the design, construction, 
and installation of a typical manufacturing facility requires a minimum of two to three years. In the 
case of COVID-19, however, the capacities needed to be scaled up much more rapidly. In 2010, the 
U.S. government started an initiative to fund sites that could be activated either for other vaccine pur-
poses or to fulfill the needs of a pandemic-vaccine requirement. These sites were funded by the federal 
government to assure that they were built and able to operate without being a burden to the companies 
that owned the sites. Unfortunately, when these sites were activated, they were not able to fulfill the 
mission for which they had been created.
Based on the need to respond quickly, approaches were leveraged to bring new facilities online faster. 
The use of standard designs for cleanroom infrastructure by suppliers significantly abbreviated design 
timelines. These standard designs allowed the in-depth knowledge of all material components needed, 
the logistics to get the components to the site, and the site installation and qualification. The absence 
of the need for a design phase and the use of a repeat build and qualification strategy reduced normal 
facility construction timelines considerably. To accelerate the timeline further, standard designs of 
off-site, prefabricated, modular cleanroom infrastructures were used, as was the case in the Pfizer Ka-
lamazoo site (4). These types of building modes not only halved the construction timeline but allowed 
them to be prequalified and used within a high-beam shell building, like a warehouse. This allowed 
the processing infrastructure to be added into existing shell buildings, with only slight modifications 
to building utilities, instead of constructing a new building. 
Some companies, such as Thermo Fisher Scientific, actively worked to overcome this challenge and 
scaled up their manufacturing efforts quickly to meet the unprecedented demand. Initially, Thermo 
Fisher Scientific scaled up the manufacture of raw materials, relying on their current working supply of 
nucleotides and enzymes for early therapeutics development, which required no infrastructure chang-
es. The company also built a 57,000-sq. ft. facility to manufacture the needed enzymes and nucleotides 
at industrial-scale levels using a platform approach to ensure a continued supply (4).
Lessons Learned
The pandemic situation emphasized the need for pharmaceutical companies and regulatory authorities 
to be prepared to encourage facility design, construction, and process installations that leverage and 
expedite innovation and the adoption of new technology with the goal of bringing the manufacturing 
facilities online rapidly. 
For example, the use of modular facilities that allows manufacturers to continuously customize and 
reconfigure equipment to accommodate new products or processes could be encouraged. This use of 
portable modular manufacturing suites also provides new options for geographic diversification and 
facility reconfiguration. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
12
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
In addition, global governments should think about how to incentivize companies to design facili-
ties in the future that are flexible enough to be repurposed during a pandemic if needed. This should 
be possible if the types of drug substance technology for the vaccine are not too different from the 
production techniques in use. The benefit of building flexibility into an operating facility is that the 
processes surrounding those manufacturing operations are upgraded over time including aspects of 
the quality systems. Building plants that are not routinely used and maintaining them in a hibernated 
state creates many unforeseen issues (e.g., equipment reliability, availability of trained staff, up-to-date 
quality systems). 
A recent McKinsey report addressed the issue of being always prepared, with upfront investments 
over two years, followed by maintenance investments into the preparedness level. One of the issues 
addressed was the need for scaled-up vaccine facilities and having these facilities ready for use to sup-
ply 15 billion doses in six months. The investment over 10 years would be substantial, but the analysis 
also showed that the minimum economic loss globally would be 40 times higher if this investment 
was not made (4).
References
1.	 Kon, E; Elia, U, et al. Principles for designing an optimal mRNA lipid nanoparticle vaccine. 
Curr Opin Biotechnol 2022, 73, 329-36.
2.	 Rosa, S; Prazeres, D, et al. mRNA vaccines manufacturing: Challenges and bottlenecks. Vaccine 
2021, 39 (16), 2190-200.
3.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Development and Licensure of Vac-
cines to Prevent COVID-19; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Silver Spring, 
Md., 2020.
4.	 Sealy, A. Manufacturing moonshot: How Pfizer makes its millions of Covid-19 vaccine doses. 
CNN Health. https://www.cnn.com/2021/03/31/health/pfizer-vaccine-manufacturing/index.
html (accessed 27 May 2022).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
13
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
