V.  Supply Chain
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
50
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 5-1:  Why have there been supply constraints for incoming 
materials, such as single-use systems, container closures, resins and 
filters, excipients, and APIs?
Background
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the demand for consumables and raw materials necessary for the 
production of vaccines and in need across the globe put a major stress on supply chains. Manufactur-
ers of these single-use systems (SUS) and excipients were not prepared for fast turnaround times and 
large production; they were accustomed to consistent and repeatable orders and delivery. Lead times 
for consumables extended by up to 12 months, and lead times for sterile filters went from 2-3 months 
to 9-12 months (1).
The system as a whole was not ready for “emergency” supply chain management and, as demand in-
creased, old methods became ineffective (1). Prior to the pandemic, the demand for incoming materi-
als was increasing, especially plastic-based SUS and primary glass containers, such as vials and rubber 
components, a result of emerging applications in cell and gene therapies, monoclonal antibodies, and 
vaccines. Since the pandemic, local authorities have prioritized incoming materials for pandemic sup-
ply and established export bans on specific items. For example, the U.S. government has been using 
such measures as rated orders under the Defense Production Act to prioritize COVID-19 vaccine 
production, which primarily use SUS. That led to a very limited allocation of SUS to other biolog-
ics development programs and commercial manufacturing. The same applies to all drug substances, 
excipients, starting materials, intermediates, and devices. 
Lessons Learned 
Drug manufacturers and suppliers should work together on pandemic preparedness to assess demand 
and capacity, plan for supply manufacturing expansion, and act quickly on implementation. End us-
ers should understand their forecast and communicate with suppliers. Suppliers should anticipate the 
market demand, evaluate against their existing capacity, and fill in the gaps in a timely fashion.
Drug manufacturers should conduct a holistic risk assessment that includes alternative solutions, aside 
from safety stock; for example, they should anticipate validation of multiple sourcing on strategic 
components to increase their chances of meeting pandemic demand and maintaining continuity of 
supply for essential treatments.
There are a few reasons why lead times of materials were so severely affected, starting with restrictions 
in transportation globally and the movement of specific goods from vendors, which affected delivery 
times of critical raw materials or consumables (2). In the months leading up to the pandemic, the 
supply chain in the medical industry was growing far more complex around the world, with more 
third-party vendors competing for business with lower pricing and faster turnaround. This growing 
spiderweb of supply chains and the uncertainty of demand resulting from the pandemic accounted for 
delays that cascaded throughout the network, such as uncertainty of demand, inconsistency of supply, 
scarcity of material, delays in transportation, constraints in capacity, and shortage of labor.
The number of facilities that could meet manufacturing capabilities was limited, and the gaps in avail-
able workforce meant it took longer to hire and train qualified personnel to meet manufacturing needs 
(3). Several suggestions were made to mitigate the situation:
•	
Drug manufacturers should establish a cross-functional task force that includes procurement, 
supply chain, technical, quality, regulatory, and operations groups to respond to risks. The task 
force should be sponsored by corporate executives.
•	
Mitigation plans should include building safety stocks (wherever possible) and providing alterna-
tive supply solutions. Since all products and processes would be impacted, companies should 
prioritize based on a product’s medical criticality and patients’ usage volume.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
51
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
•	
Additional suppliers should be evaluated and qualified when deemed necessary. An emergency 
use guideline should be generated to allow faster turnaround of qualification.
Using the category of SUS as an example, some items to consider might include:
•	
Technical teams should categorize SUS using the product-family approach, evaluate component 
interchangeability, and use the available, functionally equivalent parts as a like-for-like change. 
Drug manufacturers and suppliers should systematically start working together to build a library 
of interchangeable components. This would facilitate the qualification process and shorten the 
overall lead time significantly.
•	
In some cases, drug manufacturers may be able to assemble and then steam-sterilize SUS in 
house. When the supplier has a limited capacity to perform SUS assembly, drug manufacturers 
should investigate if it could be done internally while maintaining the same level of quality.
•	
Currently, the shelf life of SUS post-gamma irradiation is typically 24 months, a conservative 
estimate that sometimes resulted in waste. Drug manufacturers and suppliers should work to-
gether to standardize the approach used to qualify shelf life with the aim of lengthening it. In the 
meantime, drug manufacturers and suppliers should collaborate to potentially extend the shelf 
life of recently expired SUS, based on scientific study or justification.
•	
SUS are designed to be used once and then disposed. When considering the reuse of SUS, the 
original technical and quality requirements should be met. Otherwise, SUS should not be reused.
Securing global pharmaceutical supply chains during a pandemic is a primary function of the pharma-
ceutical industry. Industry shares this responsibility with government agencies. Pharmaceutical com-
panies must develop BCPs in order to maintain uninterrupted supply chain distribution during pan-
demics. BCPs provide a roadmap for senior management to understand and implement approaches to 
mitigate numerous potential risks related to supply in the event of a specific disruption.
Given the evolving nature of global pandemics, it is important to strengthen existing BCPs in order 
to ensure that they adequately address and assure robust supply chains that mitigate risk to ongoing 
product supply. Pharmaceutical manufacturers’ BCPs were stressed during the pandemic, given the 
disruption to numerous routine operations and were often found lacking in detail and scope. Legacy 
BCPs developed strategies to react to multiple potential risks; however, these plans were typically 
related to individual risks and not scoped to deal with failures of multiple operational areas. Global 
supply chain activities were uniquely impacted during this time, and existing BCPs did not address the 
numerous risk factors encountered. 
Pharmaceutical manufacturers remain responsible for developing strategies to mitigate supply-chain 
issues, which requires careful assessment of the interactions among the many existing business nodes. 
The interaction among logistics, manufacturing, packaging, warehousing, quality-control testing, 
product release, distribution, transportation routes, and importation activities are further complicated 
by segmentation of activities that are often owned by different entities at different stages of the supply 
chain. BCPs must be enhanced from the current state to include the learnings from the pandemic and 
work in synergy with BCPs of third-party suppliers to provide maximum assurance of an ongoing sup-
ply of pharmaceutical products. Several factors should be considered when deploying BCPs, among 
them, prioritization of medically critical products, product safety-stock levels, warehousing capacity, 
logistics, location of patient population centers, and third-party supplier robustness.
The BCP should detail stages of activity. For example, pharmaceutical manufacturers must act swiftly 
at the onset of a potential pandemic to ensure appropriate actions are taken immediately to limit the 
risk to product supply. This could include, to name a few, raising inventory levels to minimize the 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
52
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
risk to manufacture and distribution, engaging third-party logistic providers to ensure BCPs are being 
activated, and inventorying available warehousing capacity.
The following items should be considered as part of a pharmaceutical manufacturer’s BCP:
•	
Assess the need to increase inventory levels (commonly called safety stock) of materials used 
throughout the supply chain. Medically critical medicines should be prioritized; however, BCP 
risk mitigation should assess safety stock for all medicinal products.
•	
Assess the location where the safety stock is kept, as transportation might be impacted during a 
pandemic as well.
•	
Review safety-stock levels. Medical criticality and safety-stock levels should be assessed constant-
ly throughout the pandemic to ensure necessary levels are maintained and changes in classifica-
tion are fully understood and evaluated.
•	
Ensure alternative suppliers are qualified for all materials, as applicable, not only APIs, but even 
a lesser-priority excipient might become critical if it is missing.
•	
Assess medical criticality in each market as the supply needs may differ depending on local sup-
ply logistics, number of approved suppliers, and generic availability.
•	
Consider warehousing and distribution space needed for any increase in safety-stock inventory, 
including both cold-chain and controlled-room-temperature conditions. 
•	
Consider the wider need for warehousing. This is especially important for cold-chain product where 
local intervention to provide storage for vaccine and other treatment may be given the highest priority.
•	
Consider locating finished product storage closer to the intended patient populations earlier in 
the product lifecycle. Moving the materials closer to the market prevents route and import dis-
ruptions from delaying treatment. Controls must be established to ensure robust approval and 
release processes to prevent unauthorized distribution prior to final product release.
•	
If third parties are involved, ensure controls are in place and are covered in existing agreements 
with third-party suppliers. The controls should be part of both internal and external company 
audit programs and should be detailed in procedures and signed agreements between parties. 
Where third parties are used, controls for product quarantine, release, and rejection procedures 
need to be fully understood. This is especially important if third-party warehouses will hold 
quarantined material pending release status change.
•	
Consider options for shipping lanes due to the real possibility of disruptions to shipping part-
ners, potential changes in importation and customs procedures, port shutdown, protectionism, 
port-of-entry closures, and staffing shortages.
•	
Consider working with local governments to ensure transparent supply of materials and to make 
risk-based decisions that overcome disruptions, including deploying different ports of entry.
•	
Consider other supply options, including adding third-party suppliers and employing redundant 
sourcing options; pursuing these options during the initial stages of a pandemic may be ap-
propriate. Given potentially lengthy approval times, consider building redundant options into 
routine operations. Redundant operations for the manufacture of medically critical medicines 
must be reviewed with consideration to building capability and gaining regulatory approval of 
local and regional sites of manufacture.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
53
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
•	
Assess stability beyond current shelf-life limits where possible. In the event of shortages during a 
pandemic, this data could be essential when working with local government authorities to allow 
a pandemic-related extension in the market where necessary.
•	
Identify markets that require import release-testing. Should there be a risk of shortages, firms 
should engage with local authorities to request waivers of import-testing requirements with 
justification based on supply dynamics. This could help offset local quality-control laboratory 
operations (including third-party laboratories), supply-chain impact, and customs and import 
delays that can be expected during pandemic periods, and the risk is very low for products where 
release-testing has already been performed.
•	
Consider the risk of counterfeits and product theft, which increase during pandemic times. 
BCPs should include a detailed plan for working with third-party logistic providers, warehouses, 
and distribution providers to ensure safe and effective transport of products with rapid notifica-
tion and response over and above normal procedures. 
•	
Consider building multiple BCPs to allow for variation; for example, firms may have one BCP 
for routine product supply and a separate BCP for clinical-trial supply.
References
1.	 Dakin, J. Supply Chain Challenges Creating Hurdles to COVID-19 Vaccine Production. Pharm 
Tech 2021, 45 (4), 60-64.
2.	 Raj, A; Mukherjee, A, et al. Supply chain management during and post-COVID-19 pandemic: 
Mitigation strategies and practical lessons learned. J Bus Res 2022, 2022 Mar (142), 1125-39.
3.	 Hippold, S. Coronavirus: How to Secure Your Supply Chain. Insights/Supply Chain. https://
www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/coronavirus-how-to-secure-your-supply-chain (accessed 
26 Jul 2022).
Additional Reading
Casey, C A; Cimino-Isaacs, C D. Export Restrictions in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic; Con-
gressional Research Service: Washington, DC, 2021. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/
IF11551 (accessed 27 Aug 2022).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
54
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 5-2:  What impact did cold-chain custody and manufacturing 
bottlenecks have on vaccine supply?
Background
Current supply-chain capabilities were assumed to be sufficient to effectively distribute the COV-
ID-19 vaccines during the pandemic. This was not the case, however, as the current supply chain for 
vaccines is quite complex and was undergoing issues before the onset of the pandemic. As a result of 
globalization, supply chains have become increasingly complex. According to Dr. Robert Handfield 
from Poole College of Management and Dr. Daniel J. Finkenstadt from Naval Postgraduate School, 
there are several key challenges associated with vaccine supply chain: national security issues, personnel 
shortages, lack of coordination, shortage of supplies, limited capacity, vaccine damage, gaps for rural 
areas, and misinformation about vaccines (1). Specifically, cold-chain products are very sensitive to 
movement and high-touch handling. Processes had to be validated to prove that the vaccine was still 
effective after being handled in dry-ice packages. A narrow window existed between getting the vac-
cine out of cold storage and into patients before it deteriorated; this was a big challenge and a crucial 
step for vaccination of the population. Cold-chain issues presented an even greater challenge in rural 
areas than in highly populated cities, where the routes were longer and access points for citizens were 
more difficult. Consequently, vaccine inequality is more prevalent in lower-income countries that 
have a less-developed cold supply chain (2). Even in the United States, the capacity for temperature-
monitored cold rooms could not handle the mass volume of vaccines that needed cold storage.
Lessons Learned
When redesigning or looking to improve the cold supply chain for events such as the COVID-19 
pandemic, there are several key points to consider: 
•	
Design distribution around freezer requirements. Consider planning the distribution of vaccines 
en masse as soon as they arrive in the district. Reduce storage time after arrival by hosting events 
for mass immunization. Be creative with distribution techniques, such as the case in Ghana where 
drones were used for deliveries (2). 
•	
Optimize shipment size to limit requirements for cold-chain capacity. Transition packaging to 
smaller units by dividing bulk shipments into smaller packages shipped more frequently. 
•	
Increase cold-chain storage capacity. Increasing freezer or cold-room capacity can help to ensure 
the cold chain can handle planned or unplanned incremental volume changes associated with 
vaccines. Increasing storage capabilities is important for mass immunization events and to protect 
against delays in vaccine distribution. Possible solutions for increasing cold chain include renting 
temporary warehouse capacity from the private sector, using portable freezers or mobile cold stor-
age, or evaluating the cost effectiveness of repairing existing cold-chain units.
References
1.	 Barnhill, C. The COVID-19 Vaccine Supply Chain: Potential Problems and Bottlenecks. Poole 
Thought Leadership. https://poole.ncsu.edu/thought-leadership/article/the-covid-19-vaccine-
supply-chain-potential-problems-and-bottlenecks/ (accessed 26 Jul 2022).
2.	 Fleming, M; Okebukola, P, et al. Port to patient: Improving country cold chains for COVID-19 
vaccines. McKinsey & Company: Our Insights 2021.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
55
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Q 5-3:  How have vaccine manufacturing supply chains become 
more vertically integrated?
Background
To get vaccine manufacturing up to the demand required during the COVID-19 pandemic, many 
companies, such as Pfizer and Merck, had to take on some of the responsibility of obtaining the con-
sumables and raw materials that were required to manufacture their drug products. With extended 
delays from suppliers overseas, the need grew for companies to supply materials in house where they 
could control their own lead times.
Lessons Learned
Pfizer needed extremely large quantities of a cationic lipid that was essential to their COVID-19 vac-
cine, which was not readily available at the start of the pandemic. Consequently, Pfizer developed a 
process to create the lipid needed based on one that had already been devised by a Pfizer research and 
development (R&D) facility. Assembling a team of 50 people, they performed a tech transfer from the 
R&D facility to a larger manufacturing facility to create the cationic lipid needed for the Pfizer vac-
cine. To expedite the timeline, the team found ways to consolidate steps wherever possible and, soon 
after, the facility was producing 20 kg of cationic lipids each week. Instead of relying on vendors, Pfizer 
was able to control the output production of lipid that served their purpose in creating the COVID-19 
vaccine (1). 
Similarly, acquisition of companies that produced important raw materials needed for the creation of 
vaccines helped reduce lead times by streamlining communication between the two entities. Merck 
started production of a high-purity synthetic cholesterol product; the launch of this product followed 
Merck’s acquisition of AmpTec, which combined AmpTec’s mRNA technology with Merck’s extensive 
expertise in lipid manufacturing.
References
1.	 Silver, K. Shot of a Lifetime: How Pfizer Developed its Own Raw Materials to Ensure a Steady 
Supply for the COVID-19 Vaccine. Shot of a Lifetime. https://www.pfizer.com/news/articles/
shot_of_a_lifetime_how_pfizer_developed_its_own_raw_materials_to_ensure_a_steady_sup-
ply_for_the_covid_19_vaccine (accessed 26 Jul 2022). 
Additional Reading
Klossek, A; Gasparon, M. EIT RawMaterials Supports the World after COVID-19 in Securing a Sus-
tainable Supply of Raw Materials and Advanced Materials – for Europe’s Green Future and Competitive-
ness European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT): Brussels, 2020. https://eitrawmaterials.
eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/EIT-RawMaterials-Position-Paper-on-COVID-19.pdf (accessed 26 
Jul 2022). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
56
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
VI.  Relevant Vendor and Supplier Resources
The following paid advertisement is presented to the reader as potential supplemental resources which may aid in execution or 
fulfillment of the concepts, material, and information presented herein.
The inclusion of these resources does not imply any endorsement or preference on the part of PDA or the authors of this 
technical document.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Whatever you need – wherever you are – we can help.
Our holistic contamination control products and services include the right tools, technologies 
and expertise you need to ensure your success.
Comprehensive offerings. Integrated support.
Visit us at sterislifesciences.com
mediation  |  Biological Indicators  |  Certification  |  cGMP Sterilizers  |  cGMP Washers  |  Chemical Indicators  |  CIP 100™  |  Cl
 Disinfection  |  Cleanroom Apparel & Supplies  |  Cleanroom Certification  |  Compliance  |  Component Prep  |  Consultati
tamination Control Support  |  Controlled Environment Services  |  Critical Cleaning  |  Disinfectant Efficacy Testing  |  Envi
nitoring  |  Equipment Service and Parts  |  Finn-Aqua™  |  Global  |  Guidance  |  Holistic  |  Innovation  |  Installation  |  Mainten
Low-Temperature Terminal Sterilization  |  Manual Cleaning Detergents  |  On-Site Training  |  Optimization  |  Partnership 
rmaceutical Detergents  |  Process Cleaners   |  ProKlenz™  |  Pure Steam Generators  |  Purefit™  |  Qualification  |  Reduced Ri
ptic Processing  |  Compliance  |  Regulatory Support  |  Reliance™  |  Remote Factory Acceptance Testing  |  Remote Monito
earch Sterilizers  |  Research Washers  |  Risk-Based Approach  |  Septihol™  |  Smart AR™  |  Spordex™  |  Sporicides  |  T
Sterilants  |  Spor-Klenz™  |  Stainless-Steel Maintenance  |  Steraffirm™  |  Sterility Assurance  |  Sterility Maintenance  |  Ste
apping  |  Support  |  Training  |  Validation  |  Vesta-Syde™  |  VHP™ Equipment  |  VHP™ Flex  |  VHP™ Biodecontamination Serv
asher Loading Equipment  |  Water for Injection Stills  |  We’re Here for You.  |  AMSCO™  |  Annex 
mpliance  |  Vaprox™  |  Aseptic Processing  |  Autoclave Bags, Pouches and Covers  |  Biodecontamination  |  Biofilm Remediati
ogical Indicators  |  Certification  |  cGMP Sterilizers  |  cGMP Washers  |  Chemical Indicators  |  CIP 100™  |  Cleaning and Di
eanroom Apparel & Supplies  |  Compliance  |  Component Prep  |  Consultation  |  Contamination Control Support  |  Contro
ironment Services  |  Cleanroom Certification  |  Critical Cleaning  |  Environmental Monitoring  |  Equipment Service and Parts  | 
a™  |  Global  |  Guidance  |  Disinfectant Efficacy Testing  |  Holistic  |  Innovation  |  Installation  |  Low-Temperature Term
rilization  |  Certification  |  Manual Cleaning Detergents  |  On-Site Training  |  Optimization  |  Partnership  |  Pharmaceutical Dete
rocess Cleaners   |  ProKlenz Two™  |  Pure Steam Generators  |  Purefit™  |  Qualification  |  Reduced Risk  |  Regulatory Suppo
ance™  |  Remote Factory Acceptance Testing  |  Remote Monitoring  |  Research Sterilizers  |  Research Washers  |  Risk-Based
Spordex™  |  Septihol™  |  Smart AR™  |  Sporicides  |  Spor-Klenz™  |  Stainless-Steel Maintenance  |  Steraffirm™  |  S
Sterility Assurance  |  Sterility Maintenance  |  Sterilization Wrapping  |  Support  |  Technical  |  Training  |  Validation  |  Vaprox™ 
e™  |  Installation  | Aseptic Processing  |  VHP™ Equipment  |  VHP™ Flex  |  Washer Loading Equipment  |  Water for Injec
s  | AMSCO™  |  Annex 1 Compliance  |  Aseptic Processing  |  Autoclave Bags, Pouches and Covers  |  Biodecontamination  |  Bio
mediation  |  Biological Indicators  |  Certification  |  cGMP Sterilizers  |  cGMP Washers  |  Chemical Indicators  |  CIP 100™  |  C
Disinfection  |  Optimization  |  Cleanroom Apparel & Supplies  |  Cleanroom Certification  |  Compliance  |  Component Pre
sultation  |  Contamination Control Support  |  Controlled Environment Services  |  VestaSyde SQ Ready-to-Use   |  Environm
nitoring  |  On-Site Training  |  Equipment Service and Parts  |  Finn-Aqua™  |  Guidance  |  Holistic  |  Innovation  |  Installat
ow-Temperature Terminal Sterilization  |  Manual Cleaning Detergents  |  VHP™ Facility Biodecontamination Services 
rmaceutical Detergents  |  Process Cleaners   |  ProKlenz™ Two  |  Pure Steam Generators  |  Purefit™  |  Qualification  |  Red
ritical Cleaning  |  AMSCO™  |  Regulatory Support  |  Reliance™  |  Remote Factory Acceptance Testing  |  Remote Monitorin
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
58
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
•	 Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
•	 Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
•	 Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an 
Authorized User 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
•	 Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other 
than an Authorized User 
•	 Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available 
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
•	 Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic 
Publication 
•	 Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA 
Electronic Publication 
•	 Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication 
or its content 
•	 Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or 
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose 
•	 Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any 
text or graphics 
•	 Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information 
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material 
To License or purchase Reprints
•	 Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a fee.  
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact: 
Tehya Enger, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Tehya Enger, 4350 East West Highway, 
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
•	 Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.  
To order reprints, please contact:  
Tehya Enger, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Tehya Enger, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150, 
Bethesda, MD 20814.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
About PDA Points to Consider 
PDA Points to Consider are global consensus documents which reflect current industry best practices and think-
ing regarding a particular topic. These documents are prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside 
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/
biopharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities, and academia. 
The final working draft is reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s 
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products Advisory Board, Biophar-
maceutical Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, 
the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and determines whether or not to publish the document 
as an official PDA Points to Consider. 
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Points to Consider is of the highest quality, all readers are en-
couraged to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes 
that might be found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org.
PDA Officers and Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Susan Schniepp, RCA
Chair-Elect: Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck 
Treasurer: Melissa Seymour, Biogen, Inc.
Secretary: Emma Ramnarine, Genentech/Roche
Immediate Past-Chair: Jette Christensen, Novo Nordisk A/S
President: Glenn Wright
Directors 
Bettine Boltres, PhD, West Pharmaceutical Services
Christiana Campa, PhD, GSK
Javier Camposano, Celltrion
Mirko Gabriele, PhD, Thermo Fisher Scientific
Marc Gloglovsky, ValSource, Inc. 
Andrew Hopkins, Abbvie
Stephan O. Krause, PhD, AstraZeneca Diagnostics
Ivy Louis, VIENNI Taining & Consulting LLP
Amy McDaniel, BMS
Cylia Chen Ooi, Amgen 
Mathias Romacker, (Retired)
Osamu Shirokizawa, Life Scientia
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Carrie Horton, Project Manager, Regulatory Affairs
Josh Eaton, Senior Director, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing and Press 
Relations
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer
Sanctioning Advisory Board: RAQAB
Anette Yan Marcussen, NNE A/S, (Chair)
Denyse Baker, Eli Lilly and Company Limited,  
(Vice-Chair)
Jacqueline Veivia-Panter, Biocentriq, (Past-Chair)
Masahiro Akimoto, Heartseed, Inc.
Lisa Benette, SeerPharma
Chuck Bornhoeft, Rion
Marcello Colao, GSK Vaccines
Rosane Cuber, Bio-Manguinhos/FIOCRUZ
Karolyn Gale, Emergent BioSolutions, Inc
Kir Henrici, The Henrici Group, LLC
Dinesh Khokal, Amgen, Inc.
Beth Kirschenheiter, Bristol Myers Squibb
Amanda McFarland, ValSource, Inc.
Catriona Murphy, Eli Lilly and Company Limited
Ajay Pazhayattil, Capcium Inc.
Vishal Sharma, Vienni Training and Consulting LLP
Michele Simone, Bracco
Eva Urban, CSL Behring AG
Gopi Vudathala, Incyte
Kelly Waldron, ValSource
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
