Q 4-4:  How can the industry self-ease the burden of handling 
deviations? 
Background
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, some parts of the industry experienced an increase in de-
viations related to the quickly changing environment such as reduced on-site staff presence, supplier 
delays, and supply chain interruptions. The resulting volume of deviations, many of which had no 
impact on product quality, required companies to act and develop new processes for the evaluation, 
completion, and reporting of deviations with a focus on working to maintain product supply. In many 
cases, new processes were developed on how to approach and how to categorize deviations based on 
their impact to product quality. 
Lessons Learned
Looking ahead, industry should have plans in place (BCPs) to quicky assess the anticipated impacts of 
a pandemic, especially regarding its impact on the volume and type of deviations expected, how devia-
tions are handled, and how they are reported. 
Some actions to consider that allow self-easement of deviation handling are:
•	
If a deviation is already open and the manufacturer can simply expand the scope of deviation to 
cover many similar changes in one deviation
•	
If minor deviations can be documented by the temporary change control to continue manufac-
turing operation
•	
If procedures that govern investigations covering discrepancies, deviations, and nonconformanc-
es are suitable during this public-health emergency or if they need to be updated
•	
If delayed and reduced testing can be implemented with sufficient data available (e.g., micro-
biological testing of environmental monitoring plates from low-criticality clean areas or routine 
stability testing supporting a marketed drug with a robust history of minimal degradation)
•	
If an on-site audit of a new or existing supplier is not possible due to pandemic-related travel 
restrictions, then using any measures that can be implemented (e.g., remote supplier audit, reas-
sessment, or revision of the quality agreement so the qualification program can be updated)
•	
If the use of equipment changed or was reconfigured and it was not qualified prior to use to 
check the possibility of retrospective evaluation of equipment performance, if change control 
should be considered
•	
If servicing equipment requires a technician with special expertise and that individual is unable 
to be on site, are there alternative means to ensure that the equipment is suitable for use (e.g., 
when service that is normally performed on site was conducted with remote assistance) 
•	
If a delay is acceptable in preventive maintenance or calibration activities for facilities or equip-
ment impacting the function (e.g., adequacy for use) of facilities or equipment
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
44
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Q 4-5:  How do you make sure that commitments are met, reported, 
and documented with deviations?
Background
Sites that are commercially approved for the release of drug products typically require a periodic re-
certification to continue release of supply in some markets (as regulated by their NRA). During the 
pandemic, there have been instances where markets required an on-site inspection to recertify the site. 
Some NRAs conduct audits using a risk-based approach while others may schedule audits.
COVID-19 created profound disruption across the pharmaceutical industry in general, but it also 
impacted two specific areas of commitments from a regulatory and drug license prospective:
1.	 Regulatory Commitment—a specific description of how a company intends to manufacture 
and control the drug product that is defined in the dossier and is subject to regulatory action if 
changed after approval
2.	 Post-Approval Commitments—covers the elements of any agreement made with the regulatory 
authority during the drug review to fulfill after approval. For example, the FDA has a guidance for 
PACs that allows tracking of a new medicine’s safety, efficacy, or optimal use. Similarly, commit-
ments can be agreed upon from a chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC) perspective as 
well as between the applicant and the regulatory authority during drug registration.
According to ICH Quality Guideline Q12, legally binding information considered necessary to assure 
product quality can be considered an established condition (EC). Therefore, any change to an EC 
requires a submission to the regulatory authority, similar to EMA variations (1). While the examples 
here are specific to EMA and MHRA, an applicant can reach out to the relevant NRA to request relief 
in registering changes if any deviation is observed for ECs based on the specific circumstances.
According to the European Medicines Regulatory Network COVID-19 Business Continuity Plan, varia-
tion can be delayed if it is in the interest of the applicant. 
Furthermore, it is exceptionally agreed for DCP/MRP/RUP, renewal and type II variation 
procedures to allow a “freezing” (holding the timetable at the same procedure Day and re-
starting it as soon as the response is received or as soon as the RMS AR is finalised) or “roll-
ing back” (bring the procedure back to validation phase or back to clock stop with the usual 
timeframe of handling responses in the clock stop) of the procedure timetable due to unex-
pected and COVID-19-related capacity issues within the RMS, or when it is not possible for 
applicants to submit responses due to the COVID-19 pandemic (2). 
All manufacturers are obligated to release batches with the Qualified Person (QP) declaration whenever 
major CMC changes are registered for a license, in keeping with EMA guidance EMA/196292/2014 
(3). During COVID-19, certain exemptions were granted to submit QP declarations for post-approv-
al commitments:
•	
Exceptional circumstances, when an on-site audit is not practical (e.g., atypical actives), are out of 
the scope of the declaration template
•	
An off-site, remote, or “paper-based” audit may be justifiable of benefit risk, but this can only be 
considered on a case-by-case basis
•	
In these cases, a suitable quality system is expected to be applied by the active substance and fin-
ished product manufacturers. As a principle, such controls must provide confidence that the active 
substance is fit for purpose and will not negatively affect the safety and efficacy of the medicinal 
product. The QP is expected to justify the controls in place on a scientific basis and record a risk 
assessment on a product-specific basis (3)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
45
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The MHRA allowed applicants the following flexibility to register post-approval commitments: 
•	
Suspending the 30-day limit for replies to questions on Type 1B variations 
•	
Waiving the requirement for leaflet mock-ups to be submitted to support variations; only text 
versions will be accepted and uploaded to the MHRA Products website
•	
Extending the permitted implementation period for label/leaflet changes following a variation 
from 6 months to 9 months (4)
These scenarios may be limited to non-pandemic therapy, where applicants wish to delay registration 
of commitment due to resource constraints; however, there may be cases where pandemic-related 
therapies require accelerated approval. In such cases, using multiple tools to facilitate the implementa-
tion of manufacturing changes, such as risk-based reduction in supplement reporting categories and 
flexible assessment practices, may be allowed (5).
During the COVID-19 public-health emergency, the FDA has been willing to consider requests from 
applicants to submit certain changes using a lower reporting category based on such risk-mitigation 
information for marketing applications related to products in shortage or intended to diagnose, treat, 
mitigate, cure, or prevent pandemic (6).
Health agencies acknowledged challenges faced by applicants to register and manage PACs and devia-
tion from commitments during the pandemic. Health agencies issued guidances and allowed some 
flexibility to manage and register these changes. Based on different scenarios, applicants were able to 
utilize a risk-based approach and then discuss applications with regulatory authorities to make sure 
that commitments were met and reported during the pandemic.
Lessons Learned
The importance of quick action by the regulators and industry to identify areas where flexibility is 
needed in regard to how regulatory commitments are met, reported, and documented cannot be 
stressed enough. While the actions taken significantly helped in working to minimize product disrup-
tion and minimize product shortages, the initial delay at the start of the pandemic created signifi-
cant challenges. Developing processes to allow rapid implementation earlier, based on the knowledge 
gained during the COVID-19 pandemic, would be of significant benefit. 
References
1.	 International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q12: Technical and Regulatory Con-
siderations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle Management; ICH: Geneva, 2019.
2.	 European Medicines Agency. European Medicines Regulatory Network COVID-19 Business 
Continuity Plan; EMA and European Commission. EMA: London, 2020. www.ema.europa.eu/
en/documents/other/european-medicines-regulatory-network-covid-19-business-continuity-
plan_en.pdf (accessed 25 Jul 2020).
3.	 European Medicines Agency. Guidance for the Template for the Qualified Person’s Declaration concerning 
GMP Compliance of Active Substance Manufacture “The QP Declaration Template”; EMA: London, 2014.
4.	 Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Guidance: MHRA Regulatory Flexibilities 
resulting from Coronavirus (COVID-19); MHRA: Online, 2020.
5.	 Ramnarine, E; Vinther, A, et al. Effective Management of Post-Approval Changes in the Pharma-
ceutical Quality System (PQS) - Through Enhanced Science and Risk-Based Approaches Industry 
One-Voice-of-Quality (1VQ) Solutions. PDA J Pharm Sci Tech 2020, pdajpst.2020.011734.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
46
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
6.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Con-
trols Changes to an Approved Application: Certain Biological Products; U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2021.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
47
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Q 4-6:  How do you prioritize submissions of changes in process 
during the pandemic?
Background
During the pandemic, the pharmaceutical industry was affected at many levels. MAHs for products 
against the SARS-CoV-2 virus (therapeutics, vaccines) had to prioritize submissions against unprec-
edented, shortened timelines, while those companies involved in non-COVID-19 products were met 
with a depleted workforce at the production sites, raw material shortages, and logistics delays due to 
cross-border movement restrictions. They also faced potential delays from regulators due to the shift in 
focus as a result of the pandemic and suffering similar restrictions in workforce mobility and availability. 
Lessons Learned
For MAHs dealing with pandemic-related products, timing will be a highly critical factor in getting 
the different PACs through to submission and approved by the authorities in various jurisdictions. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, in many cases vaccine MAHs adopted the grouping or bundling 
of product variations to reduce the number of submission packages. That, in turn, reduced the bur-
den on regulators for individual assessments, aided timely approval, and ensured the maintenance of 
critical supply to the population. An excerpt presented at a regulators-industry workshop organized 
by ICMRA in 2021 shows the numbers of different PACs that were grouped in submissions for the 
different COVID-19 vaccines in the EU (1).
For MAHs of non-pandemic products, prioritizing changes based on the criticality of the change to 
ensure that an up-to-date and safe product can be placed on the shelves is recommended. Risk is best 
managed by coupling it with a scientific understanding of the process and product design for optimal 
product performance (e.g., as highlighted in ICH Q12, Chapter 2). Thus, risk-based assessments such as 
safety, integrity, strength, purity, quality (SISPQ) and safety, quality, integrity, purity, potency (SQuIPP) 
should be undertaken, and agreed-upon criteria should be documented in impact assessment tools that 
can be archived for inspections and Response-to-Questions submissions as needed by regulators.
For manufacturers with worldwide product supply and submission requirements, aligning with WHO 
guidelines on procedures and data requirements for changes and variations is recommended (2-4). 
Changes with no SISPQ/SQuIPP impact can be documented in the company’s PQS (2). Minor 
changes, such as changes to the product composition, manufacturing process, quality controls, facili-
ties, or equipment that have a minimal potential to impact the quality, safety, or efficacy of the biother-
apeutic product, may be implemented by the MAH without prior authority review for biotherapeutic 
products (3). However, a notification to the authority within a specified time is recommended (2,4). 
The justification and supporting documentation for minor quality changes are not needed for such 
notifications, but the MAH should make them available to the regulatory agency upon request. Me-
dium or major changes that need to be approved before implementation can be staggered and bundled 
in view of similarity or sequence of changes.
Additional novel tools that can be used for quick submissions and approval are:
•	
Matrix approaches to rationally reduce the number of lots required to support a manufacturing 
change for validation and stability (e.g., for vaccine combination products) can reduce the number 
of vaccine lots that are analyzed (2), which, in turn, can lead to faster submission and approval 
timelines and less destruction of lots that would reduce the vaccine supply
•	
Stability data approach and structured approach from ICH Q12, Chapters 8 and 9 (5)
•	
Established conditions as part of ICH Q12 implementation (5)
Combining these approaches for submissions that can be approved quickly according to pre-agreed 
change management protocols (or comparability protocols for the FDA) can enable multiple changes 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
48
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
to be assessed and approved at the same time. For both pandemic and non-pandemic product sce-
narios, the MAH will need to provide a clear prioritization of changes, based on supply impact and 
predictive and strategic planning (6). 
A best practice is for the MAH to clearly engage with the authorities at an early stage to understand 
regulatory expectations and flexibility based on the specific circumstances the MAH is facing. 
References
1.	 International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities. ICMRA-Industry Virtual Workshop 
Report on Enabling Manufacturing Capacity in the COVID19 Pandemic; ICMRA: Online, 2021.
2.	 World Health Organization. Annex 4: Guidelines on Procedures and Data Requirements for 
Changes to Approved Vaccines (TRS No. 993); WHO: Geneva, 2015.
3.	 World Health Organization. Annex 3: Guidelines on procedures and data requirements for changes 
to approved biotherapeutic products (TRS No. 1011); WHO Technical Report Series No. 1011. 
WHO: Geneva, 2018.
4.	 World Health Organization. Annex 10: WHO general guidance on variations to multisource phar-
maceutical products (TRS No. 966); WHO: Geneva, 2016.
5.	 International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q12: Technical and Regulatory Con-
siderations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle Management; ICH: Geneva, 2019.
6.	 European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations. Optimising Post-Approval 
Change Management for Timely Access to Medicines Worldwide; Efpia: Brussels, 2017.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
49
Points to Consider No. 9: Lessons Learned from the COVID-19 Pandemic
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
