This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
	
Appendix 10
	
Medical Devices
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
Page 246	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 10	
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
16	 Appendix 10 – Medical Devices
16.1	
Introduction
 
The regulations regarding medical devices provide opportunity for risk assessment to define different requirements for 
the associated HVAC systems.
 
There are three classifications of device according to the FDA:
 
• 
Class I – those subject to the least regulatory control, as they present minimal potential for harm to the user, 
hence are subject to “general controls.” Class I devices include elastic bandages, examination gloves, and hand 
held surgical instruments. They are subject to 21 CFR Part 820.
 
• 
Class II – Class II devices are devices subject to special controls, i.e., those for which general controls alone are 
insufficient to assure safety and effectiveness, and existing methods are available to provide such assurances. 
Examples of such products include powered wheelchairs, infusion pumps, and surgical drapes. Again, HVAC 
requirements are relatively simple
 
• 
Class III – this is the most stringent regulatory category. Class III devices are those for which insufficient 
information exists to assure safety and effectiveness solely through general or special controls. Class III devices 
are usually those that support or sustain human life, including heart valves, silicone gel filled breast implants, and 
implanted cerebella stimulators.
 
The FDA Medical Device Quality Systems Manual makes the following statements “A controlled environment is, 
to various degrees, an integral part of most production facilities. Some environmental factors to be considered 
are lighting, ventilation, temperature, humidity, pressure, particulates, and static electricity. Section 820.70 (c), 
Environmental Control, of the QS regulation, is considered by the FDA as a “discretionary” requirement: that is, the 
degree of environmental control to be maintained should be consistent with the intended use of the device and details 
of how to achieve this control are left to the manufacturer to decide.”
 
It also makes the statement that “General air conditioning is not normally regarded as an environmental control; 
however, changes in temperature and lighting can have an adverse effect on employee performance and, in turn, on 
assuring that the device is properly assembled, inspected, and tested.”
	
This Guide suggests that for each operation, the manufacturer should analyze the operations to identify the controls 
needed for the finished device to meet the specifications and be fit for use. Many Class I and Class II devices 
may require only comfort HVAC or at best, CNC. Although the manufacture of some Class III devices may start in 
an environment similar to a machine shop (with comfort HVAC at best), at some point, they become functionally 
implantable, requiring CNC or classified spaces, depending on sterility of the device.
 
The guidance provided in the FDA “Guidance for Industry for Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Processing – 
Current Good Manufacturing Practice” often is used as an environmental specification in the absence of any specific 
guidance for Medical Devices.
16.2	
Clean Workstations for Medical Devices
 
As medical devices commonly do not include potent compounds (with the exception of combination devices) 
horizontal flow clean workstations may be employed to protect product without endangering operators. Horizontal 
flow workstations are preferred as they present the lowest risk of operator contamination of components which are 
being assembled for implantation.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.
