This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
	
Appendix 13
	
Glossary
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
Page 274	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 13	
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
19	 Appendix 13 – Glossary
19.1	
Abbreviations
	
AAALAC	
Association for the Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care
	
ABMA	
American Bearing Manufacturers Association
	
ACGIH	
American Council of Government Industrial Hygienists
	
AIHA	
American Industrial Hygiene Association
	
AMCA	
Air Movement and Control Association (International)
	
ANSI	
American National Standards Institute
	
ARI	
Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute (US)
	
ASHRAE	
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers
	
ASTM	
American Society for Testing and Materials (International)
	
CIBSE	
Chartered Institute of Building Service Engineers (UK)
	
COP	
Community of Practice
	
COSHH	
Control of Substances Hazardous to Human Health
	
CSA	
Canadian Standards Association
	
EC	
European Commission
	
EMEA	
European Medicines Agency
	
EPA	
Environmental Protection Agency
	
EPBD	
Energy Performance of Buildings Directive (EU)
	
EU	
European Union
	
EU-OSHA (EASHW)	
European Union – Occupational Safety and Health Administration (European Agency for 
Safety and Health at Work)
	
FDA	
Food and Drug Administration (US)
	
HSE	
Health and Safety Executive (UK)
	
HVCA	
Heating and Ventilating Contractors Association (UK)
	
ICC	
International Code Council
	
ICH	
International Conference on Harmonisation
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 275
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning	
Appendix 13
	
IEST	
Institute of Environmental Sciences and Technology (US)
	
ISA	
International Society of Automation
	
ISO	
International Standards Organisation
	
ISPE	
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering
	
NEBB	
National Environmental Balancing Bureau – NEBB (US)
	
NEC	
National Electrical Code (US)
	
NEMA	
National Electrical Manufacturers Association (US)
	
NFPA	
National Fire Protection Association (US)
	
OSHA	
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (US)
	
PIC/S	
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention and Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme
	
SI	
International System of Units
	
SMACNA	
Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association (North America)
	
US FDA	
United States Food and Drug Administration
	
USDA	
United States Department of Agriculture
	
USGBC	
United States Green Building Council
	
WGBC	
World Green Building Council
	
WHO	
World Health Organization
19.2	
Acronyms
	
AF&ID 
Airflow and Instrument Diagram
	
AFD 
Air Flow Diagram
	
AHU	
Air Handling Unit
	
API	
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient
	
BAS	
Building Automation System
	
BL	
Biosafety Level
	
BMS	
Building Management System
	
BOD	
Basis Of Design
	
BSC	
Bio Safety Cabinet
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
Page 276	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 13	
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
	
BV	
Balance and Vibration
	
CD	
Construction Document
	
CDR	
Conceptual Design Report
	
CE	
Conformite Europenne
	
CFCs	
ChloroFluorocarbons
	
CFD	
Computational Fluid Dynamics
	
CFU	
Colony Forming Unit
	
CGMP	
Current Good Manufacturing Process
	
CIP	
Clean In Place
	
CMC	
Chemistry Manufacturing Control
	
CMMS	
Computerized Maintenance Management System
	
CNC 
Controlled Not Classified
	
CPP	
Critical Process Parameter
	
CQA	
Critical Quality Attribute
	
CV	
Constant Volume
	
CVD	
Constant Volume Damper
	
DCS	
Distributed Control System
	
DDC	
Direct Digital Control
	
DOP	
Dioctyl Phthalate
	
DP	
Differential Pressure
	
EMS	
Environmental Monitoring System
	
EN	
European Norm
	
ENEC 
European Norms Electrical Certification
	
ERP	
Enterprise Resource Planning
	
ETOP	
Engineering Turnover Package
	
FAT	
Factory Acceptance Testing
	
FDS 
Functional Design Specification
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 277
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning	
Appendix 13
	
FFU	
Fan-Filter Unit
	
FMEA	
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis
	
FRP	
Fiberglass Reinforced Panels
	
GBI	
Green Building Initiative
	
GEP	
Good Engineering Practice
	
GMP	
Good Manufacturing Practice
	
GWP	
Global Warming Potential
	
HACCP	
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
	
HCFC 
Hydrochlorofluorocarbon
	
HEPA 
High Efficiency Particulate Air
	
HIV/AIDS 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
	
HVAC	
Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning
	
IAQ	
Indoor Air Quality
	
IFB	
Internal Face and Bypass
	
IMC	
International Mechanical Code
	
LEED	
Leadership in Environmental and Energy Design
	
LEED AP	
Leadership in Environmental and Energy Design (LEED) Accredited Professional
	
LEL 
Lower Explosive Limit
	
LEV 	
Local Exhaust Ventilation
	
LiCl	
Lithium Chloride
	
LIMS	
Laboratory Information Management System
	
MAL	
Material Air Lock
	
MERV  
Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value
	
MKT 	
Mean Kinetic Temperature
	
MMD	
Mass Median Diameter
	
MPPS	
Most Penetrating Particle Size
	
MSDS	
Material Safety Data Sheet
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
Page 278	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 13	
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
	
NaCl	
Sodium Chloride
	
NDA  
New Drug Application
	
Non-XP	
Non-Explosion Proof (type of fan motor)
	
ODP	
Ozone Depletion Potential
	
OEL 	
Operator Exposure Limit
	
OPR 
Owner’s Project Requirements
	
OSD	
Oral Solid Dosage
	
P&ID	
Piping and Instrumentation Diagram
	
PAO  
Polyalphaolefin
	
PdM	
Predictive Maintenance
	
PGR	
Particle Generation Rate
	
PI 	
Proportional and Integral
	
PID	
Proportional and Integral and Derivative
	
PLC 	
Programmable Logic Controller
	
PM	
Preventive Maintenance
	
PPE  
Personal Protective Equipment
	
QA	
Quality Assurance
	
QRM	
Quality Risk Management
	
R&D	
Research and Development
	
RABS 	
Restricted Access Barrier System
	
RCFA	
Root Cause Failure Analysis
	
RH 	
Relative Humidity
	
RHC	
Reheat Coil
	
RO 	
Reverse Osmosis
	
ROI 	
Return On Investment
	
RP	
Recommended Practice
	
RTD	
Resistance Temperature Device
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 279
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning	
Appendix 13
	
SAT	
Site Acceptance Testing
	
SCADA  
Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition
	
SF	
Supply Fan
	
SME 
Subject Matter Expert
	
SOP	
Standard Operating Procedure
	
SS	
Stainless Steel
	
TAB 
Testing Adjusting and Balancing
	
TCO 
Total Cost of Ownership
	
TE	
Temperature Sensing Element
	
UDAF 
Unidirectional Airflow
	
UFH 
Unidirectional Flow Hood
	
UL 
Underwriters Laboratories
	
ULPA 
Ultra Low Penetration Air
	
UPS 
Uninterruptible Power Supply
	
UV	
Ultraviolet
	
VAV	
Variable Air Volume
	
VFD 
Variable Frequency Drive
	
VOC	
Volatile Organic Compound
	
VP	
Velocity Pressure
	
VPHP	
Vapor Phase Hydrogen Peroxide
	
WFI  
Water For Injection
19.3 
Definitions
	
Acceptance Criteria
 
The limits of conditions of critical parameters that may affect the product quality. These conditions may include 
temperature, humidity, and room air quality. For example, if humidity or particulates are not critical parameters 
affecting product quality they are not included in acceptance criteria.
	
Action Limit
 
Criteria established based on possible impact to product quality, outside the operating range (acceptance criteria). A 
documented response is usually required.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
Page 280	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 13	
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
	
Air Change Rate
 
The number of times the total air volume of a defined space is replaced in a given unit of time. This is computed 
by dividing the total volume of the subject space (in cubic volume) into the total volume of air exhausted from (or 
supplied to) the space per unit of time.
 
Airflow and Instrument Diagram (AF&ID)
 
Based on the AFD, it shows HVAC instrumentation and controls, with critical GMP components highlighted.
 
Air Flow Diagram (AFD)
 
Schematically shows rooms and zones served by an air handler, with air balance requirements, and often room 
pressures.
	
Alert Limit
 
Criteria established with the intent of notification and possible corrective action prior to exceeding action limits; alert 
when a parameter is drifting toward extremes of the operating range.
	
Arrestance
 
A measure of the ability of an air filter to remove synthetic dust from the air when tested as described in ASHRAE 
Standard 52.2-2008, Method of Testing General Ventilation Air Cleaning Devices for Removal Efficiency by Particle 
Size. Arrestance test results typically relate to larger size particles.
 
As-Built Drawings
 
Construction drawings that represent the physical condition of the plant or system at turnover from the designer or 
installer at satisfactory operation. These documents supplement and complement the system manuals and protocols.
 
Building Management System (BMS)
	
A computerized system that controls, monitors, and optimizes environmental conditions, through functions and 
facilities such as heating, air-conditioning, lighting, and security.
	
Change Control
 
A formal system by which qualified representatives of appropriate disciplines review proposed or actual changes 
which might affect validated status. The intent is to determine the need for action which would ensure that the system 
is maintained in a validated state.
	
Closed
 
Not exposed to the room, capable of holding some pressure or purge. PDA TR-28 provides a rigid definition of closed.
	
Closed Process
 
A process condition when the product, materials, critical components or container/closure surfaces are contained 
and separated from the immediate process environment within closed/sealed process equipment. A process step (or 
system) in which the product and product contact surfaces are not exposed to the immediate room environment.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 281
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning	
Appendix 13
	
Commissioning
 
Commissioning is a quality oriented process for verifying and documenting that the performance of facilities, systems 
and assemblies meets defined objectives and criteria. 
	
Critical Component
 
A component within a system where the operation, contact, data, control, alarm, or failure may have a direct impact 
on product quality or the ability to know product quality.
	
Critical Location
 
The location where product is exposed; the location where a cleaned product contact surface is exposed.
	
Critical Parameter
 
A processing parameter (temperature, pressure, pH, etc.) which directly influences the drug substance 
characterization or impurity profile in or after a critical step.
	
Critical Process Parameter
 
A process parameter whose variability impacts a quality attribute and therefore needs to be controlled to ensure the 
process produces the desired quality. A critical process parameter remains critical even if it is controlled.
 
Critical Quality Attribute
	
A physical, chemical, biological or microbiological property or characteristic that needs to be controlled (directly or 
indirectly) to ensure product quality.
	
Design For Impact
	
The practice of making design decisions related to the impact of the system in operation, at the beginning of design 
development.
	
Design Point
 
Provided in the basis of design as the nominal set point around which the parameter is expected to be controlled, +/- 
a given tolerance value (the Design Tolerance) to provide the Design Target.
 
Design Qualification (DQ)
 
Documented verification that the proposed design of the facilities, equipment, or systems is suitable for the intended 
purpose.
	
Design Target
	
A value for a critical parameter that is more conservative than its acceptance criterion, used by designers to assure 
that the system is capable of meeting the acceptance criterion. Design Targets should not be used for system 
qualification; they are “wishful” values that may not be achieved in reality.
	
Design Tolerance
 
The expected (design) upper and lower points of the normal operating range.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
Page 282	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 13	
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
	
Direct Impact System
 
A system that is expected to have a direct impact on product quality. These systems are designed and commissioned 
in line with Good Engineering Practice and also are subject to Qualification Practices that incorporate the enhanced 
review, control and testing against specifications or other requirements necessary for GMP compliance.
	
DOP (Dioctyl Phthalate)
 
Material used in the past to generate aerosols comprising particles in the 0.1 to 0.7 micron range (typically with 
an average size of 0.3 micron) used to test HEPA and ULPA filters. This chemical is believed to have carcinogenic 
properties and has been generally replaced by a mineral oil, e.g. Emery 3004/ Durasyn 164, or Shell Ondina EL.
 
The smoke generated from this has very similar characteristics and the term DOP testing remains, although it is now 
understood to mean ‘Dispersed Oil Particulate.’
 
Dust Spot Efficiency
 
The measure of a the ability of a filter to remove synthetic dust when tested as described in ASHRAE Standard 52.2-
2008, Method of Testing General Ventilation Air Cleaning Devices for Removal Efficiency by Particle Size.
 
Enhanced Design Review (EDR)
 
A documented review of the engineering design, at an appropriate stage in a project, for conformance to operational 
and regulatory expectations.
 
Exfiltration
 
Leakage of air out of a room through cracks in doors and pass-throughs through material transfer openings, etc. due 
to a difference in room pressures.
 
Exhaust air
	
Air removed mechanically from the space and discarded
 
Functional Design Specification
 
Description of acceptance criteria, in terms of ranges and logic of system operation, etc. In HVAC, a description of 
HOW the HVAC will meet the acceptance criteria (room air class, DP, airflow, recovery time, level of air filtration, etc.).
	
Good Engineering Practice (GEP)
 
Established engineering methods and standards that are applied throughout the project life cycle to deliver 
appropriate, cost-effective solutions.
	
Grade
 
Applied to air cleanliness, “grade” implies airborne particle count limits in operation, with associated bioburden limits. 
The number of the grade is the upper limit in operation as defined by ISO 14644 -1 (i.e., Grade 5 has 0.5 micron 
upper particle limit of 3500/cubic meters). In the European GMP, Grades A through D also involve particle limits at 
rest.
 
High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) Filter
 
High efficiency particulate air filter, a filter with DOP efficiency in excess of 99.97% on 0.3 µm particles.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 283
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning	
Appendix 13
	
Indirect Impact System
 
A system that is not expected to have a direct impact on product quality, but typically will support a Direct Impact 
system. These systems are designed and commissioned following Good Engineering Practice only.
 
Infiltration
 
The entry of air from an adjoining room or from outdoors through wall and ceiling openings due to a difference in air 
pressure between the two areas.
	
Laminar Flow – see Unidirectional Flow
	
Latent Heat
	
Latent heat refers to the amount of energy released or absorbed by a chemical substance during a change of state, 
meaning a phase transition such as the melting of ice (latent heat of fusion) or the boiling of water (latent heat of 
vaporization). In an HVAC application typically used to condense water from humid air.
	
“Nearly Massless” Particles
 
Particles smaller than 0.5 μm, which typically constitute less than 1% of the total mass of particles typically found in 
outside air, but represents a large percentage of the total number of particles in a typical sample of air. (Due to the 
exponential increase in the mass of a particle caused by an increase in the diameter, very small particles typically 
represent a small fraction of the total mass of particles in an airstream.)
	
Normal Operating Range
 
The actual observed values of the critical parameter during operations, collected over time. This range may be larger 
than the design tolerance, but should be well within Action Limits.
	
Operating Range
 
The validated acceptance criteria within which a control parameter must remain, wherein acceptable product is being 
manufactured.
 
PAO (Polyalphaolefin)
 
A synthetic oil used in lieu of DOP for HEPA filter testing.
 
Particle Count
 
Airborne particle count of both viable (living) organisms and non-viable (inert) particles. [Measured in PCF (particles 
per cubic foot) (multiply by ~35.3 to obtain particles per cubic meter)].
	
Particles Generation Rate (PGR)
 
Particles generated within a space by a process and occupants per unit time.
 
Plenum
 
An enclosed space used for HVAC airflow, typically at low velocity. A plenum may be constructed of duct materials 
(e.g., sheet metal) or may utilize interstitial spaces in building construction such as below floors, above ceilings, or in 
vertical chase-ways. A plenum accomplishes air distribution via static pressure difference between the plenum and 
surroundings, rather than using velocity and associated diversion/distribution devices, as in ductwork.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
Page 284	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 13	
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
	
Process Validation
 
Establishing documented evidence that provides a high degree of assurance that a specific process will consistently 
produce a product meeting its predetermined specifications and quality attributes.
	
Psychrometry
 
Determination of the properties of gas-vapor mixtures. The air-water vapor system is the most commonly 
encountered.
 
Requirement Specifications
 
A detailed document used to specify the requirements of the client for individual aspects of the facility, item of 
equipment, utility, and systems in terms of function, throughput, operability, and applicable local standards.
 
Return Air
	
Air removed mechanically from the space and returned to the air handling system serving that space for recirculation
 
Supply Air
	
Conditioned air supplied mechanically to the space (room), measured here in cubic feet per minute (CFM) (Divide by 
0.6 to get cubic meters per hour CMH).
 
Ultra Low Penetration Air (ULPA) Filters
 
Extended media dry filters in a rigid frame that have a minimum particle-collection efficiency of 99.999% for particles 
greater than or equal to 0.12 µm in size.
 
Unidirectional Airflow
 
Controlled airflow through the entire cross-section of a clean zone with a steady velocity and approximately parallel 
streamlines. 
	
Ventilation Rate
 
The number of times in an hour that the air volume of a room is replaced; see Air Change Rate.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2009. All rights reserved.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
Where does energy  
efficiency fit into  
the equation?
We deliver solutions that combine energy efficiency with the 
highest levels of control and compliance.
Creating research and manufacturing environments has always required the greatest focus on precision and reliability. 
But today, concerns like energy efficiency are becoming just as important. At Siemens, we help you control it all.  
We are experts at integrating new building technologies with advanced energy efficient design. The results are 
complete building environments that meet quality, safety and efficiency concerns and make good business sense.  
To learn more about our compliance and other life science solutions go to usa.siemens.com/labs.
Answers for infrastructure.

This Document is licensed to
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF, 
ID number: 299643
Downloaded on: 10/5/11 2:26 PM
Active in ISPE since 1995 serving and supporting members across the globe. 
Life-Cycle
Cost Analysis
Application
Successes
Corporate
Committment
Cleanroom
Design Software
