 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
58 
4.4.2.6 Bracketing Approach 
Bracketing qualifies processes that represent the extremes of process variables under the premise that the 
extremes are fully representative of intermediate groups. The bracketing strategy is used when a single 
process element can be varied while all other variables remain fixed, for example: 
• 
Use of a common blend or solution, that is, identical-strength tablets or those very closely related in 
composition (e.g., for a tablet range made with different compression weights of a similar basic 
(common) granulation, or a capsule range made by using different fill weights of the same basic 
composition into different size capsule shells).  
̶ 
A blend concentration of 50 mg active ingredient/100 mg powder could be compressed into 
a 100 mg active (per 200 mg tablet weight), 200 mg active (400 mg tablet weight), and 300 
mg active (600 mg tablet weight) as the same powder blend is common to the three tablet 
strengths.  
̶ 
Capsules or liquid fills where common blends or solutions are used for filling into the final 
dosage form.  
• 
Different container sizes or different fill volumes in the same container–closure system.  
The rationale for selection of representative groups and numbers of batches should be scientifically justified, 
risk-assessed, and outlined in the PVMP and PPQ protocols. 
4.4.2.7 Matrix Approach 
A matrix approach is appropriate for commercial manufacturing PPQ when configurations of the same 
process and product have more than one variable. The approach assumes that the batch configurations 
selected for inclusion in the PPQ fully represent processes for all combinations. The rationale for the 
selection of combinations and the number of batches representing each combination, should be scientifically 
justified, risk-assessed, and documented in the PVMP and PPQ protocols. Some processes require a 
comprehensive PPQ. In those cases, selecting batches or lots from all combinations is advisable.  
Table 4.4.2.7-1 shows an example of a matrix design for a PPQ of a filling process where evaluation of 
three variables results in multiple drug-product strengths. Variables in this example include fill volume, bulk 
DP solution concentration, and final DP strength. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
59 
Table 4.4.2.7-1 Matrix Design 
Fill 
Volume 
(mL) 
Bulk Drug 
Solution 
Concentration 
(mg/mL) 
Final Drug 
Product 
Strength (mg) 
Batch Included 
in Process 
Performance 
Qualification? 
Rationale 
0.10 
2.00 
0.2 
Yes* 
Lowest DP strength 
Lowest bulk DP 
concentration 
Lowest fill volume 
4.00 
0.4 
No 
Covered by matrix 
0.15 
4.00 
0.6 
No 
Covered by matrix 
8.00 
1.2 
Yes* 
Highest drug 
concentration in fill 
solution 
0.30 
4.67 
1.4 
No 
Covered by matrix 
6.00 
1.8 
No 
Covered by matrix 
6.67 
2.0 
Yes* 
Highest drug 
concentration in final 
DP 
Highest fill volume 
*Based on the assumption that process variability is highest at these conditions. 
Rationale for selection of representative groups and number of batches should be scientifically justified and 
outlined in the PVMP and PPQ protocols. Consideration should be given to product stability, as sometimes 
this can vary considerably in the presence of matrixes. 
4.4.2.8 Family (Grouping) Approach 
A family approach is appropriate when multiple related but different entities can be grouped so that a single 
one represents the common characteristics or worst-case of each group. The rationale for family groups and 
justification for the representative selection should be included in the PVMP and PPQ protocol. All 
variations in the formulation or method of manufacture should be described and evaluated in detail. Two 
examples of the use of the family approach for PPQ are provided.  
Example 1: Equipment Family 
Cell culture for biological product manufacturing can be performed in multiple trains using the same 
equipment and process in each one. Use of a family or grouping approach may be valid for the PPQ for the 
fermentation unit operations. The example depicted in Table 4.4.2.8-1 shows how such an approach, which 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
60 
limits the number of batches for the PPQ versus repeated multiple runs from each fermenter, could be used. 
In this case, each equipment train was evaluated for similarity of the equipment (identical equipment trains 
with duplicated equipment of the same model and manufacturer). Identical equipment trains reduce the 
number of batches needed to show that the process is reliable in each one. In this case, there is ample prior 
knowledge on the performance of the process. Use of a reduced number of batches in a family approach 
should take into consideration the amount of prior knowledge of the process, the number and impact of the 
CPPs, and the ability to control the parameters within the ranges. For a unit operation with no critical 
parameters, use of fewer batches may be appropriate. In these cases, the approach should be clearly justified 
with reference to supporting data in the validation protocol.  
Table 4.4.2.8-1 Equipment Family Example 
Equipment 
Family – 
Production 
Bioreactor 
Process 
Performance 
Qualification 
(PPQ) Runs 
(Unit Operation) 
Assessment 
Supporting Data 
Bioreactor #1 
3 Batches 
Compare: 
• 
Physical design 
• 
Design specs 
• 
Materials of 
construction 
• 
IQ 
• 
Acceptance 
criteria 
• 
Operating 
principles 
• 
Process control 
instruments and 
software 
Multiple small-scale 
process characterization 
runs available to support 
ranges 
Bioreactor #2 
1 Batch 
Bioreactor #3 
1 Batch 
 
Example 2: Buffer Family Grouping 
In assessing the stability of solutions and buffers to support commercial-scale bulk-protein DS 
manufacturing, buffers and solutions of similar formulations and storage-vessel types may be assigned to 
family groupings. Following an analysis of concentrations, the potential for interaction with the vessel, the 
susceptibility to contamination, and other appropriate factors, a worst-case representative of each family 
grouping may be selected. The representative buffer is subjected to all testing described in the protocol. The 
qualification of the family representative qualifies all other buffers or solutions in the family grouping. This 
should be outlined in the rationale and in the PVMP and protocols. 
4.4.2.9 Concurrent Validation, Continuous Process Verification, and Hybrid Approach 
The concepts of concurrent validation, continuous process verification, and a hybrid approach were 
introduced in EU GMP Annex 15. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
61 
In exceptional circumstances, where there is a greater benefit verses risk to the patient, it may be acceptable 
not to complete a validation program before routine production starts and concurrent validation could be 
used. However, the decision to carry out concurrent validation must be justified, documented in the PVMP, 
and approved. Where a concurrent validation approach has been adopted, there should be sufficient data to 
support the conclusion that any given batch of product is uniform and meets the defined acceptance criteria. 
The results and conclusion should be formally documented and available to the Qualified Person prior to 
certification of the batch. 
For products developed by a QbD approach, where it has been scientifically established that routine process 
control provides a high degree of assurance of product quality, then CPV can be used as an alternative to 
traditional PV. The process verification system should be defined, and there should be a science-based 
control strategy for the required attributes for incoming materials, CQAs, and CPPs to confirm product 
realization. This should also include regular evaluation of the control strategy. PAT and multivariate 
statistical process control may be used as tools. Each manufacturer must determine and justify the number of 
batches necessary to demonstrate a high level of assurance that the process is capable of consistently 
delivering quality products. The same general principles—justification of approach, documentation in 
PVMP, approval by authorized personnel—apply.  
A hybrid approach using the traditional approach and CPV for different production steps can also be used. 
Where there is a substantial amount of product and process knowledge and understanding that has been 
gained from manufacturing experience and historical batch data, continuous verification may also be used 
for any validation activities after changes or during ongoing process verification, even though the product 
was initially validated using a traditional approach. 
4.4.2.10 Process Analytical Technology 
After developing a control strategy that incorporates PAT, process qualification is performed to confirm that 
the monitoring, measurement, and process control or adjustment systems are suitable, capable, accurate, and 
reliable (refer to Section 3.4 and Section 6.3). The key to effective PAT process control is the reliable 
operation of instruments and equipment.  
The use of PAT controls can provide an alternate approach to PPQ. If a PAT system is used to control every 
commercial batch, then the PPQ stage will have a different focus. For example, if a powder-blending or 
solution-mixing operation is controlled by a PAT system, such as NIR assays, the PPQ will involve 
demonstrating that the control model and system and the process model work as predicted in commercial 
manufacturing.  
Qualification of the equipment, measurement system, and process must demonstrate the capability to adjust 
CPPs according to the established algorithm and confirm that the adjustments result in acceptable and 
predictable outputs. In other words, a PAT-based control method needs to be validated (58). 
4.4.2.11 Sampling Strategy 
During the PPQ, increased sampling and analytical testing is expected to verify that the process is under 
control, and to demonstrate consistency at intermediate steps, as well as in the final product. Sampling plans 
for discrete units should include the statistical rationales that underlie the plans (refer to Section 6.0). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
62 
For processes or individual unit operations that yield a single homogenous pool of material, statistically 
based sampling plans may not be useful in ascertaining the level of intrabatch process variability. For 
example, analysis of multiple samples from a homogeneous bulk solution or API provides information on 
the variability of the analytical method only, not intrabatch variability of the process. In these cases, 
extended characterization of intermediate pools and nonroutine sampling performed at certain points in the 
process and comparison of the data between batches can demonstrate process control and reproducibility.  
4.4.2.12 Setting Process Performance Qualification Acceptance Criteria 
The acceptance criteria for PPQ should be based on the body of data available from Stage 1, prior 
knowledge, and equipment capabilities. The approach used to determine the acceptance criteria should be 
outlined in the PVMP, and the justification of the individual acceptance criteria for each unit operation 
should be documented in the PPQ protocols. Statistical approaches should be used where appropriate, and 
each product and process variable should be evaluated individually. Process justification documented in the 
Process Design Report provides the scientific basis and reference to the data supporting the acceptance 
criteria for process parameter ranges, and product attributes (refer to Section 3.7). The rationale for PPQ 
acceptance criteria should be clearly described in the PVMP and PPQ protocol. When sufficient data are 
available and statistical methods are used, the method(s) used and the rationale for selection of that method 
should be described.  
When establishing acceptance criteria for PPQ, the following considerations should be considered: 
• 
Historical data/prior knowledge 
• 
Preclinical, development, clinical, and precommercial batches 
• 
Early analytical method suitability (if data is used from clinical lots) 
• 
Amount of data available (level of process understanding) 
• 
Sampling point in the process 
• 
Compendial requirements can be met with high confidence 
• 
Product stability 
An overview of the factors considered for determining PPQ acceptance criteria should either be described or 
referenced, if included in a different document. Criteria for determining inter- and intrabatch consistency 
should be defined in the PVMP and the PPQ protocol. All parameters and attributes designated for tracking 
and trending in Stage 3 should be included in the PPQ acceptance criteria, which may include: 
• 
Incoming Material: Meets designated criteria (maybe raw material or the output of a preceding 
step)  
• 
Process Parameters: All process parameters are expected to remain within NOR, with particular 
attention focused on parameters with critical designation 
• 
Attributes: All product quality and process performance attributes should meet predefined 
acceptance criteria and include statistical criteria where appropriate:  
̶ 
CQAs have the potential to impact safety or efficacy (e.g., impurities) 
̶ 
Quality attributes do not necessarily impact safety or efficacy, but can be used as a 
surrogate at certain process steps to demonstrate process consistency (e.g., deamidation or 
oxidation that does not impact potency or safety/immunogenicity) 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
63 
4.4.2.13 Special Process Performance Qualification 
Public health emergencies have a significant potential to affect the health and well-being of citizens, 
allowing for the authorization of emergency use of drugs and biological products when justified. The law 
empowers FDA to authorize deviations from otherwise applicable GMP requirements for eligible medicinal 
products.  
As per PV guidance, a concurrent release may be applied when appropriate for processes used infrequently 
for some reasons, such as to manufacture drugs for which there is a limited demand (orphan drugs) or those 
with a short half-life (radiopharmaceuticals). The concurrent release approach may be appropriate for drugs 
which are medically necessary that are manufactured in coordination with the health regulatory agency to 
avoid the short disruption of patient-critical products. 
4.5 Process Performance Qualification Protocol 
PPQ protocols are a documented plan for executing the PPQ studies. Protocols are reviewed and approved 
by cross-functional groups that include the Quality Unit. Protocols must be approved prior to 
commencement of PPQ activities. They typically contain the following sections: 
Introduction  
The introduction should include a description of the process and/or specific unit operations under 
qualification, including the intended purpose of the operations in the context of the overall manufacturing 
process. The introduction should provide an overview of the study(ies) and important background 
information. 
Purpose and Scope  
Describes the objective of the study and provides an overview of the study strategy, that is, how it will be 
performed, how data will be analyzed, and the expected outcome. Justifications or cross-referencing to 
documents that contain justifications, such as the PVMP, should be included.  
Terms and Definitions 
Terms and definitions relevant to the PPQ protocol. 
References 
References to relevant documents related to the study should be included in the protocol:  
• 
Development and/or process characterization plans that provide supporting data for process 
parameters and attribute ranges 
• 
Process Design Report (outlining CQAs and CPPs) 
• 
PVMP 
• 
Commercial manufacturing batch records 
• 
Related qualification documents (facilities, utilities, equipment, other PPQ studies)  
• 
Analytical methods 
• 
Specification documents 
• 
Approved batch records 
Equipment and Materials 
A list of equipment, instrumentation, and materials necessary to perform the study should be included. 
References to qualification of utilities and equipment should be provided as appropriate.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
64 
Responsibilities  
A designation of various functional groups and their responsibilities as they relate to execution of the study, 
and verification that appropriate training has been conducted for all contributors.   
Description of Unit Operation/Process  
The objective of PPQ is to provide confidence that all elements of unit operation/process are under the 
appropriate degree of control. A comprehensive discussion of the control strategy, like the level of detail 
provided in the commercial manufacturing control strategy, is appropriate to demonstrate that all process 
elements have been considered. Although all elements are described, only a subset of the process variables 
will comprise PPQ acceptance criteria. 
Methodology 
The step-by-step procedure needed to perform the study—this section clearly identifies the critical and key 
process parameters under qualification and the methods by which the operation will be monitored and 
recorded. A brief explanation of the relevance of these parameters and their potential relationship to process 
performance and quality attributes is useful to further describe the PPQ strategy. Documents containing the 
detailed rationale for critical and key parameter designations should be referenced. 
A discussion of the number of batches planned should be included, and the rationale should be stated (refer 
to Section 4.4.2.2 for additional information). The level of confidence expected at the conclusion of the 
PPQ study should be included as applicable.  
Data Collection 
The list of process data to be collected should be stated.  
Sampling Plan  
A description of a defined prospective sampling plan and its Operating Characteristic Curve should include 
details on the number of samples, frequency of sampling, and sampling points supported by statistical 
justification, as applicable:  
• 
Sampling points 
• 
Number of samples and statistical basis for sampling, as appropriate 
• 
Sample volume 
• 
Nonroutine sampling for additional characterization 
• 
Sample storage requirements 
• 
Analytical testing for each sample 
Analytical Testing 
The overall validation package includes the methods used for all analytical testing performed, from 
assessment of raw materials to extended characterization of the DP. A listing of all analytical methods used 
in each protocol, the validation or qualification status of each, and references to source documents should be 
included. Analytical method validation should also be included as part of the PVMP. 
Note: Microbiological methods may be verified concurrently for an initial PPQ. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
65 
Deviations  
All potential deviations cannot be anticipated regardless of the level of characterization and knowledge. A 
general framework for defining the boundaries of qualification is appropriate, for example:  
• 
OOS or out-of-limits test results  
• 
Failure of a CPP to remain within NOR (A CPP is designated as such due to the potential impact on 
a corresponding CQA. Failure to control may indicate overconfidence in an immature control 
strategy, which would be grounds for protocol failure.)  
• 
Missed samples or samples held under incorrect storage conditions 
• 
Which individual batches or lots failing to meet validation acceptance criteria will impact the study  
Acceptance Criteria for PPQ 
The objective of PPQ is to demonstrate that the commercial manufacturing process is in a state of control, 
and the elements of the process control strategy provide confidence that a state of control will be 
maintained. The expectation for PPQ is that all process variables will remain within their designated ranges 
or meet acceptance criteria; subsets of these are used to define the PPQ acceptance criteria. The protocol 
should clearly document the acceptance criteria to be met in order for the PPQ to be considered successful. 
Acceptance criteria may be shown in tabular format in the protocol. 
4.6 Process Performance Qualification Report 
A report should be prepared for each PPQ study that will typically include the following sections: 
Introduction 
The introduction should include a concise description and outline of the unit operations or group of unit 
operations that have been qualified. It should summarize the overall results of the study, providing 
background information and explanations as necessary. 
Methods and Materials 
A clear and concise summary of how the study was performed. It should identify how the objectives of the 
study were accomplished using both methodology and references to appropriate procedures and protocol 
requirements. 
Deviations  
A summary of the deviations and corresponding root causes, as well as a discussion of the potential impact 
on the PPQ, should be included. Corrective actions resulting from deviations should be discussed. Their 
impact on the process, the PPQ, and on the affected batches should be provided.  
Protocol Excursions 
Protocol excursions and unexpected results should be included and fully described in the report. A reference 
to the root cause analysis should be provided if documented separately from the PPQ report. Any corrective 
actions and their impact on PPQ should be outlined in the report.  
Discussion: PPQ Results  
This section should restate the key and CPPs and give the actual range of values occurring during the PPQ. 
It should include how the data were collected as well as references for analytical methods used.  
Data summarized and compared with predefined acceptance criteria should be presented in tabular or 
graphical format whenever possible, and data used from Stage 1 studies should be clearly identified. A 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
66 
reference to the original study should be provided when data from outside the PPQ is used to augment the 
PPQ dataset for statistical robustness or other support. The level of statistical confidence achieved should be 
stated.  
The discussion should provide support for all study conclusions. The impact of ranges and deviations should 
be discussed if they affect the study results. Risk assessment and any follow-up conclusions, including 
corrective actions, should be stated.  
Findings associated with batches or lots that fail to meet the acceptance criteria in the protocol should be 
referenced in the final PPQ package, likewise, with any corrective measures taken in response to the cause 
of failure. 
Conclusions 
Conclusions as to whether the data demonstrate that the process is in a state of control should be provided. 
Pass or fail results should be stated for each acceptance criteria and corresponding results. 
When a unit operation approach is used, PPQ reports are prepared for each unit operation study. A summary 
executive report that unifies all the study results to support the overall process PPQ should be written. 
4.7 Transition to Continued Process Verification 
Following a successful PPQ, the CPV plan can be finalized and implemented. Any adjustments to be made 
based on the PPQ should be in place prior to the manufacture of post-PPQ batches and should be handled 
through the change control procedures. When appropriate, enhanced PPQ-level sampling is recommended 
for a period following PPQ (refer to Section 5.0). The CPV plan is developed to detect unplanned 
departures during commercial manufacturing from the process as designed. The monitoring measures 
should provide continual assurance that the process remains in a state of control (refer to Section 5.0).  
 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
67 
5.0 Continued Process Verification (Stage 3) 
Continued process verification (CPV) is a regulatory and quality assurance approach used in the 
pharmaceutical and manufacturing industries. It involves ongoing monitoring, assessment, and validation of 
processes throughout the lifecycle of a product. CPV aims to ensure that the processes remain in a state of 
control, consistently producing products that meet predefined quality standards and regulatory requirements. 
Unlike traditional batch validation, which focuses on verifying processes at specific intervals, CPV involves 
continuous monitoring, data collection, and analysis over time. This allows firms to detect deviations, make 
adjustments, and ensure that any changes in the process do not negatively impact product quality or safety. 
The primary goals of CPV are: 
• 
To ensure consistent product quality:  
̶ 
By verifying that the manufacturing processes remain stable and within specified limits 
over time. 
• 
To identify potential risks early:  
̶ 
Through continuous data analysis, potential issues can be detected before they become 
major problems. 
• 
To improve operational efficiency:  
̶ 
Continuous monitoring can help optimize processes and reduce waste, leading to cost 
savings. 
• 
To comply with regulatory expectations:  
̶ 
Regulatory agencies, like the FDA, often require CPV as part of GMPs. 
5.1 Establishing a Monitoring Program 
Establishing a monitoring program for CPV is a critical step in ensuring that manufacturing processes 
remain in control and consistently produce products that meet quality standards. A CPV monitoring 
program involves systematically collecting, analyzing, and interpreting data throughout the lifecycle of a 
product to verify that the process is consistently operating within its defined parameters (4, 59, 60). 
5.1.1 Purpose and Strategy 
The FDA PV guidance defines CPV as the assurance that the process remains in a state of control during 
routine production (1). EU GMP Annex 15 defines “Ongoing Process Verification,” also known as CPV, as 
documented evidence that the process remains controlled during commercial manufacture (50). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
68 
Maintenance of a validated state requires having a robust quality system in place encompassing aspects such 
as change control, training, auditing, and periodic review (4, 60). A CPV program (Stage 3a and 3b) 
provides a means to ensure that processes remain in a state of control following successful PPQ (Stage 2). 
The information and data collected during Stages 1 and 2 set the stage for an effective control strategy in 
routine manufacturing and a meaningful CPV program. Understanding functional relationships between 
process inputs and corresponding outputs established in earlier stages are fundamental to the success of the 
CPV program. The program minimizes process failures through early detection of adverse trends and a 
quick reaction by applying data analysis and scientific methods for better decision-making. Figure 5.1.1-1 is 
a conceptual chart depicting a high level of sampling at Stage 3a, the strategies applied when a lifecycle 
change is proposed, and the achieving of process stability.  
Continued monitoring of process variables enables adjustments to inputs covered in the scope of the CPV 
plan and detects the potential for process variability, ensuring that outputs remain consistent. Since all 
sources of potential variability may not be anticipated and defined in Stages 1 and 2, unanticipated events or 
trends identified from CPV may indicate process control issues and/or highlight opportunities for process 
improvement. Science- and risk-based tools help achieve high levels of process understanding during the 
development phase, and subsequent KM across the product life stages facilitates implementing CPV (refer 
to Section 3.0 and Section 4.0). 
Figure 5.1.1-1 Sampling Levels 
5.1.2 Responsibilities 
Effective CPV with variability detection methods, via sampling and statistical assessment, results in 
identification of continuous improvement opportunities. Along with the process subject matter expert, the 
determination of the sampling plan adequacy and statistical assessment should also be reviewed by 
personnel trained in statistical methods and data science, along with the use of appropriate statistical 
software. The list of process data to be collected and how it will be analyzed should be stated and the roles 
and responsibilities for various functional groups as they relate to collection, analysis, and review of CPV 
data, and the documentation requirements identified. Technical Operations, Manufacturing Science and 
Technology, Quality Unit, or Development groups are typically responsible for the CPV program.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
