5.0 Filtration Process Design, Usage, and Handling
Considerations

According to the FDA’s Guidance for Industry: Process Validation: General Principles and Practices
(Revision 1), quality, efficacy, and safety must be built into the product and cannot be tested at the end of the
manufacturing process. This concept is especially important for many sterilizing filtration operations, as the
filter often represents the final microbial control barrier prior to patient dosing (25). This guidance document
outlines three stages of process validation: Stage 1-Process Design, Stage 2-Process Qualification, and Stage
3-Continued Process Verification. Section 5.0 focuses on the process design aspects, and Section 6.0
focuses on the process-specific validation requirements for a sterilizing filtration process. Continued process
verification is generally out of scope in this document and is covered in other guidance documents. The
process design methodology discussed here is consistent with the principles of the International Council for
Harmonization (ICH) Quality Guideline (Q8): Pharmaceutical Development, which is to first evaluate the
design space, then develop a control strategy (8).

Membrane filters are used for multiple applications within the pharmaceutical industry and therefore,
membrane filter types, designs and configurations are as varied as their applications. This chapter will focus
on the process design and usage of sterilizing filters for the removal of microorganisms in pharmaceutical
processing. Many of these design principles will also apply to the use of sterilizing-grade filters in locations
other than the final sterilizing barrier for the control of bioburden, although those use cases have
significantly reduced risk to product quality and may not require the same level of validation and controls to
be applied (26).

5.1 Process Design: Design Space Evaluation

An initial evaluation of the design space for a sterilizing-filtration operation will generally encompass a
survey of the product properties, compatibility and required operational ranges used in the process.

5.1.1 Product Properties and Filter Compatibility

A good first step in the design of a sterilizing-filtration process is to evaluate the solution that needs to be
sterilized and how it will interact with the filtration system. A thorough evaluation of the properties of the
filtrate will guide in the selection of a filtration membrane and housing system that can withstand chemical
stress such as solvents, strongly basic or acidic media, and high-ionic strengths. After performing this type
of analysis, it can allow the user to select filtration systems that are appropriate for the application.

For the second step of the compatibility analysis, an evaluation of the physical properties of the process fluid
and intended processing parameters should be carried out. Characteristics such as the fluid temperature
range, particulate load, and viscosity can also affect the filter membrane and filtration system selection. The

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
24 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

system must be able to handle the mechanical stresses placed on it and remain integral for the duration of
the filtration process. Since there may be numerous chemical interactions between filter device/SUS
components and the process fluid or solvents, the typical chemical compatibility table provided by the filter
manufacturer is commonly used as a starting point for filter selection.

Another dimension of filter compatibility to consider is adsorption of components from the process stream.
Adsorption is a mechanism of product binding to the membrane or product contacting materials, which may
affect the product composition and concentration. Potential adsorption of product components to the filter
and other components of the filtration system (e.g., bags, connectors, tubing) must be considered
independently. Considerations should include membrane type, MoC used throughout the filtration system,
hardware, and support materials. Flow rate, product concentration, contact time, process fluid components,
temperature and pH can also affect the level of adsorption.

In instances where elevated adsorption occurs in the beginning of the filtration process but levels off during
filtration, the filtered volume could be pooled to achieve the specified product composition. During PD,
adsorption tests are typically performed at small scale and confirmed at large scale. These tests can also be
used to establish potential pretreatment options (e.g., buffer flush, soaking), necessary process parameter
options or membrane polymer choices. Elevated levels of nonspecific product adsorption on the filter
membrane can result in accelerated filter-fouling and performance degradation that would need to be studied
as part of filter-sizing studies.

5.1.2 Defining the Design Space and Operational Ranges

Knowledge of the desired at-scale process prospectively allows setting ranges to be studied during the
development of the filtration process. For example, a survey of the compounding process and the maximum
and minimum volumes that will flow through the filter during the sterilizing filtration process can create an
important set of operational ranges that the filter must be able to process. In addition, a subset of these
parameters will define ranges that need to be validated later (see Section 6.3). While some parameters can
be difficult to know during the initial PD exercise, it can be useful to evaluate the potential market demands
for the product and maximum expected batch volume. This will potentially reduce the need for additional
development and revalidation of the sterilizing-filtration process as the conditions change over the product
lifecycle. Table 5.1.2-1 shows a list of potential factors to consider during the process design phase that can
help determine operational ranges to study.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 25

Table 5.1.2-1 Factors to Consider When Developing Operational Ranges for Study During
Sterilizing-Filtration Process Design and Development

Factor Extent Rationale

Temperature Refrigerated to
Warmed
Dependent on product quality effects and physical property
optimization, can affect filter differential pressures and flow
rate due to viscosity differences and also microbial growth
rates

Total Product
Volume
Minimum and
Maximum
Sets limits for bacterial retention study validation and allows
proper filter sizing

Flow Rate Zero to Maximum
Expected
Flow rate dependent on application, e.g., in line with sterile
filling machine or bulk filtration

Differential
Pressure
Minimum to
Maximum
Requires appropriate development studies to determine
pressure/flow rate relationship; reasonable maximum
differential pressure should be defined based on expected
conditions as well as a minimum expected to aid, for
example, in detection of filter installation errors

Filtration Time Maximum Dependent on the processing time required, determines
how long the process will take, including process setup and
any necessary process stops

Product
Contact Time
Maximum Extended contact time may impact product compatibility,
membrane fouling, or filter integrity

Driving Force Pulsatile and/or
Constant Pressure
Determines what type of pump or driving force will be used
in the commercial setting; certain filters may be used in
more than one manufacturing setup

Configuration Single or Redundant
Filter Setup or
Multiple Filter
Setup

Knowledge of physical size constraints for the filter may
necessitate the use of multiple filters site, business or
procedural factors may also require the use of redundant
filtration; and knowing this up front will aid in the design of
the filtration process

5.2 Flow Characteristics

Flow-performance criteria during a filtration operation can include parameters such as flow rate, total
throughput, thermal and mechanical resistance, and nonspecific adsorption. A filter’s EFA is used in
calculations for scaling filter performance, determining extractables levels, reporting flow rates (i.e., flux),
and assuring of bacterial retention. Since applications vary, desired filter-performance characteristics also
vary. For example, since buffers widely utilized in purification processes are nonfouling, the optimum filter
may be one with the highest flow rate; for solutions that may contain foulants, such as media, the optimum
filter may be one with the highest filtration capacity for that solution. Optimizing the filter to the process
requires determination of critical and key operational parameters and performance requirements.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
26 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Filter flow rate is affected by such parameters as the EFA, membrane porosity, pore size, thickness and area,
differential pressure, flow path design, fluid viscosity, and temperature. Table 5.2-1 shows the relationships
between flow rate and a common list of process parameters.

Table 5.2-1 Common Factors Affecting Flow Rate

Higher Flow Rate Lower Flow Rate

High Porosity/Greater Void Volume Low Porosity/Lesser Void Volume

Large Pore Size Small Pore Size

Thin Membrane (less hydraulic resistance) Thick Membrane (greater hydraulic
resistance)

Large Effective Filtration Area (EFA) Low Effective Filtration Area (EFA)

High Differential Pressure (fluid force) Low Differential Pressure

Straight Flow Path Torturous Flow Path

Low Viscosity High Viscosity

High Temperature Low Temperature

Most of these parameters are governed by membrane and filter designs or particular fluid properties. The
primary parameter is the differential pressure that is, the difference between inlet (feed side) and outlet
(filtrate side) pressure. The differential pressure can be adjusted within the filter manufacturer supplied
maximum temperature/pressure ranges to achieve the desired process flow rates. Studying the required
pressure and flow rate ranges using scale-down membrane areas with the actual product stream is further
elaborated in Section 5.4.1. It is important to understand this information thoroughly to determine the ranges
that will be challenged during the validation activities (see Section 6.8).

5.2.1 Inlet and Differential Pressure

From the filtration curves it can be determined that increasing the pressure across the membrane will result
in an increased flow rate under most processing conditions, which is an important variable to control during
the sterilizing-filtration process. There are two important ways to specify the pressure: Differential pressure
(ΔP) is the difference in pressure between the upstream (inlet) and downstream (effluent) sides of the filter,
while inlet pressure is the pressure measured directly on the inlet side of the filter. To determine the
differential pressure, the inlet pressure must be measured using a pressure gauge or sensor. When
appropriate, outlet pressure may be assumed to be atmospheric (e.g., a vented downstream vessel). If the
outlet pressure is higher than the atmospheric pressure (e.g., when the fluid is transferred into a pressurized
or unvented system or if the flow rate causes a significant pressure drop downstream of the filter) either the
outlet pressure must be measured, or assume that the inlet pressure represents a worst-case upper limit on
the true differential pressure.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 27

Depending on the flow regime and the safety factor to the validated maximum pressure it may be important
to monitor the inlet or differential pressure of the filtration system (see Section 6.8). Increasing differential
pressure at a constant flow rate is indicative of filter fouling, and detection may be important for certain
types of process streams that are susceptible to fouling behavior.

Many modern filtration systems are driven by peristaltic pumps, especially in the case of SUS. As peristaltic
pumps are a type of positive displacement pump, the flow rate can be easily controlled (correlated with
pump revolutions per minute (RPM) and defined tubing diameter) without needing to worry about cleaning
internal pump components or tubing systems; this adds a degree of safety and convenience to many
filtration process designs. On the other hand, filtration can also be performed by pressurizing the system,
managed by a pressure control valve, which avoids the need of a pump system. In most final sterilizingfiltration
systems, the process stream is nonfouling and the filtration pressure remains relatively consistent
over time. With proper system design and appropriate safety factors, constant flow rate or pressure filtration
setups can operate in pressure regimes well below validated filter pressure limits. Some form of pressure
control or monitoring may be an expectation of certain health authorities, even for pump-driven sterilization
filtration processes that do not exhibit significant fouling.

5.2.2 Filtration Process Temperature

Process temperature has a variety of effects on the filter and fluid stream. Elevated temperatures reduce the
maximum allowable differential pressure due to the strength of the mechanical structure of the filter.
Pressure limits may vary between forward-and-reverse flow directions, based on filter structure (reverse
flow often being considered worst-case). Pressure limits at specific process temperatures may be listed by
the filter manufacturer in the qualification documentation of the particular filter type. Figure 5.2.2-1 depicts
an example of the relationship between process temperature and maximum differential pressure, that is, the
higher the process temperature, the lower the pressure resistance of a filter. Under elevated temperature
conditions, filter users should evaluate the risk factors, and if necessary, monitor process parameters
carefully.

In addition to affecting differential-pressure capabilities, higher process temperatures could result in
elevated leachables or chemical incompatibilities. Consideration should also be given to temperature, as
some polymeric membranes are sensitive to hydrolytic and oxidative alterations by heat.

Higher temperatures reduce fluid viscosity and increase the flow rate through the filter for most Newtonian
fluids. Higher viscosities could also result in the need for higher differential pressures to achieve a required
flow rate. These elevated differential pressures correspondingly require increased monitoring of flow rate
and/or differential pressure to avoid exceeding the rated pressure conditions.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
28 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Figure 5.2.2-1 Example of Filter Pressure/Temperature Resistance

5.2.3 Filtration Time

Filtration time (duration) is the amount of time required to filter a single batch (or campaign) of production
fluid. The process duration will differ depending on if the process is a single bulk-sterilizing filtration
operation or an intermittent in-line-filtration operation used to maintain the level in a break tank connected
to dosing pumps during a sterile filling process. Increasing filtration times may increase the potential for
bacterial penetration; therefore, the filter retentive performance should be validated to the maximum
product/filter contact time for the process (see Section 6.8).

As part of the development of the process an assessment should be conducted to determine the longest
potential product-contact time with the sterilizing filter. The worst-case process time should include
maximum filling-process duration, including manufacturing interruption scenarios prior to and during
filtration.

5.3 Filter Throughput and Maximum Volume

Filter throughput, or capacity, is the measurement of a total volume that can be filtered through the EFA
under defined process conditions. Filter capacity depends on membrane material, porosity, pore size,
nonspecific adsorption, pore shape, filtration area, pressure differential, contaminant load, and the physical
properties of the product type being filtered. Table 5.3-1 lists potential factors affecting throughput.

Many process fluids that undergo sterilizing filtration are in the final formulation and do not result in
significant fouling or filter-flux degradation over any practical volume. In many cases, there is no practical
limit to the throughput, while in other cases, there can be particulate matter or subvisible particles present in

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 29

the filtrate that do limit the filter throughput. In some cases, the prior processing history of the filtrate can
affect the capacity (e.g., high-shear mixing of monoclonal antibodies can generate agglomerates) (27).
Appropriate scale-down studies can be used to determine these behaviors as outlined in Section 5.4. Even in
the case where no defined maximum filter capacity can be determined, the maximum volume that will be
filtered should be specified so it can be covered during the filter-validation studies (see Section 6.8).

Table 5.3-1 Factors Affecting Throughput

Higher Total Throughput Lower Total Throughput

High Porosity/Higher Void Volume Low Porosity/Lesser Void Volume

Large Pore Size Small Pore Size

Low Nonspecific Adsorption High Nonspecific Adsorption

Asymmetric Pore Shape Isotropic Pore Shape

High Effective Filtration Area (EFA) Low Effective Filtration Area (EFA)

Low Contaminant Load High Contaminant Load

Nondeformable, Hard Contaminant Deformable, Soft Contaminant

Low Shear-Stress History High Shear-Stress History

5.4 Scale-Down Systems and Testing

PD activities are generally done at the bench-scale using scale-down systems to minimize material
quantities and allow for faster and more efficient experimentation. In order for the scale-down systems to be
representative of the larger scales used in manufacturing the available systems and scaling considerations
are discussed in this section.

5.4.1 Small Scale Device Testing

Filter-screening is generally performed using the process fluid in a constant flow or constant pressure
experimental setup. Traditionally, 25mm or 47 mm discs or disc composites (Figure 5.4.1-1) installed in
holders (Figure 5.4.1-2) were used for these screening studies. With modern filtration systems, however,
most filter manufacturers have developed specialized encapsulated discs or small pleated capsules that better
represent the flow dynamics of full-sized filters and allow closer estimates of scaling by EFA (see Figure
4.2-2). The screening tests can also be helpful to determine potential prefilter combinations to optimize the
total throughput and reduce fouling, where required. For yield-sensitive applications, filtrate samples can be
taken at frequent intervals to determine any nonspecific adsorption effects. Small-scale device tests may not
always accurately predict the actual process in regard to flow-path dynamics and pleat-density parameters,
however, and therefore may not scale up in a linear fashion, so care must be taken in the experimental
design to ensure that any throughput or flux limitations are well understood.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
30 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Figure 5.4.1-1 Filter Disc

Figure 5.4.1-2 Filter Disc Holder

Most filterability tests are performed by keeping pressure constant and measuring the decline in flow rate as
a function of filtered volume. The pressure set-point should mimic production pressure conditions.
Nevertheless, there are some applications that should be evaluated using constant flow rate, such as the
filtration of media. For constant-flow testing, the flow rate is controlled while the pressure gradually
increases until a maximum pressure is reached. This mode of testing avoids compression of contaminants
that may be captured on the membrane surface, leading to membrane fouling. Either constant-flow or
constant-pressure filterability tests can be used to predict manufacturing-scale performance. Ideally, smallscale
tests should be performed using flux and pressure conditions representative of the manufacturing-scale
process or a representative worst-case scenario.

The main output of these small-scale filtration studies is to develop and understand the flow curves and
evaluate filter flux at different pressure conditions, thus allowing selection of the optimal filter size and
configuration to use in the at-scale process. If properly designed, the fouling propensity of the filter and
process fluid combinations can also determine a maximum filter-throughput value. With this information
under representative temperature and process conditions, the process can be scaled up using the ratio of
EFA.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 31

5.4.2 Filtration Process-Scaling Considerations

Scaling up filtration performance from a laboratory-scale filter unit to a production-scale system, which
might contain multiple cartridges or units, poses several challenges to the filter user. Challenges include, but
are not limited to:

• Product for filter trials might be in limited supply due to high production costs and limited
production runs.
• Surrogate fluids might not be representative of the actual process fluid for certain behaviors like
fouling or non-Newtonian flow dynamics.
• Small-scale filter studies may not represent the conditions under which filtration occurs in the
manufacturing process.
• Laboratory-scale filter elements used for testing may not be directly predictive of large-scale
filter capacity.

To overcome these challenges, filter users may elect to work with the filter manufacturer(s) to design smallscale
studies that either closely approximate production systems or, alternatively, rely on appropriate safety
factors to account for unknown variables and ensure successful filtration operations at scale.

Careful attention should be paid to ensuring that the material used for the scale-down studies is
representative of the materials used for commercial production. In the production of proteins, there have
been several documented examples where shear stresses imparted on the molecule upstream in the process
result in the formation of subvisible particulates that can cause filter-fouling (27). In many cases the same
solution that has not been subjected to the same levels of shear stress will show no signs of fouling behavior;
this represents a scale-up risk that can be difficult to characterize that can manifest itself as filter-clogging
during production. In this instance, considerable study may be required to create appropriate scale-down
models of this shear behavior, as not all protein solutions and mixer types react in the same fashion. This is
just one example of the importance of understanding the full-scale process and the stress history of the
filtrate and how they affect filtration performance. There are also instances where freeze-thaw or shipping
conditions of solutions, such as lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) or lentivirus drug products can affect the
filtration performance (e.g., reduced volume throughput). It is critical that the impact of these factors is
understood to ensure small-scale studies provide representative data.

5.5 Filtration System Design and Integration

A user requirement specification (URS) is a helpful tool in designing a SUS or stainless-steel setup. The
filter user should have detailed knowledge of all process operational parameters to define the requirements
of a particular assembly. The suitability of particular components depends on the requirements of the
product and process. URSs typically include:

• Flow rate
• Pressure conditions
• Temperature conditions
• MoC
• Filter (pore size, area)
• Product volumes
• Instrumentation

• Sampling requirements
• System configuration
• Fluid properties
• Integrity-test methods and needs
• Sterilization method
• Documentation requirements

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
32 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

In addition to the integrity-test considerations stated in Section 7.0, the following points should be
considered for filtration systems:

• Pressurization of the upstream side of the filter with gas after wetting
• Need for a downstream vent filter to accommodate the gas flow
• Mechanism to aseptically remove the wetting fluid from the system, if necessary
• Use of a hydrophilic drain filter and a separate hydrophobic vent filter or other appropriate
valves and drains for the system
• Use of a combination hydrophilic/hydrophobic vent filter, where applicable
• Appropriate placement of process controls, such as pressure sensors or flowmeters, and
required sampling locations

Note: Use of separate filters enables both to be integrity-tested in situ with water, whereas a combination
hydrophilic/hydrophobic filter can only be tested with alcohol, off-line.

The qualification tests listed in Section 4.1 are performed within the manufacturer’s defined conditions.
Assemblies of components require validation within the filter/single-use user’s process and environment.
Validation should be performed to cover actual or worst-case process conditions, preferably with the
product or a model (surrogate) solution. The single-use component or assembly should meet process and
regulatory requirements. The validation effort should ensure that the components/assembly functions as
intended and does not negatively influence product attributes, neither the product and process conditions,
nor the single-use components or assembly.

Furthermore, functionality tests verify that desired process conditions, (e.g., filtration time) can be met.
Documented evidence should be established that operational parameter specifications can be met repeatedly.

5.5.1 Multiple Filters in Series

Manufacturing processes are frequently designed with trains of multiple filters in a series (sequential flow
through one filter after another), but the purpose of these extra filters varies from process to process, and the
design and purpose of each filter must be clearly documented.

5.5.1.1 Two-Filter Sterilization (Double Filtration)

In uncommon processes, where two filters together in series are both required to achieve sterility and the
train has been validated to achieve the sterilization of a specific product only when passing through both
filters, the filter train can be considered a single sterilizing unit, and both filters must successfully pass the
integrity test.

5.5.1.2 Pre-Filtration

One of the most common purposes for additional filters upstream of the final sterilizing filter is for
prefiltration functions, as opposed to sterilization. An example is bioburden reduction that may be
performed with a sterilizing-grade filter, but the filter is not performing a strict sterilizing function. Rather, it
is assuring that a very low bioburden level is present before entering the final sterilizing filter.

Other prefilters may be performing functions unrelated to microbial control, such as aggregate or particle
removal prior to the final sterilizing filtration, that may not use sterilizing-grade filters.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 33

5.5.1.3 Redundant Filtration

Processes where an additional (redundant) sterilizing filter is placed in the filter train to ensure against loss
of product due to potential-integrity test failure of the primary sterilizing filter. The additional “secondary”
filter is typically identical to the primary sterilizing filter, is fully validated to sterilize the fluid on its own
and undergoes post-use integrity-testing as a contingency in the event the primary filter fails. Generally, the
filter closest to filling (farthest downstream) should be the primary filter (10). The pressure and flow-rate
controls are generally designed to apply across both sterilizing filters.

Figure 5.5-1, Figure 5.5-2, Figure 5.5-3, and 5.5-4 illustrate different filter trains that can be used for the
filtration operation (see Section 7.4.3 for additional information).

Note: DP/DS stands for drug product/drug substance.

Figure 5.5-1 Single Filter Train Configuration

Figure 5.5-2 Pre-Filter Train Configuration

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
34 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Figure 5.5-3 Redundant Sterilizing Filter Train Configuration

Figure 5.5-4 “Double” Filtration Train Configuration (uncommon)

5.6 Pre-Filtration Bioburden Monitoring

An important aspect of filtration process design is pre-filtration bioburden monitoring: a common regulatory
expectation. The inlet to the final sterilizing filter should have well-controlled bioburden levels, despite the
extreme bacterial removal efficiency typically validated in retention studies (see Section 6.6) (28). The
difference between the low bioburden levels routinely entering the sterilizing filter, and the high levels
validated to be removed by retention studies provides a large safety factor which is an important principle in
sterilization by filtration. Factors to consider when designing a pre-filtration bioburden monitoring program
include:

• Relevant regulatory expectations for allowable bioburden limit (i.e., the acceptance criteria of
the test)

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 35

• Representative sampling time:

– If bioburden levels could rise over the course of the filtration operation, sampling at or
near the end of the filtration could be warranted. For short filtration durations or
bacteriostatic/bactericidal fluids, sampling at the beginning of the filtration may be
appropriate.

• Location of the sample: the pre-filtration bioburden sample should be taken immediately
upstream of the sterilizing filter (or, in cases of redundant filtration, upstream of the first
sterilizing filter), and downstream of any bioburden reduction filters.
• Impact of preservatives on the bioburden assay.

5.7 Flushing Conditions/Filter Priming

Sterilizing-grade filters generally must be flushed and primed prior to use, either in the process of integritytesting
or as a separate step, and filter manufacturers typically have recommendations for minimum flush
volumes. Pre-use flushing with water for injection (WFI), buffer, product, or sequential combinations as
necessary may be used to reduce leachables and can be important to reduce the level of nonspecific
adsorption and ensure that the filtrate is homogeneous during the process. Filter-priming is also necessary to
remove air from the filters and ensure that the filter membrane is fully wet thus making use of all of the filter
EFA during the process. For specific flushing considerations related to pre-use post-sterilization integrity
test (PUPSIT) refer to Section 7.0.

Pre-use flush volumes are typically determined empirically at scale for each installation based on the needs
of the process. Depending on the propensity of the filter to adsorb the product or excipients contained in the
product stream, there may also be a specific flushing solution used. For example, polysorbate or poloxamer
surfactants are common excipients in the final formulation of many protein-based pharmaceutical products.
Depending on the filter chemistry and the formulation composition, the saturation of adsorption sites on the
filter material with these excipients can occur considerably slower than the saturation of adsorption sites that
chemically bind the protein active ingredient, leading to reduced excipient concentrations at the beginning
of the filtration. In these instances, a surfactant containing flush buffer can considerably reduce the required
product flush volume, significantly increasing the product yield. The flush steps can be estimated using a
scale down system, although due to the flow dynamics and different surface area-to-volume ratios between
small-and-large scales, they require confirmation at full scale. In these instances, a larger flush volume,
calculated as a multiple of the EFA-ratio scale-down volume required, is used, the flush is done in a
stepwise fashion, and the material is collected after the filter. This fractionated material can then be
subjected to characterization testing, such as TOC, excipient concentration, or protein-specific assays that
can be used to generate a filter-flush curve to determine when the leachables are removed, the filter reaches
saturation equilibrium and the filtrate is completely homogeneous. Nonproduct flushes may need to be
chased with a product flush to avoid diluting effects and return the filtrate to a homogeneous state.

5.8 Filter Handling and Installation

An important part of the development of a sterilizing filtration process involves the installation and handling
of the sterilizing filters in the manufacturing environment. Filter cartridges must be installed into a filter
housing. Filters encapsulated in a polymeric housing may be part of a pre-assembled SUS assembly. Most
commonly, the filter cartridge will be installed into the filter housing and heat sterilized via in-line steam

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
36 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

sterilization or autoclaving. Capsule filters are commonly supplied presterilized via irradiation, or they can
be autoclaved by the end user.

5.8.1 Cartridge Handling and Installation Considerations

By following these guidelines for cartridge-handling during the development of the process, users can
ensure the proper installation, maintenance, and performance of the filtration system.

1. Identification and Receipt

– Cartridges should be identified by checking the part number, lot number, and
description.

– Enclosed documentation such as the quality certificate or certificate of conformance
should be reviewed to verify the correct filter type and conformance with the
specifications.

– The outer and inner packaging material should be checked for damage with processes.
put in place to segregate and evaluate any instances of damage.

2. Installation

– Cartridges should be installed in the classified area as defined within the approved
contamination control strategy (CCS) to mitigate contamination.

– Cartridges should be handled with care and protected by the packaging during
installation to avoid contamination or unnecessary operator contact.

– Cartridges should be inserted into the filter-housing recess or adapter without twisting
and ensuring a secure fit without forcing it in place. If the cartridge includes locking
tabs, the cartridge should be rotated into position by holding it near the filter’s base
rather than at the closed end.

– If needed, the manufacturer's recommendations for lubricating O-rings and using a
product-compatible liquid should be followed.

– Proper alignment and secure installation to prevent leaks or bypass.

– Cartridges must be handled carefully to avoid damage to the filter media. Ensure proper
procedures or instructions are in place to note any dropping or rough handling of the
filtration system during installation.

3. Wetting

– Some filter cartridges are required to be wet with water before steam sterilization or
autoclave cycles. In that case care should be taken to achieve saturated steam
conditions on the porous membrane structure during the sterilization phase and to
ensure the differential pressure stays within the required conditions during the different
sterilization phases.

– Filter manufacturers typically have process recommendations on how to wet the filter
to ensure the entire membrane matrix is properly wet.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 37

5.8.2 In-Line Steam Sterilization Considerations

In-line steam sterilization is one of the main sources of potential damage to a filter. Well-defined standard
operating procedures (SOPs), a proper training program, and close qualification and monitoring of pressure
conditions are essential to prevent damage during steam sterilization. In addition to the sterilization
considerations outlined in Section 8.0, the following items should be considered during PD to ensure the
filter is not subjected to undue stress during steam sterilization.

1. Positioning

– During steam sterilization, the cartridge should be positioned to prevent the
accumulation of condensate, allowing drainage from the housing.

2. Temperature and Pressure Monitoring

– Pressure gauges should be installed as appropriate to monitor pressure conditions
during the steam sterilization process or during qualification activities.

– Excessive pressure conditions during steam sterilization can potentially damage the
membrane of the filter cartridge.

3. Potential Damage

– Reverse-steaming of the filter at elevated differential pressure conditions can cause
damage to the filter, leading to issues like pleat-pack movement, cage imprinting, or
cartridge deformation.

4. Precautions

– Care should be taken to avoid condensation vacuum by pressurizing the system or
venting through appropriate sterilizing-vent filters.

By following these guidelines for steam sterilization of filter cartridges, end users can ensure the integrity of
the filtration system and ensure the effective sterilization of the cartridges for safe and reliable filtration
processes.

5.8.3 Autoclaving Considerations

While the goals of steam sterilization using an autoclave are similar to those of in-line steaming, the process
of placing a filtration device into an autoclave chamber is distinct in several aspects. Similar to sterilizing
any item in an autoclave, the preparation of the filter must be considered, including appropriate wetting if
necessary and how to wrap it to safeguard the sterilized equipment from contamination when removed after
the sterilization cycle. The wrapping material must strike a balance; it should be porous enough to allow the
penetration of steam and air while effectively blocking any bacterial ingress. Autoclave cycles typically run
a pre- and post-vacuum cycle to evacuate any residual air and to dry the load. These vacuum cycles can
cause high differential pressure when the wrapping materials are affixed too tight on the inlet, outlet and
vent connections. Sterilizing-grade filters are vulnerable to damage from excessive differential pressure
across the membrane at elevated temperatures; therefore the preparation of the filter requires attention
during the development phase.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
38 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

In addition, the placement of the filter within the autoclave is of importance as it should not have any
contact with other parts within the autoclave especially the autoclave walls as this could result in
temperature gradients which can result in additional stress on the filter.

5.8.4 Filter-Capsule Handling

The filter-capsule handling can be compared with the filter-cartridge activities, except the filter capsule is a
filter unit that does not need to be installed into a filter-housing; it is already encapsulated and just needs to
be connected into the process stream. More detailed information on the handling of single-use capsule filters
can be found in PDA TR 66.

Most filter capsules cannot be in-line steam-sterilized and either require to be autoclaved or are supplied
presterilized using gamma or x-ray irradiation. The autoclaving cycle for filter capsules requires the same
attention as the filter cartridge to prevent damage to the filtration system

5.9 Impact of Filter Sterilization

As shown in Table 4.1-1, the effect of the sterilization method and conditions on filter bacterial retention for
both the membrane and the assembled filter unit should be a part of the filter manufacturer’s qualification
package. These studies are generally performed to demonstrate that stresses that occur during the
sterilization process do not affect the ability of the filtration system to retain microbes. The work that the
filter manufacturers perform demonstrates, that after sterilization stress, the filter performs as designed as
long as the integrity test passes. Within the sterilization stress ranges studied, this allows nondestructive
integrity-testing of the filters by the end user to demonstrate that sterilizing filters are functioning as
designed. It should be noted that these sterilization-method qualification studies are different than those
performed for product-specific bacterial retention validation studies, as outlined in Section 6.0. In the
absence of any filtration surface modifications caused by the sterilization method, no additional product
specific studies related to the filter sterilization conditions are generally required.

As long as the sterilization processes performed by the end user are within the ranges (e.g., temperature,
time, ionizing radiation exposure) qualified by the filter manufacturer, performing an integrity test is an
appropriate control strategy that connects the filter performance back to the microbial-retention testing
performed during the filter qualifications.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 39

