8.0 Sterilization of Filters

A key element of a successful sterilizing filtration process is the sterility of the filtration assembly,
especially on the filtrate side. Proper sterilization of filters involves applying the right physicochemical
conditions, and with careful attention, this process can be highly effective while preserving the integrity of
the filter membranes and components. By following the manufacturer’s recommendations for sterilization,
the risk of thermal, mechanical, or chemical damage to the filters can be minimized. The sterilization
process should be appropriately qualified to ensure that there is no variation during the cycle and that it
achieves the respective sterility goal and does not cause harm to the filtration device. In instances when the
sterilization process is not automated, a routine integrity test of the filter after sterilization may be
performed. An integrity test after the sterilization process can confirm that the filter was not damaged during
sterilization.

8.1 Steam Sterilization

Steam under pressure is widely recognized as one of the most effective sterilization methods, typically
carried out in an autoclave or in situ as SIP. Steam sterilization cycles are required to be properly validated
and performed to ensure the entire filter and membrane matrix is sterilized. The steam sterilization cycles
are often automated and well controlled within the end-user site to assure maintaining the validated state.
Validation studies typically include integrity-testing the filters post-sterilization and the use of biological
indicators (BI). BI’s may be placed in the filter core or embedded into the pleat packs. These studies play a
critical role in confirming that the cycle achieves a 10-6 sterility assurance level and that the filters are
integral.

Steam sterilization parameters should be considered carefully when designing a sterilization process for any
filter. Refer to the filter manufacturer’s literature for additional information regarding temperature and
pressure limitations together with the maximum allowable sterilization cycles.

8.1.1 Autoclave Sterilization

Most sterilizing filters are qualified for steam sterilization by their manufacturers to at least 121°C and, in
some cases, up to 130 – 134°C. Temperatures higher than this may make many of the plastics used for filter
construction unstable and may affect the physical integrity of the filter or increase the level of extractables.

Filter assembly preparation for autoclave sterilization is critical. Sterilized filter components should be
protected with a suitable microbial barrier to avoid recontamination after sterilization; however, the barrier
must allow air to pass from the filter and steam enter the filter during sterilization. It is critical to ensure that
filter inlets and outlets are left open to avoid excessive differential pressures during sterilization. Wrapped
articles should be covered with only enough wrapping material to protect critical surfaces while allowing
free transfer of saturated steam and air through the material. Use of sterilization tape should be minimal. The

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
72 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

weight of any attached fittings and hoses should be supported to avoid potentially deforming of capsule
filter inlet and/or outlet at high temperatures. Hoses should not be kinked or closed to allow the free flow of
steam and air. The filter user should refer to the manufacturer’s specifications when developing an autoclave
sterilization cycle for the filter assembly. Slow exhaust (e.g., liquid) cycles may be considered for filter
sterilization to avoid excessive pressure differentials across the filter during the cool-down phase of the
cycle. Filters should be removed promptly after the sterilization cycle to avoid potential oxidative damage
from heated air in the chamber.

One of the major difficulties encountered in autoclave sterilization is air removal. Air can be effectively
removed at the initiation of the sterilization cycle by applying a series of vacuum and steam purge cycles.
Large filter assemblies may require adjustments to the sterilization parameters, especially the prevacuum
phase, to optimize air removal and steam penetration (57). During the sterilization cycle, the filter assembly
should be oriented to allow condensates to drain. If the filter is integrity-tested immediately poststerilization,
it does not have to be dry.

8.1.2 Sterilize-in-Place

The SIP method is limited to filters in housings that can withstand steam pressures of 15–30 psig (1–2 bar).
Disposable filter capsules with polypropylene or polyester housings should not be subjected to in-situ steam
under pressure, except for high-temperature polymers, such as polyetherimide.

To ensure optimal performance during the sterilization process, it is important to monitor pressure
differentials by installing pressure gauges both upstream and downstream of the filter (58). Adhering to the
differential pressure limits set by the filter manufacturer for each specific housing or assembly is critical,
especially at elevated temperatures. High differential pressure may occur due to restricted drainage or
blocked steam flow but, with proper practices, this can be effectively avoided.

To protect wetted filters, steam should be introduced gently in forward flow at low pressure. This approach
allows the filters to heat up gradually, ensuring that any liquid in the membrane matrix is evaporated before
steam flow begins. An effective way to facilitate this is by opening the upstream vent and housing drain
before the steaming process. This allows steam to efficiently heat the filter, ensuring a smooth transition to
sterilization. Once downstream pressure increase is observed, upstream steam pressure can be increased to
target the sterilizing pressure by partially closing the vent and drain valves. Alternatively, the system can be
designed to introduce steam from both sides of the filter to avoid excessive steam-pressure differentials.

During the cool-down phase of an SIP process, it is critical that air or other suitable gas maintain a positive
pressure across the filter. Excessive reverse pressure differential can arise if the upstream side of the filter is
cooled more rapidly than the filter core. Gas-assisted cooling is preferred over liquid cooling, because the
latter may generate thermal shock and damage the filter (58, 59).

8.2 Irradiation Sterilization

Common irradiation sterilization processes are gamma radiation and X-ray. Gamma and X-ray irradiation
sterilization can be validated using a bioburden and dosimetry approach. Follow current International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards such as ISO-11137: Sterilization of Health Care ProductsRadiation
(60).

Some polymers used in filter manufacturing have limited resistance to sterilizing irradiation. Filters may be
constructed of radiation-resistant materials or polymers formulated with antioxidant additives designed to

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 73

protect the polymer from excessive radiation-induced degradation. Irradiation sterilization, as with all
sterilization methods, requires validation to establish sterility and stability.

Irradiation sterilization has several advantages, such as a high sterility-assurance level, no residual gas-or
chemical-sterilization components, dry filters, and minimal interference by packaging components with the
sterilization process. Disadvantages include potential lack of filter compatibility to high-dose and limitedfilter
shelf life (most irradiated filters are not validated to withstand a second sterilization cycle involving
irradiation or steam). Steam sterilization of previously irradiated filters may increase extractables and
leachables and could lead to loss of filter integrity, which could be confirmed by an integrity test.

8.3 Gas Sterilization

The most common sterilization gas is ethylene oxide, which may be used at 100% or diluted in a carrier gas.
In addition to the increased environmental impact from using ethylene oxide as a sterilant, there may be
safety factors such as the formation of ethylene chlorohydrin and ethylene glycol reaction products and
ethylene oxide that may remain in the filter matrix. For successful filter sterilization by ethylene oxide, the
filters should be dry and wrapped in a manner that allows for the free entry of water vapor and gas into the
filter matrix. Following sterilization, the package also should permit the removal of residual gas and other
undesirable byproducts. Due to the difficulty of ensuring gas penetration into and out of the filter membrane,
this method of sterilization is typically not used for pleated filters but only for very small, encapsulated discstyle
filters.

Parameters influencing gas sterilization are preconditioning factors, gas concentration, relative humidity,
temperature, and time. Since there is no established correlation between lethality and the interrelationship
between the sterilization parameters, destruction of a suitable biological indicator is the preferred method for
validation and process monitoring. Spores of Bacillus atrophaeus have been established as the indicator of
choice for this sterilization method.

8.4 Resterilization of Filters

Many sterilizing filters are designed to withstand multiple autoclave or in situ SIP cycles, either to
demonstrate robustness or to meet filter-user resterilization requirements. Multiple gamma-irradiation
sterilization cycles are generally not applicable due to cumulative dosage effects. Autoclave resterilization
of previously radiation-sterilized filters may also not be possible. Suitability of resterilization processes
should be confirmed with the filter manufacturer.

Where the resterilization of sterilizing filters is elected, the filter user should ensure that the resterilization
process and the number of resterilization cycles does not adversely affect the filter or the product.
Resterilization, including sterilization conditions, number of sterilization cycles and cumulative sterilization
times should be validated.

Sterilizing filters should be routinely discarded after the processing of a single lot. In instances where
repeated use can be justified, however, the sterilizing-filter validation including integrity-testing, bacterial
retention studies, and cleaning should incorporate the maximum number of lots to be processed.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
74 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

