4.0 Filter Qualification, Design, and Characterization

Filter manufacturers typically provide the information discussed in this section, which should be considered
by the end user for their risk assessment when selecting a sterilizing-grade filter. Since bacterial retention
studies and filter integrity testing are important components of manufacturer-supplied information, those
topics are covered separately in Section 6.0 and Section 7.0, respectively.

Sterilizing-grade filters are available in a variety of sizes, configurations (e.g., flat sheets, capsules,
cartridges) and membrane chemistries so that the filter user can select the most appropriate filter for a
particular application. Commonly used membrane chemistries include polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF),
polysulfone (PS), polyethersulfone (PES), nylon, cellulose esters, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), polyester
and polypropylene. Not only do different chemistries impart differences in flow characteristics and filtration
performance, but they also affect the levels of filter extractables and leachables, the thermal and physical
properties of the filter, and the interactions with the process stream (as determined via compatibility and
adsorption-testing). Once the membrane is manufactured into its final format, it is evaluated by the filter
manufacturer with respect to flow rate and pressure drop, operating limits of temperature and pressure,
extractables, compatibility, cleanliness, sterilization conditions, integrity, and bacterial retention applying
defined test conditions.

Since sterilizing-grade filters are a critical part of any aseptic process, a significant amount of testing and
documentation is conducted by filter manufacturers to qualify their filters. Filter support documentation may
include a validation or qualification guide, FDA Drug Master File (DMF), product literature, specification
sheets, technical bulletins and application notes. Pharmaceutical-grade filters are also often accompanied by
an individual certificate listing the filter part, lot numbers and release criteria. The supporting documentation
from filter manufacturers can help the end users in their assessment for qualifying filters and supporting
regulatory inquiries.

4.1 Filter Qualification and Validation

Filter manufacturers typically publish results of tests performed according to applicable compendial
methods to qualify the filter as suitable for pharmaceutical applications. This qualification documentation
supports, but does not replace, performance qualification as a part of process validation conducted by the
filter user. Table 4.1-1 lists qualification and lot-release tests on membranes and devices commonly
performed by manufacturers and validated by filter users.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
12 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Table 4.1-1 Qualification and Validation Recommendations

Criteria Filter
User
Filter Manufacturer

Membrane Device

Bacteria Retention in Water or Saline Lactose Broth
(SLB) with Integrity Test Correlation in Water or
Solvent
- Q, L Q, L

Bacteria Retention in Product with Respective Process V - -

Chemical Compatibility, Effects on Filter Integrity V Q Q

Extractables E Q Q

Leachables E - -

Sterilization Method, Effects on Filter Integrity E Q Q

Integrity Test (Water or Solvent) E Q, L Q, L

Integrity Test (Product) V - -

Toxicity Testing – Bioreactivity Tests - Q Q

USP Bacterial Endotoxin Test E - Q, L

USP Particulate Matter E - Q

USP Nonfiber Release E - Q

Flush Volume E - Q*

Filter Selection/Fit for Purpose E - -

Impact to Product Critical Quality Attributes (CQAs) E - -

L = Filter Manufacturer’s Lot Release Criteria

Q = Filter Manufacturer’s Qualification

V = Process Validation Testing (Rationale can be provided for scale-down testing)

E = Evaluate the Need for Additional Testing, Document Technical Assessment

+ = Fully Assembled Filter with Membrane, Filter Components and Plastic Housing (if applicable)

* = Typically Using Water

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 13

Further details of the tests listed in Table 4.1-1 are provided below:

• Bacterial retention of a filter is initially qualified by the filter manufacturer in saline lactose
broth (SLB), water or another suitable carrier fluid and then again by the filter user under
process conditions for critical sterilizing-filtration applications. In each case, 100% retention is
correlated to an integrity test using a standard reference fluid (e.g., water or alcohol). During the
membrane development process, filter manufacturers define the correlation between integrity
testing and bacterial retention following ASTM F838 methodology (6).
• The chemical compatibility between the filter and product can be qualified by the filter
manufacturer. Filter-user testing is often necessary to confirm compatibility of the process
fluids with the filter and operation conditions. Tests such as product-based integrity and
bacterial retention may be used to assess chemical compatibility.
• Extractables may be qualified by the filter manufacturer using model solvents and specific
laboratory conditions and may also be determined by the filter user for product-specific fluids
under simulated processing conditions (e.g., temperature, duration). Based on the results
obtained from the extractables study, the filter user should evaluate the need for testing of
leachables. The leachables study should build upon the identified extractables and be tested
with the product in scope or a representative surrogate.
• Filter safety testing (i.e., biological reactivity) is conducted by the filter manufacturer and does
not need to be repeated by the filter user (16).
• The capability of a filter to be sterilized and the maximum sterilization conditions
recommended for the filter are qualified by the filter manufacturer. The filter user is responsible
for validating the sterilization method used in the process*
• Particulate matter, nonfiber release, oxidizable substances, total organic carbon (TOC),
conductivity testing and flow rates may be qualified by the filter manufacturer. The filter user
should determine if additional testing is required due to differences in processing conditions.
• Filter selection done by the end user will look at filter sizing, filter type based on process scale
and design, and impact on product critical quality attributes (CQA) by evaluating compatibility
(e.g., adsorption, reaction, degradation) through contact with the filter unit.
• Since solvents could be used as wetting agents to determine if the integrity test failed due to
wetting problems, it would be advisable to determine the appropriate amount of flush volumes
needed.

*Note: Sterilization of filter capsules by gamma or x-ray irradiation is generally validated by the filter
manufacturer.

4.2 Filter Design

Sterilizing-grade membranes are employed in a wide variety of sizes and filter formats, including cartridges,
capsules and disc styles to suit many scales and types of applications. Membranes can also be pleated to
increase the surface area, and this can be placed in either a cartridge or a capsule filter. Figure 4.2-1 shows
examples of filter cartridges, capsules and components.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
14 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Figure 4.2-1 Filter Cartridge (A), Filter Capsule (B), Filter Components (C)

The design of filter elements is important because design features like membrane pleat shape and density
determine the EFA which, in turn, influences the flow rate and total throughput (i.e., the larger the EFA, the
higher the flow and/or throughput). If the pleat density is too high, the free flow path is restricted, and the
flow is reduced; if the pleat density is too low, the EFA might be too low and the flow restricted. There may
be a difference in the pleating geometry used in a scale-up study in process development (PD) and the
pleating geometry of the process-scale device, since high-EFA pleating geometries are typically used in
process-scale devices only. Potential differences in performance should be evaluated during PD (see Section
5.4.1 for additional information).

Depending on the filtration needs (e.g., product, process, equipment or facility constraints), different setups
and filter types can be employed. Figure 4.2-2 shows different filter types and configurations.

Figure 4.2-2 Different Filter Types and Configurations

Figure 4.2-3 and Figure 4.2-4 are cutaways that reveal the internal components of a typical cartridge and
capsule. Filter capsules, composed of filter elements preinstalled and sealed in plastic housings, are
compact and relatively lightweight. Depending on the orientation and configuration of the capsule or
filter-housing, the fluid may enter from the bottom or from the top of the capsule or housing and flow
around the outside of the internal filter module, pass through the pleated filter membrane to the interior
core, and exit the outlet.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 15

Figure 4.2-3 Cartridge Internal Components

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
16 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Figure 4.2-4 Capsule Internal Components

Stainless-steel filter housings and disposable filter capsules are available in two configurations: T-style or
in-line style (Figure 4.2-5A and Figure 4.2-6A, respectively). The T-style housings have the inlet and outlet
pipe adjacent to each other at the bottom plate of the housing (Figure 4.2-5B). The inlet pipe in the in-linestyle
housing is positioned at the dome of the housing and the outlet pipe on the bottom plate (Figure 4.2-
6B). Most housings and capsules also have vent ports for removing air.

Figure 4.2-5A Filter T-Style Housing

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 17

Figure 4.2-5B Flow Diagram for T-Style Filter

Figure 4.2-6A Cutaway View of an In-line Style Stainless-Steel Filter Housing with Cartridge

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
18 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Figure 4.2-6B Flow Diagram for In-Line Filter

In addition to housing styles, the filter elements themselves have multiple adapter options (Figure 4.2-7) for
fitting the filter into the housing. The most common filter-cartridge adapter is a double O-ring, doublebayonet
adapter. This adapter type is twisted into place on the base plate to ensure a tight seal between the
filter element and the housing base. As housing-base tolerances may vary, it is imperative that the specific
filter and housing provide the proper seal throughout the filtration operation (e.g., from steam-in-place (SIP)
through post-use integrity-testing).

Figure 4.2-7 Cartridge Adaptor Options

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 19

4.3 Filters in Single-Use Disposable Systems

It is common to build transfer sets of filters integrated with tubing, sensors, and connectors that are
presterilized (e.g., gamma, x-ray) typically used together with other single-use technology or in hybrid
systems together with stainless steel equipment. Furthermore, the assembling of multiple filters in ready-touse
assemblies has also become common. These systems offer some advantages over conventional stainlesssteel
equipment including the:

• Ability to obtain presterilized
• Reduction in setup time
• Elimination of cleaning
• Elimination of cleaning validation
• Elimination of risk of cross-contamination
• Elimination of filter housing maintenance
• Reduction in operator exposure due to closed systems
• Reduction of drug product contamination from the external environment
• Reduction of the operator’s exposure to the drug substances

Implementation of SUS should follow a risk-based approach that considers product and process
compatibility and demonstrates robustness, suitability, and consistent performance under intended use
conditions. (Refer to PDA’s Technical Report No. 66: Application of Single-Use Systems in Pharmaceutical
Manufacturing for additional information.)

Depending on the processing considerations and setup requirements, the filter user chooses the best
configuration (capsule, cartridge in stainless-steel housing, or hybrid) for the filtration operation. Use of
disposable capsules obviates the need for cleaning validation and equipment amortization, which may
reduce operating costs. Another advantage is that operator contact with potentially hazardous products is
minimized. The use of stainless steel must be balanced against the use of capsule filters, which can be single
use and can reduce utilities and validation efforts. Different optimization can be performed based on
environment (waste), energy use, or financial analysis.

4.4 Filter Toxicity and Biocompatibility

One important aspect of selecting a filter is assessing the safety of the filter medium and/or device. Filter
manufacturers should provide information about the origin and toxicity of the filter components, including
their origin of animal-derived components.

4.4.1 Toxicity

Filters must not impart toxic materials to the fluid stream. Filter manufacturers generally qualify filters
through performance of standardized testing in compliance with compendial methods (16). These tests
involve the introduction of filter extracts or actual filter samples into cell-culture systems. Reactivity of the
cell culture to the test article is assessed visually, scored and compared against predefined acceptance
criteria for toxicological safety. The results of these tests are commonly included as part of the filter
validation guide.

Over the years there has been a shift away from animal-based testing, to better align with animal-welfare
principles.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
20 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

4.4.2 Animal-Derived Materials

The filter manufacturer typically includes information on biocompatibility of animal-derived materials used
in filter manufacture. The use of bovine tallow-derived stearates poses essentially no risk for transmission of
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE) and other diseases. Typically, the manufacturing
processes used to produce bovine tallow and tallow derivatives are very rigorous and meet or exceed safety
requirements (17, 18).

4.5 Filter Cleanliness

Particulate contamination from the filter, filter hardware, filter installation and the process should be
evaluated and considered since each source may contribute to particle burden in the product. Filter flush
effluent samples are examined for particles greater than 10 microns and greater than 25 microns. Filter flush
effluent is considered compliant upon meeting compendial guidelines for particulate matter in injections.
Using these criteria, filters are also qualified as nonfiber-releasing (10-12).

In addition to particles, filters may be a source of other contaminants, such as endotoxin, organic carbon, or
oxidizable substances. Potential sources may include surfactants, wetting agents, additives in the plastic
component manufacture, manufacturing debris and materials of construction (MoC). Preflushing filters may
reduce levels of particulates and contaminants and may be performed as part of the wetting process prior to
integrity-testing. A filter can be preflushed based on the extractable studies, taking into account the
sterilization method and process step.

Note: Filter flushing and preflushing are performed by the filter user.

4.6 Filter Extractables

Since sterilizing-filters are often used in the final manufacturing steps of a pharmaceutical production
process, the effect of the filter on the final product should be evaluated. An extractable is any chemical
component that is removed from a material by the application of an artificial or exaggerated condition (e.g.,
solvent, temperature, time). A leachable is a chemical component that migrates from a contact surface into a
drug product or process fluid during storage or normal use conditions. These are typically a subset of
extractables (19, 20).

Potential sources of extractables and leachables include, but are not limited to, membrane components (e.g.,
plasticizers, surfactants, antioxidants, residual solvents, device support layers), and device components (e.g.,
end caps, housings, cages, O-rings). Factors affecting leachables may include the chemical properties of the
process stream, sterilization process, contact time, temperature, and volume-to-area ratios (21). Filtration of
organic solutions may lead to higher levels of leachables than aqueous solutions.

Extractable data may be obtained from the filter manufacturer or may be generated by the filter user (see
Section 6.5 for filter user-generated data). Filter manufacturers can use model streams to determine the
extractable profiles under worst case conditions (22). Although an important component of filter validation,
the level of extractables and leachables from most sterilizing-grade filters that can potentially enter the
process stream is relatively low. Flushing the filters prior to use can further reduce these levels as
demonstrated by flush curves measured by TOC or other tests for specific leachables (21).

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 21

Data should ideally include a comprehensive list of the compounds that could be leachables when the filter
is used in the actual formulation under process conditions. The necessity to perform leachable study should
be evaluated based on risk determined from extractable studies and risk to patient safety.

4.6.1 Chemical Compatibility

The chemical compatibility of the filter device must be evaluated to avoid potential filter damage or
alteration and to avoid fluid contamination by either leachables or particulates. Filter manufacturers will
have general chemical-compatibility guides based on the MoC and a range of standard chemicals. Since
there may be numerous chemical interactions between filter device components and the process fluid or
solvents, the typical chemical compatibility table provided by the filter manufacturer is commonly used as a
starting point for further testing. More extensive testing should be performed by the end user to determine
chemical compatibility of the filter device and process fluid under process conditions (see Section 6.0 for
more details).

Chemical-compatibility testing should encompass the entire device and depends on the fluid, filtration
temperature, and contact time. Additional studies should be performed by the filter user. Additional productspecific
studies may be conducted by the filter vendor on request from the filter user to ensure there is no
impact to product CQAs. Common chemical-compatibility tests include integrity test, tensile strength,
nonvolatile residue (NVR), extractables, particulates, flow rate, optical or scanning electron microscopy
(SEM), burst pressure and membrane/O-ring thickness (23). Use of a combination of tests is recommended
since a single test might not be able to detect subtle incompatibilities.

4.7 Operational Ranges

Manufacturers typically specify the maximum operational temperature, pressure, and sterilization
temperature limits and provide water flow-rate data for their filters. Manufacturers provide maximum
forward and reverse differential pressure limits at specific temperature conditions, incorporating adequate
safety margins. This information may also reference limits at different temperatures, facilitating the
selection of process flow rates, temperatures, and sterilization options compatible with the filter. Section 8.0
addresses selection and validation of sterilization options by the filter user.

Filter-system flow rate at a given differential pressure is a function of membrane polymer and structure type,
pore size, housing inlet and outlet diameter, effective filter area, fluid temperature and viscosity. During the
design of a process filtration system, these variables should be evaluated for compatibility with the operating
limits of the filters and the filter area selected. Filter suppliers also test pressure-pulsation cycles to
determine the mechanical stability of the filter device. However, care should be taken to avoid pressures
exceeding the manufacturer’s stated specifications of maximum allowable differential pressure at specified
temperature ranges.

Note: There may be a distinction between the operational ranges with which a filter is generally suitable,
and the “validated filtration parameters” for a sterilizing filtration unit operation, as defined in processspecific
bacterial retention study validation in order to cover scale-down worst-case process conditions (see
Section 6.0).

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
22 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

4.8 Shelf Life and Shipping Studies

Filter manufacturers will validate packaging and shipping of the filters according to industry standards to
ensure that the products can withstand common transport hazards (24). In addition, filter manufacturers will
establish shelf-life recommendations based on product stability under defined conditions, which will be
valid if the filter is stored and handled properly. These recommendations can be used by the filter user to
establish expiration dates or use-by dates.

Filters that are sterilized via gamma or x-ray irradiation will have expiration dates due to the sterility claim
associated with the sterilization method.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 23

