1.0 Introduction

Sterilizing filtration is the process of removing microorganisms* from a fluid stream without adversely
affecting product quality (1-4). This technical report is intended to provide a systematic approach to
selecting and validating the most appropriate filter for liquid sterilizing filtration applications.

PDA’s original Technical Report No. 26: Sterilizing Filtration of Liquids, (TR 26) published in 1998
described the use and validation of sterilizing filtration to a generation of pharmaceutical scientists and
engineers. A revision of the original report was developed in 2008 in response to enhancements in filtration
technologies and recent additional regulatory requirements within the pharmaceutical industry at that time.
This current revision has been implemented to reflect current best practices and regulatory expectations, as
well as clarify the roles of filter suppliers and end-users. References are provided for scientific publications
and international regulatory documents where more detail and supportive data may be found.

When membrane filters entered the commercial scale, 0.45 µm-rated membranes were considered
"sterilizing-grade" filters and were used successfully in the sterilizing filtration of parenterals. These filters
were qualified using Serratia marcescens as a standard bacterium for qualifying membranes used for water
quality testing. In a paper published in 1960, however, Dr. Frances Bowman of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) observed a 0.45 µm "sterile-filtered" culture medium to be contaminated with an
organism subsequently shown to repeatedly penetrate 0.45 µm-rated membranes in small numbers at
challenge levels above 104
 – 106 colony forming units (CFU) per cm² (5). This led to the development of
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) F838, a standard test method for evaluating sterilizinggrade
membrane filters (6). Challenge organisms are discussed further in Section 6.0.

*Note: Sterilizing filtration is not intended to remove viruses.

1.1 Purpose & Scope

The primary objective of the TR 26 revision team was to develop an updated scientific technical report on
sterilizing filtration. This report does not always address region-specific regulatory expectations but it
provides up-to-date scientific recommendations for use by industry and regulators in establishing a
sterilizing filtration policy. This report should be considered a guide and is not intended to establish
mandatory standards for sterilizing filtration. Concepts presented in TR 26 pertain to processes in which
filtration is used to render a liquid sterile, with all accompanying assurances, and may not be universally
applicable to all filtration processes, such as upstream bioburden reduction steps.

The revision team was composed of European and North American industry professionals to provide a
diverse perspective, thus ensuring that the methods, terminology and practices of sterilizing filtration
presented are reflective of sound science and can be used globally. This report underwent review by global
technical peers that included feedback from experts from the Americas, the Asia-Pacific region and Europe.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) © 2025 ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

