--- PAGE 137 ---
Page 135
Appendix M5
Appendix M5
13	 Appendix M5 – Design Review and
Traceability
13.1
Introduction
This appendix covers the design review process and requirements traceability for computerized systems.
Defects should be identified and corrected at the earliest opportunity in the life cycle. Design reviews and traceability
assist with ensuring that computerized systems are fit for intended use and with keeping the overall cost of projects
down through the early identification of defects and resolution of problems.
Design review and traceability can help ensure that:
•
Requirements have been addressed
•
The functionality is appropriate, consistent, and meets predefined standards
•
Existing functionality is not negatively affected
•
The system is appropriately tested with no unintended gaps between requirements and tests
For non-linear software development life cycles, for example Agile, it is appropriate for design reviews and traceability
to be achieved in an iterative manner, for example, within each sprint cycle for Scrum.
13.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
This revised appendix encourages automated and tool-based reviews rather than manual traceability approaches
where possible, as this drives efficiency and accuracy. Adoption of Agile approaches is also considered.
13.2
Scope
This appendix is intended to cover GxP regulated systems, but the methods are appropriate to all system types.
Design review and traceability also may cover operational, commercial, safety, and environmental considerations.
13.3
Design Review
Design reviews evaluate deliverables against standards and requirements, identify issues, and propose required
corrective actions. They are planned and systematic reviews of specifications, design, and development performed at
appropriate points throughout the life cycle of the system. They are an important part of the verification process.
Design review should be performed by appropriate SMEs. The individuals performing the review should be identified.
Tools can also be used to perform aspects of design review; for example, code analysis and traceability tools can
provide confidence and an efficient approach.
The rigor of the design review process and the extent of documentation/artifacts should be based on GxP risk,
complexity, and novelty.

--- PAGE 138 ---
Page 136
Appendix M5
Aspects that should be considered when planning design reviews include:
•
The scope and objectives of the review
•
What method or process will be followed
•
Who will be involved, and the specific role/responsibilities
•
What the outputs will be
For standard products (GAMP Category 3), a design review by the regulated company typically is not required.
For systems based on configured product, a significant part of the design review activities should have been
performed by the supplier during development of the product. This should be verified during supplier assessment.
User design review activities should focus on the configuration and implementation activities.
For custom applications, design reviews typically are conducted at each level of detail of specification and design, or
within the sprint process for Agile software development life cycles.
13.4
Traceability
13.4.1	 Introduction
Traceability establishes the relationship between two or more products of the development process.
Traceability ensures that:
•
Requirements are met and can be traced to the appropriate configuration or design elements
•
Requirements are verified, and can be traced to the test or verification activity that shows the requirement has
been met
Accurate traceability can also provide benefit by:
•
Enabling more effective risk-management and design review processes
•
Judging potential impact of a proposed change
•
Facilitating risk assessment for a proposed change
•
Identifying scope of regression testing for changes
•
Enabling fast and accurate responses during an inspection or audit
This section describes methods of achieving traceability. The approach applied should be selected based on the level
of GxP risk, criticality of the business process, complexity, and novelty.
13.4.2	 Principles
A means of linking relevant specification records to testing should be established and maintained. It should also be
possible to trace from testing back to the relevant specification record. Traceability provides a method to ensure that
all applicable elements of specification, including requirements, have been verified. It also enables faster responses
to questions about verification of functions, both to meet internal business needs and during regulatory inspection.
Accurate traceability depends upon on the completeness and accuracy of the specification records.

--- PAGE 139 ---
Page 137
Appendix M5
The rigor of traceability activities and the extent of documentation should be based on GxP risk, complexity, and
novelty; for example, a standard product may require traceability only between requirements and testing.
For more complex systems, the relationship between requirements, specifications, and verification may not be simple,
for example:
•
Multiple requirements can be covered by a single DS and verified by a single test
•
Multiple DS may be linked to a single requirement
•
Multiple tests can be required to address one requirement or one DS
The process (documentation and/or tools) used to achieve traceability should be documented during the planning
stage and should be an integrated part of the complete life cycle.
13.4.3	 Methods of Achieving Traceability
Traceability may be achieved in a number of ways, including, automated software tools, spreadsheets, or embedding
references directly within documents, or even a separate Requirements Trace Matrix document (RTM). Traceability
may be generated as a separate deliverable or as part of an existing deliverable, such as the requirements document.
The use of automated tools is recommended as manual methods, for example, spreadsheets or RTM documents, are
difficult to maintain and keep accurate.
Traceability for simpler systems can be achieved through common or consistent numbering of requirements, designs,
and testing documentation, rather than a separate matrix, although tool-based traceability is recommended; see
Figure 13.1.
Figure 13.1: Example of Embedded Traceability
As shown in Figure 13.1, the numbering for temperature recording is the same in the requirements, design, and
test documentation, thereby enabling traceability without creating a separate traceability matrix. This method is
considered appropriate for a smaller system in low-risk situations.
For standard products, traceability between user requirements and verification may be sufficient.
For configured products, the Design column in Figure 13.1 may be replaced with a link to configuration items,
providing traceability between user requirements, configuration, and verification.
For custom applications, traceability should be provided from requirements through each level of specification to the
appropriate verification. Figure 13.2 provides a simple example RTM for a custom application.

--- PAGE 140 ---
Page 138
Appendix M5
Figure 13.2: Custom Application Example of a Manually Produced and Maintained RTM
Each reference within the matrix, e.g., U1.1.2, S3.1, T8.2, could be a reference to a section or sub-section within the
relevant document, or to a totally separate document.
In practice there often is not a simple one-to-one relationship from the requirements through the different design
documents. One function may fulfill different requirements, or one requirement may require different design elements.
For Agile software developments, the traceability of requirements through the life cycle is often inherent in the
method and the tools used, although this should be verified as part of tool selection. For example, in Scrum, there is
traceability from the requirements (epics/user stories) in the product backlog into the sprint backlog and then through
the sprint and artifacts necessary to build and test the software through to the initial release and sprint retrospective.
13.4.4	 Additional Requirements Traceability Considerations
Requirements traceability may be enhanced by adding more information or ideally linking to the information within
tools, such as:
•
A brief description of each requirement, which may assist verification
•
Inclusion of change-control numbers or linkage to the change tool to enable tracking the system history and
change impact. A reference to other processes that impact the system, such as deviations, may be beneficial.
•
An indication of the criticality of the requirements to assist levels of testing applied to any given requirement.
High-criticality requirements may have more detailed testing applied and may, therefore, reference multiple tests,
whereas low criticality requirements may have a reference to a single test.
•
Identification of where a requirement has been satisfied by a procedure rather than software, along with the
reference to the procedure and version number
•
Reference/linkage to testing may be expanded to indicate:
-
At what level the testing occurs, (e.g., unit, integration, or acceptance for linear development) or during a
sprint for Agile
-
When (e.g., development, test, or operational)
-
Where the testing occurs (e.g., global or local)
In this case, the level of effort in testing should relate to the criticality of the requirement and the level of acceptable
risk.
•
Traceability to a maintenance or calibration record for the instrument required for a test and requirement

--- PAGE 141 ---
Page 139
Appendix M5
Note, however, that any such additions to a manually developed and maintained traceability matrix will make it more
difficult to navigate and maintain.
For large projects other tools, such as a Document Management System (DMS) with the capability to maintain the
links between documents (both in the DMS and reference to documents generated and stored outside) may be used.
13.4.5	 Practical Issues to Consider
The level of detail required for traceability can be a difficult balance to strike. The following considerations seek to
help in balancing usefulness, complexity, and maintainability.
•
For linear projects, the strategy for traceability should be established during planning and requirements
development. For Agile projects, the strategy for traceability should be established at the start of the project and
reviewed during execution on a continuous-improvement basis.
•
Traceability could simply comprise references to supplier documentation, if this is adequate.
•
The supplier should have their own traceability for the software under their control. This should be verified during
supplier assessments where this is appropriate.
•
Requirements need not trace to technical controls in all circumstances. Requirements can trace to procedural
controls, in which case a cross-reference to identified SOPs is appropriate.
•
The use of automated tools is strongly recommended as these provide a more accurate, sustainable approach
than manual traceability methods.
•
For simple systems, an RTM is not recommended as sufficient traceability can be incorporated within document
cross-references.
•
For global systems, early and careful planning for traceability is required since the control and tracking of local
and global requirements should be resolved.

--- PAGE 143 ---
Page 141
Appendix M6
Appendix M6
14	 Appendix M6 – Supplier Quality Planning
14.1
Introduction
Quality planning defines how a supplier fulfills the quality requirements for a new software release, project, or service
introduction. Quality planning defines the approach, tools, control mechanisms, roles and responsibilities, and
deliverables. Quality planning ensures the appropriate application of the supplier’s QMS based on risk.
Supplier organizations work across multiple industries and are often not governed by GxP regulations. Quality
agreements and/or other contractual documents define the quality responsibilities and measures to be attained by the
supplier to enable regulated companies to leverage their effort and activities.
In the context of this appendix, suppliers may be external or internal to the regulated company (e.g., internal IT
departments).
The output of quality planning may be defined in IT tools, a document quality plan, project plan, Service Level
Agreement (SLA), or other artifact such as a release plan.
Quality planning for medical device software should consider the requirements of IEC 62304, Medical device software
– Software life cycle processes [18].
This appendix is not intended to give detailed guidance on project management or project planning, which is outside
its scope. The ISPE Project Management Community of Practice [51] is a forum for professionals creating a body of
knowledge on project management.
14.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
The following changes have been made:
•
Address the considerations of quality planning rather than contents of a quality plan
•
Update to recognize the use of standard approaches and IT tools
•
Removed project planning as this is covered by the ISPE Project Management Community of Practice [51]
14.2
Scope
Quality planning may be applied to new software product releases, introduction of new services, or client projects
requiring new system development and/or configuration.
Quality planning should take account of quality agreements, SLAs, and other contractual documents defining quality
requirements between the supplier and regulated company.
14.3
Considerations of Quality Planning
14.3.1	 Quality Agreements
Quality agreements are established between regulated companies and suppliers to define the responsibilities and
measures to be taken to ensure computerized systems and services are fit for intended use. These quality measures
enable the regulated company to leverage the supplier effort and avoid duplication of activities.

--- PAGE 144 ---
Page 142
Appendix M6
Quality planning should ensure that the responsibilities and measures defined in quality agreements are addressed
by the supplier’s QMS and individual quality plans where required. Quality responsibilities and measures may also be
defined in contractual documents, SLAs, technical agreements, and other documents.
Suppliers may contract with multiple regulated companies and therefore quality agreements should define quality
measures at an objectives level rather than imposing specific processes on the supplier. This will enable suppliers to
better address the quality measures within their QMS.
14.3.2	 Quality Planning Considerations
Note: Some of the quality planning considerations discussed in this section may not be relevant to smaller projects.
For customer projects, the quality plan should address any quality requirements defined in contractual documents
and/or quality agreements. Similarly, suppliers and regulated companies may collaborate to define all quality
requirements within a combined validation plan.
The quality approach defines the overall process that will be adopted for the project. The general approach should be
defined in the supplier’s QMS, but the approach should be scalable in accordance with the solution and project risks.
Such risks should include process/functional criticality, solution complexity, and novelty.
For internal software product releases, the approach defined in the supplier’s QMS should generally be followed for
all new releases irrespective of whether the release is a new feature release, bug-fix release, or patch release. As
such, the supplier’s SOPs may be used in place of a specific quality plan.
The scope of features to be included in a release and their priority may be defined within IT tools supporting the
system development life cycle or may be defined in a release plan.
Quality planning should address the relationship between the supplier and customer QCs. In such cases, a
documented quality plan aligned to the customer’s validation plan may be beneficial.
The areas to address in quality planning are described in Table 14.1.
Table 14.1: Quality Planning Considerations
Area
Planning Consideration
System/Service/Project Approach
The life cycle approach as appropriate to the project, products, and
services being provided
Risk Management
Risk-management approach and plans
Managing customer input to risk assessments for customer projects
(understanding risks to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity)
Organization (including use of third
parties)
Roles and responsibilities of supplier, customer, and third parties as
appropriate
Third-party governance controls (e.g., supplier assessment and oversight,
roles and responsibilities, governing procedures, training considerations,
contractual agreements)
Specification
Will customer requirements be integrated into the core software product or
managed as custom developments?
Define the process for capturing, analyzing, and recording customer
requirements

--- PAGE 145 ---
Page 143
Appendix M6
Table 14.1: Quality Planning Considerations (continued)
Area
Planning Consideration
Design and Configuration
How will design records be articulated (e.g., IT Tools, documents, etc.)
For projects, customer review and approval expectations
Configuration management approach
Traceability
How to ensure requirements traceability throughout the life cycle (e.g., IT
tools, documents, traceability matrices)
Build
Source-code management and integration tools
Software coding standards, code review and automated code verification
tools
Test
Risk-based test planning.
Testing roles and resources (including independence of testers from
developers)
Use of test-management tools and automated testing
Approach to development testing, functional testing, and requirements
testing
Approach to test-defect management
Regression analysis and regression testing requirements
For projects, customer role in accepting the solution/service
Release Management
Acceptance criteria (based on quality planning requirements)
Release authorization requirements
Installation
Procedures for software deployment/installation (test and production
environments)
Approach to verification of deployment/installation (installation verification
test and/or automated deployment process)
Data Migration
Data migration approach
Data verification approach to ensure data integrity
Acceptance
Supplier and customer responsibilities
Risk-based testing strategy
Leveraging supplier testing effort
IT Tools
Define IT tools supporting the project, product, service
Consider customer access to tools for customer projects
Assessment and control of IT tools
Controls for ensuring data/record integrity
Records/Document Management
Ownership of records and documents
Records and document management processes (including supplier/
customer roles)

--- PAGE 146 ---
Page 144
Appendix M6
Table 14.1: Quality Planning Considerations (continued)
Area
Planning Consideration
Deliverables
Define deliverables for product/project/service:
•
Life cycle records and information (including responsibilities)
•
Software products
•
Configuration
•
Customized software source code (as appropriate)
•
Services
•
Training
•
User and administration manuals/guides
•
Reports
Project Change Management
Project change process and governance responsibilities
Transition from supplier processes to customer processes during handover
Handover to Support Organization
How the solution will be supported post-handover
Knowledge transfer
Reporting
Progress, issues, and risk reporting
Quality metrics reporting (e.g., deviations)
Project Audits
Are periodic projects reviews to be conducted, if so at what stages and by
whom
Training
User and system support/administration requirements and approach
Training materials (including ownership)
Roles and responsibilities (customer and supplier)
14.4
Projects Involving Multiple Organizations
Multiple organizations may be involved in a project to deliver different technology solutions (e.g., IT infrastructure,
applications, middleware) or may be involved in different aspects of the project (e.g., system development/integration,
testing, data migration, business readiness).
Quality planning should ensure that all parties understand:
•
Roles and responsibilities
•
Dependencies between related activities
•
Timescales for each party’s activities
•
Requirements to jointly participate in activities (e.g., system interface testing documents, data, equipment, test
execution)
•
Responsibilities for deliverables (creation, review, approval, and sharing)

--- PAGE 147 ---
Page 145
Appendix M7
Appendix M7
15	 Appendix M7 – Validation Reporting
15.1
Introduction
This appendix describes the computerized system validation reporting process. It covers the activities involved, the
roles and responsibilities, and identifies where the process fits within a typical computerized system life cycle.
Accurate and informative planning and reporting are key elements of effective and successful governance, and the
validation report is often the first document related to a system that is examined during a regulatory inspection.
This appendix should be read in conjunction with Appendix M1, which discusses computerized system validation
planning.
15.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
Changes have been kept to a minimum to avoid disruption to companies that have been successfully following GAMP
guidance on this topic since First Edition publication. The changes are:
•
Align with updated Appendix M1 Validation Planning
•
Take into account the validation of SaaS solutions
•
Take into account the validation of systems developed in an incremental or iterative manner (Agile)
15.2
Scope
This appendix gives guidance on the reporting of the outcome of validation activities relating to the implementation of
either a specific computerized system, or a group of related systems.
15.3
Roles and Responsibilities
Specific roles and responsibilities will vary depending upon the scope and scale of the project. These roles should
be defined in the appropriate section of the corresponding plan and will cover who is responsible for the creation, the
review, and the approval of the computerized system validation report(s). Any changes in roles and responsibilities
that were made during the project should be noted in the report.
The quality unit is responsible for ensuring that the generated deliverable(s) comply with requirements specified in the
corresponding plan, are produced in line with company policies and procedures, and meet the appropriate regulatory
requirements.
15.4
Reporting Process
Where required by a computerized system validation plan, a validation report should be produced, focusing on
aspects related to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity, highlighting those areas and how these aspects
have been delivered and controlled. It should summarize the activities performed, any deviations from the validation
plan, any outstanding and corrective actions, and a statement of fitness for intended use of the system.
The level of detail in the report should reflect the risk, complexity, and novelty of the system. For simple or low-risk
systems a separate document may not be needed; applicable aspects may be covered by another document.

--- PAGE 148 ---
Page 146
Appendix M7
The structure of the report should mirror the structure of the corresponding plan, although there are some
components of the plan (e.g., organizational structure) that typically will not have a corresponding section in the
report unless a significant change has been made.
The report should be approved, as a minimum, by the process owner and the quality unit. It also may be appropriate
for other approvers of the corresponding plan to approve the report, such as the system owner.
It is common to produce one final report. There may, however, be other reports that either feed into this document or
are created after it and which supplement it.
For example, for larger systems it may be advantageous to issue sub-reports to cover phase completion (such as
specific testing or verification phases) and there may be an interim report to release the system. In general, each plan
should be addressed in a corresponding report and the scope of the report should correspond to the scope defined
in the related plan. For computerized systems using an incremental development life cycle, for example Agile Scrum,
the report would be expected prior to the initial release of the system. The approach to reporting and acceptance of
subsequent releases through sprints should be defined in the validation plan.
15.4.1	 Contents of the Computerized System Validation Report
This section lists topics that may be included in the computerized system validation report; not all sections or
subsections may be relevant. The guidance provided is intended to be neither prescriptive nor exhaustive.
15.4.1.1	 Introduction and Scope
The introduction should reflect the corresponding plan, and highlight any differences that have arisen since the plan
was issued. It should contain the following information:
•
Purpose and scope of the report
•
Who created the report, and under what authority
•
Summary of approach adopted
•
Cross-reference to controlling plans, policies, or procedures
15.4.1.2	 Scope Changes
It may be necessary to modify the original approach; the report should highlight and justify such scope changes.
In large complex projects the recording of such events may be centralized as part of a formal tracking system, e.g., a
Risks, Actions, Issues, Decisions (RAID) log. In such cases this section of the report may reference such sources of
information.
15.4.1.3	 Supplier Assessment
Supplier assessment activities should be summarized, or a reference made to other sources of information, such as a
Supplier Assessment or Audit Report.
Responsibility for system and related activities may be delegated to suppliers and service providers, but in all
cases regulatory accountability lies with the regulated company. Regulated companies may, however, leverage
the knowledge, experience, activities, and artifacts of the supplier or service provider through defined risk-based
assessment, management, and governance processes.
Information available in other documents should not be repeated.

--- PAGE 149 ---
Page 147
Appendix M7
Contents of supplier assessments or audit reports should not be included.
15.4.1.4	 Summary of Activities
The summary should refer to existing documentation, e.g., verification or test reports, and information should not be
duplicated.
This section may include subsections relevant to each phase.
15.4.1.5	 Summary of Deliverables
The report should verify that all of the deliverables noted in the corresponding plan are complete, adequate, and
where appropriate approved. This includes system development documentation, information maintained in tools or
supporting systems, and SOPs required for operational support.
15.4.1.6	 Summary of Deviations and Corrective Actions
The report should describe any activities and results that did not conform to the expectations specified in the plan,
and explain the impact, including corrective actions. Outstanding corrective actions should be highlighted and
appropriate next steps identified or referenced.
15.4.1.7	 Statement of Fitness for Intended Use
There should be a clear statement on the status of the system and whether it is fit for intended use, bearing in mind
any outstanding deviations or corrective actions.
15.4.1.8	 Training and Knowledge Management
The report should verify that personnel involved with new processes, equipment, or systems have been trained and
that this training is documented. Knowledge management arrangements should be verified.
15.4.1.9	 Maintaining Compliance and Fitness for Intended Use
The report should outline how the compliant status of the system will be maintained. This may be efficiently achieved
by referring to relevant policies and procedures or other QMS elements. See the Operational Appendices for further
details.
15.4.1.10	Glossary
Definitions of any terms that may be unfamiliar to the readership of the document should be included.
15.4.1.11	 Appendices
There may be a requirement for appendices, depending on the purpose, size, and complexity of the report, and the
corporate styles and policies adopted for reporting. These may include references to project-specific documentation
and references to other relevant documentation such as policies and procedures, guidelines, and standards.

--- PAGE 151 ---
Page 149
Appendix M8
Appendix M8
16	 Appendix M8 – Project Change and
Configuration Management
16.1
Introduction
This appendix covers change and configuration management of computerized systems during the project phases
prior to acceptance and handover to operational use.
Any controlled item that undergoes review, approval, or test should be governed by appropriate configuration
management, and every controlled item should be subject to appropriate change management.
Change management should be applied to each controlled item upon its first formal approval to avoid unintentional or
unauthorized change. Different controlled items may require different levels of formality and rigor. The project change
management approach should be documented. The project manager and the user should agree on the level of user
involvement.
Project change management processes typically are simpler than those for operational GxP systems due to fewer
people involved, faster communication, and lower risk to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity.
The point of transfer from project to operational change management should be clearly defined before handover to
operational use.
See Appendix O6 for further details on operational change and configuration management.
16.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
•
Added ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service Management
[20] references to introduce Agile as a toolset to manage requirement changes, artifacts/deliverables, and for
DevOps and Continuous Integration/Deployment
•
Added concept of traceability of requirement changes
•
Added risk assessment and discrepancy handling deliverables to change management
•
Added role to include quality unit to provide guidance and approve regulatory and compliance user and functional
requirement changes
16.2
Scope
This appendix applies to changes to controlled items such as documentation, application software, operating
software, firmware, hardware, and system, master, and configuration data within the scope of the specified
computerized system during its project phase.
This appendix is not aimed at changes to project scope, which typically are initiated and managed by change
procedures forming part of project management processes, and which may have significant financial implications.
This appendix is aimed at changes to controlled items that may be triggered by such project scope changes among
other reasons.
ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service Management, Section 3.4
[20] introduces the benefits of using Agile to create and manage changes to requirements and maintain traceability
throughout the project phase to release for operations.

--- PAGE 152 ---
Page 150
Appendix M8
16.3
Guidelines
16.3.1	 Configuration Management
All components of a computerized system, and changes to them, should be controlled. The exact hardware and
software configuration of the system should be documented throughout the life of the system. The level of formality
is greater for an operational system than for a system early in its development, but the principles that apply are the
same.
Configuration management should begin as early as possible during development. The more formality is introduced
during development, the easier it is to document the baseline configuration for operational configuration management.
Configuration Management consists of:
•
Configuration Identification
(WHAT to keep under control)
•
Configuration Control
(HOW to perform the control)
•
Configuration Status Accounting
(HOW to document the control)
•
Configuration Evaluation
(HOW to verify that control)
Configuration management activities, responsibilities, procedures, and schedules should be clearly defined. For a
large or complex project or product, a separate Configuration Management Plan should be produced.
The use of automated configuration management tools can bring significant advantages and should be considered.
The selection, verification, and use of such tools should be documented and based on risk, complexity, and novelty.
See Appendix O6 for further details on configuration management.
16.3.2	 Change Management
Project changes should be controlled and documented. As the project advances the formality of the change
management process generally increases. This progresses from informal project team meetings and discussions,
through formally recorded project meetings, to formal change management requests. The increase of rigor and
formality depends on the impact on both the preceding and subsequent deliverables in the documentation set, as
these are developed and linked to each other. Some controlled items may require different levels of formality and
rigor. Projects should define their approach to project change management during project planning.
All deliverables should be identified so that the controlled items subject to change management may be defined.
These may include:
•
Planning documents
•
Vendor or supplier contracts and assessments
•
Requirements specifications
•
Design specifications
•
Quality review documents
•
Risk assessments

--- PAGE 153 ---
Page 151
Appendix M8
•
Test specifications including acceptance criteria
•
Testing results and discrepancy handling
•
Reports
•
Hardware (e.g., Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs), Personal Computers (PCs), minicomputers, servers,
communication interfaces, printers)
•
Developed software code (e.g., PLC code, source code, executables, data files)
•
Third-party software (e.g., operating systems, firmware, library files, configurable products, drivers, compilers,
virtualization software). This includes software delivered with the system and customer-supplied software items.
•
Configuration files (for configurable products, alarm, and process setpoints, etc.)
•
Manuals (e.g., user manuals, system manuals)
16.3.2.1	 Changes during Development and Prototyping
Formal control should not be introduced too early during development in order to minimize non-productive work
during what are naturally iterative or evolutionary processes. Documents should be held in a draft status during
development without formal change control. Version control should track the current working draft (e.g., Agile backlog)
and ensure that documents are not unintentionally modified simultaneously by different project team members.
At the end of the development phase document review and approval should act as the formal verification that the
document content is complete, accurate, and fit for intended use.
Changes made during approved prototyping work are exempt and should be subject to these controls only when they
become documented design proposals.
16.3.2.2	 Changes to Code
Changes to code should be managed effectively to avoid unintended or unauthorized changes. The best solution is
the use of an automated code management tool, reference ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation –
Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service Management, Section 3.5 (Tools Instead of Documents) and Section 3.6 (DevOps,
Continuous Integration/Deployment, and Product Teams) [20] for use of Agile tools to manage requirement changes.
These tools use a check-in and check-out process to protect code so that two developers cannot be simultaneously
working on the same file, which could lead to errors and wasted effort. They also make it less likely that a developer
will edit an old file, leading to loss of intervening developments or the possible reintroduction of corrected defects (see
Appendix D4 for further details on management, development, and review of software).
16.3.2.3	 Key Change Management Steps
Raising a Change
Any member of the project should be able to raise a change in accordance with the project change management
procedure. Each change should be uniquely identified and indexed.
Change Review and Authorization
Each project should have a designated project manager responsible for ensuring that all changes to the system are
implemented in a controlled manner. The project manager may delegate this responsibility.

--- PAGE 154 ---
Page 152
Appendix M8
It is advisable that the project team engage the quality unit to ensure adequate oversight of regulatory and
compliance requirements.
Each change raised should be reviewed. Based on a risk assessment there should be a decision to accept or
reject the change. If accepted, the activities required to specify, carry out, and verify the change should be defined,
including:
•
The scope of the change and which controlled items are affected, including documentation
•
The impact of the proposed change and the need for further risk assessments to determine what verification is
required
•
The risks associated with making the change, and any back-out plans if the change fails at implementation
The review, risk assessment, the decision to proceed or the decision to reject with reasons, and activities required,
should be recorded and retained as part of the project documentation. Traceability should ensure transparency of
each requirement change and the resulting impact of subsequent testing or verification, as applicable.
The authority and responsibility for accepting and rejecting changes should be clearly defined.
Controlled items that have been approved by the regulated company (e.g., RS, contractual documents, tested and
accepted software) should be changed only after prior approval of the change.
The quality unit should approve changes to regulatory and compliance user and functional requirements.
Each controlled item should be tracked to completion. A change plan may be required for complex changes
incorporating many controlled items.
Change Completion and Approval
When the change has been implemented, documentation revised, and appropriate verification performed, the change
should be approved by the project manager or nominated representative and closed.
Example forms to assist with the process of managing a change are supplied separately.

--- PAGE 155 ---
Page 153
Appendix M9
Appendix M9
17	 Appendix M9 – Documentation and
Information Management
17.1
Introduction
This appendix covers the management of relevant information that is created during the development,
implementation, and validation of applications and which is required to be able to demonstrate that the application is
in a state of control.
17.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
As tools and approaches to information management have evolved the emphasis on all evidence residing in signed
hard-copy documents has also evolved. Major new consideration are:
•
Much information will never exist on paper, or even in the form of a document
•
Some information will be created and managed throughout its lifetime in a tool
•
Documentation needs to be searchable, that is, there must be some sort of robust search engine able to locate
information when it is needed
•
There is no need to create documents simply for the sake of having a document in case of regulatory inspection.
If it is not useful for managing the application in a state of control and is not needed.
17.2
Scope
This appendix is applicable to all system life cycle documentation. The guideline principles apply to documentation in
all record formats.
It describes an approach applicable to complex, business-critical projects in a GxP environment. It is not intended to
be prescriptive. Simpler projects may adopt less formal methods. Suppliers may choose to adopt other approaches.
17.3
Guidelines
A procedure should be established for management of documentation covering:
•
Production
•
Review
•
Approval (where appropriate)
•
Issue
•
Change
•
Withdrawal
•
Storage

--- PAGE 156 ---
Page 154
Appendix M9
Where documentation is produced by a supplier, consideration should be given at the planning stage of projects
to agree on information management standards and ensure that regulated company and supplier expectations
are aligned. The regulated company may assess the supplier approach to information management as part of the
supplier assessment processes.
Documentation should be assessed for suitability, accuracy, and completeness. There should be flexibility regarding
acceptable format, structure, and documentation practices.
17.3.1	 Documentation Production
Documentation standards should be agreed, including the use and management of tools where information may
reside, and the searchability of the information.
Where actual written documents are needed, there should be standards covering document layout, style, and
reference numbering. Documents should be under version control and in draft form prior to formal issue. Draft and
approved versions should be clearly distinguished, e.g., by their version identifier.
Where information resides in a database or other tool, data integrity controls should be in place to ensure that
information within the tool is correct and trustworthy. Only people with a justified need to enter or change the content
should have access rights. Audit trails may be appropriate so that a record exists of prior versions of the data.
Depending on the nature of the data, formal change control may also be necessary.
It is critical that information can be located when needed. This may require metadata to be created for the purpose of
indexing; if this is not automated, it should be done manually as part of the creation or modification of the information.
17.3.2	 Documentation Review
The review of documentation should be part of the business process of system build, with the level of formality of the
review based on risk. Review is typically most effective when carried out by an SME. For example:
•
For test records, the most effective review will be by an SME in the business process, as they will be in the best
position to evaluate whether a test result is actually acceptable
•
For release of an application at the end of a validation process, the appropriate SME is the quality unit8, who are
best placed to evaluate the overall GxP compliance
If the review results in the need for remedial actions, whatever measures were required should be assigned to a
responsible party, addressed, and completed. If a formal approval for a particular record or document is required, this
remediation should be completed before submission for approval.
Review reports, if used, should be logged and indexed. Individual actions noted on the review reports should be
logged and progressed through to closure.
17.3.3	 Documentation Approval
Formalization of the review and approval can take a variety of forms, ranging from a pen and ink signature to an
electronic approval in an EDMS to a separate record where an SME attests to having reviewed and accepted the
information.
8	 This may be different for GLP systems, as interpretation of GLP rules may result in greater separation of Quality Unit activities than are expected for
GMP, GCP, or medical devices.

--- PAGE 157 ---
Page 155
Appendix M9
The reason for each approval should be defined, e.g., technical approval, system release, etc. Approvals should be
dated. Unnecessary approvals should be avoided since this can cause significant delays; it is extremely unusual that
more than two approvals are justifiable.
Subsequent changes to approved documentation should be carried out under the applicable change-control
procedure.
17.3.4	 Documentation Issue
As soon as documentation is approved, or finalized if no approval is required, all indexing actions needed to ensure
that the information is searchable and can be located when needed should be completed.
Indexing is critical because documentation that cannot be located has no value, and worse, may lead to compromised
decision-making in its absence. Effective knowledge management needs a robust search capability, and the
information discussed in this appendix needs to be readily locatable when needed. Methods exist for documents
(e.g., by management in an EDMS) but the challenge may be greater for records that reside in a tool (e.g., records
from Agile software development).9
Superseded versions of the documentation should be removed from use and clearly marked as such. These
superseded versions may need to be archived, for example, if an investigation of a deviation or failure needs to
reference the version that was applicable at the time. For information that resides in a tool or database an audit trail
meets this need.
The procedure for managing controlled copies, if required, should be documented. Where a system of controlled
copies is in operation, uncontrolled copies should be clearly identifiable.
17.3.5	 Documentation Changes
Modifications to documentation should be controlled. Finalized documentation, whether in the form of an actual
document or in a tool or database, should be managed under change control. Examples of tools and databases that
might contain relevant documentation might include:
•
Trial Master File (TMF) Systems contain important documents like the study protocol, statistical analysis plan,
etc., that are frequently updated and reapproved during a study
•
Validation support tools that may include living data such as traceability matrices, in addition to standard
validation documents
•
Systems supporting moving targets such as DR, including plans that must be updated periodically and test
results
The rigor of the change-control process should be based on risk. In some tools documentation may be reset to the
next draft version, updates made, and the documentation reviewed, approved, and issued in accordance with defined
procedures. For low-risk information there may not be a formal approval process.
Indexing should be updated as part of this process; documentation history may be incorporated within the
documentation itself or held as a separate document, and databases or tools should have an audit trail.
Modifications to approved documentation should be reviewed and approved by the same functions or organizations
that performed the original review and approval, unless specifically designated otherwise.
9	 See ISPE Good Practice Guide: Knowledge Management in the Pharmaceutical Industry, Section 12.5 [10] for further discussion of content
management and enabling search tools.

--- PAGE 158 ---
Page 156
Appendix M9
17.3.6	 Documentation Withdrawal
There should be a defined procedure for withdrawal of approved documentation, which would normally be handled
through change control.
The documentation index and documentation history should be updated to indicate the documentation is being
withdrawn. Any controlled copy holders should be notified of the withdrawal and those copies removed from
circulation. If required to be retained, the withdrawn documentation should be archived in a manner secure from use
and its status clearly identified.
17.3.7	 Documentation Records and Storage
Documentation and associated information should be stored safely and securely (whether by paper-based or
electronic means), and according to defined procedures. They should have standard data integrity protections against
accidental and malicious damage, and should be retrievable throughout the defined retention period. Safeguards
should prevent the unintended use of unapproved, superseded, and withdrawn documents.

--- PAGE 159 ---
Page 157
Appendix M10
Appendix M10
18	 Appendix M10 – System Retirement
18.1
Introduction
This appendix provides guidance on planning the orderly retirement of computerized systems. This appendix
assumes that the regulated company has already made a decision to retire a system and has identified the data to be
archived and/or migrated to another system(s). Throughout the data and system life cycle it is paramount that data
integrity is at the forefront of the solution design; this also carries through to retirement.
This appendix offers a system-centric overview of the retirement process, with more detailed information on
system retirement contained in the ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based Approach to Operation of GxP
Computerized Systems, Chapter 18 [34]. A data-centric view of the system retirement process, focused on the details
of managing the data produced in the system via archiving, migration, and/or disposal, is contained in the ISPE
GAMP RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design, Chapters 3 and 7 [36].
18.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
•
Inclusion of retirement process owner responsibilities
•
Inclusion of data owner responsibilities
•
Accounting for cloud service providers/XaaS
•
Inclusion of cloud service providers/XaaS exit strategies
18.2
Scope
This appendix covers retirement planning for all GxP regulated computerized systems. The guidance focuses on the
controlling computer system and associated data rather than associated controlled equipment.
This appendix gives comprehensive guidance on all aspects of system retirement planning. Not all aspects will be
relevant to all systems. The extent of planning and other activities will depend on the GxP assessed risk, the business
criticality, size, and complexity of the system, and other factors that may impact the future use of the data.10
18.3
System Retirement Planning
18.3.1	 General Guidelines
System retirement is a process consisting of these main activities:
•
Retirement – System is removed from active operations; that is, “normal operational” users are deactivated, and
interfaces disabled. No data is added to the system from this point forward. “Special access” is retained for data
reporting, results analysis, and support.
•
Decommissioning – The controlled shutdown of a retired system. A system may be stored if required to be
reactivated at a later date, e.g., for retrieval of regulatory data or results.
10	System retirement and data retention within the context of mergers, acquisitions, and divestitures should consider future use under the new entity;
see ISPE GAMP RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design, Section 3.7 [36] for more details.

--- PAGE 160 ---
Page 158
Appendix M10
•
Disposal – Data, documentation, software, or hardware can be permanently destroyed. Each may reach this
stage at a different time. Data and documentation may not be disposed of until they have reached the end of the
record-retention period as specified in the record-retention policy.
The system retirement process should be documented in a system retirement plan, which typically should receive
input from functions such as the business process owner, quality unit, system owner, and IT.
Inputs to the planning process may include:
•
A risk assessment identifying and evaluating the business, technical, and regulatory risks associated with retiring
a system, as shown in Figure 11.3. If the risks of continuing to operate a system are considered greater than the
risks associated with retiring a system, then the retirement should proceed.
•
Data and record retention and destruction requirements for historic data and records
•
Identification of the current software and hardware configuration as well as interfaced systems, equipment, or
instruments
•
Identification of any internal and/or external systems that rely on data or records from the system
•
Identification of technical and contractual constraints of cloud-based providers
The extent and rigor of planning should be based on the system impact and risks associated with ensuring data
integrity (e.g., mitigating the potential for data loss).
The system retirement plan typically should be approved by the process owner, system owner, data owner, quality
unit where necessary, and others as required such as the legal department.
18.3.2	 Contents of the System Retirement Plan
The system retirement plan should describe the approach to be undertaken, including:
•
Introduction
•
Roles and responsibilities
•
Overview and implications
•
Business process description
•
Retirement approach
•
Data and record migration, archiving, and destruction
•
Verification approach
•
Ending system maintenance and support
•
Change management
•
Schedule
•
Retirement execution
•
System documentation

--- PAGE 161 ---
Page 159
Appendix M10
This appendix provides further detail on each of these topics; not all sections may be relevant. The guidance provided
is intended to be neither prescriptive nor exhaustive.
18.3.2.1	 Introduction
The introduction should include:
•
Who produced the document, under which authority, and for what purpose
•
Relationship with, and reference to, relevant policies, procedures, standards, and guidelines
•
Relationship with, and reference to, other documents
18.3.2.2	 Roles and Responsibilities
The roles and responsibilities associated with the retirement process should be documented in the plan, and should
cover the business process owner, quality unit, system owner, data stewards, data owner, the retirement team and
its members, and any other contributing parties as appropriate. There must be a responsible owner of the retirement
process.
18.3.2.3	 Overview and Implications
Consideration should be given to the effect of system retirement on aspects such as:
•
Strategy – Document the impact on the overall technology strategy to include archive access controls, including
further viewing of the data (and, in the case of dynamic data, reprocessing if required), and initiate any updates
to documentation or other necessary actions. For example, in order to access and use archived data, the
strategy may require the retention of software, inclusive of licenses, and hardware with appropriate operating
system to support the use of the software. ISPE GAMP RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design [36]
contains extensive guidance on maintaining data readability (Section 3.2), managing inactive data in an archive
(Section 7.2) and the challenges of maintaining legacy software (Appendix O5).
•
Process – Describe the impact on the support of the business process going forward
•
Technology – The scope and boundaries of the system to be retired should be determined and documented as
well as the rationale and justification for the retirement. Identify other systems, instruments, or equipment that
interface with the retiring system. Data or sources of information may be in place between various systems.
If the system is the location of primary records, identify the new location of the primary record (e.g., in the
archive or alternative system). Include consideration for data warehouses and data lakes. Identify infrastructure
components (networking, etc.) that will need to be decoupled from the system.
•
Personnel – Describe the impact on the user base
18.3.2.4	 Business Process Description
The pre-retirement business process should be documented and understood from the perspectives of the process,
user base, and data/records. This helps to ensure that all business process impacts are identified and all angles of
support or automation of the process are translated into the post-retirement scenario. The to-be scenario also should
be documented and understood, especially regarding changes to business processes and/or user base, and the
location of, and effect on, data/records.

--- PAGE 162 ---
Page 160
Appendix M10
18.3.2.5	 Retirement Approach
A decision on whether the system will be replaced should be documented. If it is to be replaced, retirement planning
should be referenced and synchronized with implementation planning for the replacement system. The approach to
interface decoupling, infrastructure disconnection, ending, or transition of technical support, and any assumptions,
exclusions, limitations, or dependencies, should be documented. A risk assessment should be performed to identify
and mitigate potential risks introduced by resulting changes initiated by the retirement process.
System retirement is a formal life cycle phase and should be treated as such by identifying the required inputs,
outputs, standards, activities, and deliverables.
18.3.2.6	 Data and Record Migration, Archiving, and Destruction
The plan should identify which data should be migrated, archived, or destroyed, and the associated approval process.
The approach to data migration and archiving should be determined based on the anticipated frequency of access,
the need for re-processability, and the record risk level and media robustness. Controls should be established to
ensure that records and data remain secure, complete, and accurate, and that signature/record linking is preserved
where applicable.
The approach should take into consideration:
•
If data is to be retained, it should be backed up and stored, per data retention schedules and company
procedures.
•
Before the data is moved or archived from the system, the appropriate data retrieval procedures and technology
should be available and tested.
•
Cloud service provider/XaaS license and contractual agreements (e.g., Master Service Agreements (MSA),
quality agreements) should include language that enables the migration of data to other systems, or holds data in
archive in a controlled manner for a predetermined period.
•
Archived data media (e.g., solid state drives) should be stored and maintained, per the manufacturer
recommendations and under the required environmental conditions.
•
If data and records are to be migrated to a replacement system, the migration should be planned, conducted,
and verified in such a manner as to ensure data integrity. The migration procedures should be tested or
confirmed before the data is completely transferred out of the system.
•
For any data migration or data conversion requirements, the methods to be used for migration/conversion and
verification of the data records should be defined. This may include piloting work to be done before the actual
migration takes place.
•
If data is to be moved to a replacement system or a cloud service provider/XaaS, the test strategy for verifying
the migration should be defined. If an automated migration or conversion tool is to be used, the approach to
ensure its fitness for intended use should be documented.
See Appendix D7 for further details on data migration.
For further information on the compliant handling of electronic records during data migration, archival, and retrieval,
refer to ISPE GAMP Guide: Records and Data Integrity, Section 4.5 [35] and ISPE GAMP RDI Good Practice Guide:
Data Integrity by Design, Chapters 3 and 7 [36].

--- PAGE 163 ---
Page 161
Appendix M10
18.3.2.7	 Verification Approach
Verification documentation needed as part of the system retirement process should be identified.
18.3.2.8	 System Maintenance and Support Discontinuance
The required actions associated with the modification or ending of internal and external support agreements,
operations, backup and restore, DR and business continuity plans, technical support, security and user
administration, SLAs, cloud subscriptions, and configuration management programs should be planned and
documented.
The retired system should also be removed from any inventory lists.
18.3.2.9	 Change Management
Formal change management procedures should be followed for the retirement of a computerized system to ensure
the retirement process is controlled and managed using established procedures for assessing change impacts.
Changes resulting from the system retirement should also be addressed, such as changes in support roles (technical
support, superusers, etc.) and the associated training.
The approach to communicating the impact of the system retirement on affected stakeholders should be documented.
Appendices M8 and O6 contain more details on change management.
18.3.2.10	Schedule
The individual retirement tasks should be documented, along with who is responsible, the associated due dates, and
any task dependencies. Critical milestones and checkpoints also should be included in the schedule.
Scheduling archive purge periods to align with record-retention requirements should be assessed to determine the
potential risks associated with the purge and the appropriate timing of archive disposal. The schedule should be
documented, and applicable procedures updated to reflect the schedule.
Separate project schedules may be more efficient and effective than including this information directly in the plan.
See Appendix O13 for more information on archiving and retrieval.
18.3.2.11	Retirement Execution
The timing of the retirement execution should be carefully considered. For example, this may include cutover to a
replacement system (which could be phased in parallel, or a clean cutover.)
Business continuity plans should be in place in case any problems arise during the retirement or migration work.
Additionally, a back-out plan is suggested, and should include detailed steps or references to configuration and
reinstallation procedures to make the retired system operational again, if deemed necessary. Once the system is
retired, the business continuity plans should be updated accordingly.
Any relevant documentation should also be defined.

--- PAGE 164 ---
Page 162
Appendix M10
18.3.2.12	System Records, Software, and Life Cycle Documentation
System records, software including source code for custom applications, and life cycle documentation (e.g., validation
documentation, change history, system-related SOPs, etc.) should be defined. Decisions regarding whether to retain
specific documents, software, and records should be based on their potential future usefulness and an assessment of
the risk associated with destroying them.
Information to be retained should have a designated data owner and be placed in a defined secure location using a
taxonomy that is helpful in maintaining traceability to archived records.
Affected inventories, procedures, or other documentation should be updated in a timely manner.
18.4
System Retirement Reporting
After the system retirement plan is executed, a summary (e.g., report, checklist, etc.) should be created to describe
the execution and the results. If testing or verification activities were executed, the results of these tests should be
summarized, and any deviations discussed along with their resolution. This summary also may include an index or
registry of all documentation related to the retired system and where it is archived.

