--- PAGE 237 ---
Page 235
Appendix D6
Appendix D6
26	Appendix D6 – System Descriptions
26.1
Introduction
This appendix provides guidance on the contents of System Descriptions.
EU GMP Annex 11 [32], requires that there is an up-to-date description of critical GxP regulated computerized systems:
“For critical systems an up to date system description detailing the physical and logical arrangements, data
flows and interfaces with other systems or processes, any hardware and software pre-requisites, and security
measures should be available.”
The need for a system description may be covered by one or more existing specifications or other documents, or a
separate document may be produced.
The principal use of such a document is to help new users and regulators understand what the system does, and as
such is written in non-technical language as far as possible.
26.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
This section has been updated to reflect current ISPE guidance document format.
26.2	 Scope
This appendix covers information that may be required for a wide range of GxP computerized systems. Not all the
information will be required or relevant for all systems. The level and detail of information should be based on system
risk, complexity, and novelty.
26.3	 Guidance
26.3.1	 General Guidelines
The system description should be maintained up-to-date throughout the life cycle of the system.
For complex systems spanning multiple departments or sites (e.g., Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)), a separate
document may be appropriate. For simpler systems it is common practice to include the system description in another
specification or other document.
The development of the system description may begin early in the life cycle and evolve iteratively as the development
process progresses. A complete system description meeting regulatory expectations should be established before the
system is released for operational use.
The system description should be subject to change control and periodic review.
26.3.2	 Contents of the Document
Listed below are topics that may be required in the system description depending on the nature and type of system.
The guidance provided is intended to be neither prescriptive nor exhaustive.
The system description should cover only the main features of the system. Detailed information on specific topics
should be included in other specifications and not repeated.

--- PAGE 238 ---
Page 236
Appendix D6
26.3.2.1	 Introduction
This should explain the context of the system within the business process and regulated company in general. This
should be considered from the following perspectives as appropriate:
•
Departmental
•
Site-wide
•
Division-wide
•
Global
26.3.2.2	 Main System Functionality
This is a description of the key functions of the system, both GxP and non-GxP (many of which could be business
critical). The functions may be grouped to maintain the description at a high level. The use of diagrams is encouraged
to explain relationships between key functions.
26.3.2.3	 Regulatory Impact
This should include a description of the key GxP functions of the system. The impact that the system has upon
patient safety, product quality, and data integrity should be considered.
Other regulatory requirements should also be covered as appropriate.
26.3.2.4	 The Computing Environment
This may be covered by a high-level diagram of the architecture supporting the system covering, as appropriate:
•
The infrastructure that supports the system (e.g., server configurations, storage arrangements)
•
Interfaces to users
•
Interfaces to equipment
•
Interfaces to other systems
•
Interfaces outside the company
•
The flow of data through the interface
•
Security features such as firewalls
26.3.2.5	 System Components
An indication of the main hardware and software components should be provided. This may include information
regarding servers and storage devices, as well as the operating systems, databases, and application layers. It should
make reference to any configuration documentation relevant to the system. A detailed inventory of all components is
not required here.
26.3.2.6	 System Interfaces
This is an overview of the key interfaces to other systems and equipment, and the data flowing to or from the system.

--- PAGE 239 ---
Page 237
Appendix D6
26.3.2.7	 Access Control
This is an overview of the access control features of the system, both physical (if relevant) and logical.
26.3.2.8	 Security Controls
This is an overview of the established system security controls both physical and logical. These should include
software for the protection of data and records, e.g., virus protection software.
26.3.2.9	 Electronic Records and Signatures
An indication of the types of electronic records created and managed by the system, and the type of electronic
signatures used, should be provided, if relevant.
26.3.2.10	Glossary
Definitions of any terms that may be unfamiliar to the readership of the document should be provided.

--- PAGE 241 ---
Page 239
Appendix D7
Appendix D7
27	Appendix D7 – Data Migration
27.1
Introduction
This appendix provides guidance for the migration of electronic data in the regulated environment. This covers
planning, execution, and reporting of the activity.
Migration activities should be focused on aspects critical to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity and their
extent should be commensurate with risk, complexity, and novelty.
27.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
Minor changes have been made to clarify some basic concepts and principles.
27.2
Scope
This appendix can be used by, or on behalf of, regulated companies to define quality and compliance-related
procedures and standards for planning, executing, and verifying data migration activities.
This appendix does not cover routine transfer of data from one system to another as part of an ongoing business
process. Such situations should be covered by normal specification and verification activities.
27.3
Guidance
27.3.1	 General Guidelines
Data migration is the activity of transporting electronic data and associated metadata from one system to another, or
simply the transition of data from one state to another. Data migration is an activity that can occur often during and/
or at the end of the life cycle of the various computerized systems used by regulated companies. In practice, data
migration efforts can vary greatly in scope, complexity, and risk, example:
•
An in-place version upgrade of a database or application
•
Data conversion (e.g., from one supplier’s database to another)
•
Same system – different platform migration (e.g., transporting an application’s data from one server platform to
another server platform, such as from an on-premise platform to a cloud service-provider platform)
•
Migration from one source system to a different target system
•
Migration from multiple source systems to a single target system
The complexity and risk of the data migration effort also may increase significantly if rules are used to select a subset
of data from the source system, or if data is transformed (e.g., data type conversion, filtering, cleansing, aggregation,
renormalization) prior to being inserted into the target system. The ultimate goal of any data migration is to have data
that remains usable and retains its contextual meaning. Quality management controls should be in place to ensure
that data migration efforts are successful, compliant, and repeatable.
Each data migration should be managed within the framework of a data migration plan and report, or through
following an established data migration procedure.

--- PAGE 242 ---
Page 240
Appendix D7
27.3.2	 Quality Management
27.3.2.1	 System Life Cycle
Data migration may take place multiple times during the life cycle of a single computerized system, such as during:
•
Initial system development and deployment
•
Application upgrades
•
System retirement
Despite this, organizations that have defined a system life cycle may not have a defined or documented data
migration process. As with other life cycle phases and activities, data migration efforts will be more consistent
and successful if the life cycle provides guidance for the requirements and expectation of data migration including
roles and responsibilities, documentation requirements, quality and compliance controls, technical and verification
activities, and project management and oversight. A data migration SOP may be the best method for describing and
documenting the process expectations, including quality and compliance requirements. Just like every other life cycle
activity, it must utilize a risk-based approach to ensure the effort is appropriately rightsized.
27.3.2.2	 Risk Management
The life cycle should include an established risk management process with guidance for assessing risks that are
specific to activities related to computerized systems. In addition to risks typically found with technology projects, the
following should be evaluated when migrating regulated data:
•
The inherent quality and compliance risk associated with the data being migrated, including but not limited to:
-
Impact upon patient safety, product quality, and data integrity
-
Risk associated with the business processes that the computerized systems involved are supporting
-
Risk associated with incomplete source data
•
Risk to the business due to systems being unavailable or data being unreliable
•
The level of complexity (e.g., multiple source or target systems; multiple phases; a high degree of data
transformation)
•
Technology risk due to the use of complex or leading-edge systems or tools
•
Risks associated with the use of system vendors and third-party contractors to support and execute the migration
27.3.2.3	 Configuration Management and Change Control
Migration of electronic data in the regulated environment should be performed under change control. Similarly, all
appropriate data migration project documents and tools should be controlled using configuration management and
good documentation practices, including ALCOA+ principles.
During a data migration project, system changes unrelated to the migration should be prohibited. This is because
the success of a data migration effort depends on various characteristics of the systems (e.g., software versions,
database schemas) remaining unchanged during the project. Unrelated system changes can increase the complexity
of the data migration effort, which will in turn increase the overall project risk.

--- PAGE 243 ---
Page 241
Appendix D7
The change management process, as well as the migration plan, should also ensure that adequate communications
occur with the impacted business areas and users of the system. These communication activities should be defined
and include information about the timeline, scope, entry criteria, and completion criteria of the migration. It should
include activities that need to be completed prior to the start of the actual migration process to ensure the reliability
and accuracy of the source data, such as in-process and incomplete data cleanup prior to the migration, unavailability
of the system, and activities required post-migration to confirm and/or monitor success. Proper communication with
the impacted business areas and users prior to, during, and post-migration can have a significant impact on the
perceived and actual overall success of the migration and should not be overlooked.
Typical good practice is to use one or more intermediate staging areas for data that has been extracted from
source systems, prior to being loaded into the target system. A typical migration effort will include at least three
system platforms or areas that should remain under configuration management during the entire project: the source
system(s), the staging area, and the target system. It is also good practice to establish a rollback strategy in the
event of a significant failure of the migration activities. This should include a full source-system backup prior to any
migration activities so that the source-system data can be recovered if necessary.
27.3.3	 Areas of Concern
27.3.3.1	 Fitness of Software Tools for Intended Use
Data migration efforts typically involve the use of software tools to automate some or all of the extraction,
transformation, loading, and verification activities. These tools tend to be GAMP software Category 1 infrastructure
tools (e.g., database migrators, and verifiers purchased from a software supplier) or Category 5 custom application
(e.g., SQL scripts, in-house developed programs).
The infrastructure tools and custom applications should be fit for intended use. The rigor of related specification
and verification activities should be commensurate with associated risks. Depending upon the scope, complexity,
and customization of the software tools being used, required deliverables may range from evidence of basic testing
to full software specifications and formal verification. An SME should ensure that appropriate life cycle activities
and deliverables are identified and executed. The quality unit should review and approve key documentation in
accordance with company procedures.
For software tools that move or transform data, there are three principal areas of risk:
•
Data will be moved or transformed incorrectly or incompletely (incorrect data format, accuracy and/or
completeness of the information, loss of information, orphan records, etc.),
•
Data residing in the target system will be harmed (deletion and/or overwriting of data, breaking and/or
modification of data links, loss of metadata, etc.)
•
In the case where not all data is being migrated, residual data in the source system is adversely affected by the
removal of the migrated data
In theory, these risks would require that a high level of effort be applied to demonstrate the fitness for intended use
of software migration tools. In practice, however, through the use of data verification the risks can be significantly
mitigated and therefore the rigor of software migration tool verification can be reduced. It should be noted that the
development and approval of a data mapping table (i.e., fields from the source-system data model mapped to the
target-system data model) is still necessary when using software migration tools.
27.3.3.2	 Data Verification
Data should be verified each time it is moved (either within a system platform or from one system to another) or its
state is transformed. There are two general types of post-migration data verification: test environment verification and
operational environment verification.

--- PAGE 244 ---
Page 242
Appendix D7
In test environment verification a target test system is initially populated with data, then a migration test run is
performed, and finally data in the target test system is verified to show that all required data migrated successfully
and without adversely impacting existing data. This verification provides objective evidence that the data migration
software tools are fit for intended use, and also provides a level of confidence in the overall migration process. A
typical approach during this step is to work with a relatively small amount of data, which can then be completely
verified to ensure that no data errors occurred. The results of this verification should be appropriately documented to
provide evidence of the success of the process and retained as part of the migration process.
The intent of operational environment verification is the same: to verify the outcome of the migration process on both
migrated and existing data. The amount of data involved, however, is typically very large and, therefore, more difficult
to verify. Automated software tools can be used to verify 100% of data in the target environment. The suitability of
such software tools should be rigorously determined through appropriate testing and clearly defined verification
processes with the outcomes clearly documented and maintained as part of the migration activities.
Data mapping and transformation are not the only issues to be addressed. An important part of data migration is
confirming that all of the required data has been migrated. Verification techniques, such as checksum and checksum
in two dimensions, can be used to corroborate complete data transmission and to locate failed records.
Objective evidence of data verification should be generated. Verification scripts and data sheets, screen shots, error
logs, and hardcopy reports should be created when appropriate and feasible.
27.3.3.3	 Reliability of Source Data
The reliability of the source-system data must be considered as part of the migration process. If the source system
is used and maintained in compliance with regulatory requirements with appropriate source system’s controls, the
reliability of the source data prior to migration should exist. Through the use of a well-defined and well-controlled
data migration process, sufficient assurance of the accuracy and integrity of the migrated data (i.e., reliability of
the migrated data) can be obtained. (If the process for extraction of the source data from the source system to
the staging area is not performed using standard controlled and validated processes from the source system,
additional verification activities should be defined as part of the migration plan to ensure the reliability and accuracy
of the source data.) To document this, the data migration plan should reference the appropriate source-system
documentation.
If the reliability of the source system and data are unknown then two problems exist: first, the veracity of data
migrated from the source system may not be verifiable; second, the migrated data will mix with reliable data
already in the controlled target system. After the migration effort is complete, the trustworthy existing data and the
questionable migrated data will be indistinguishable unless steps are taken to identify the migrated data as such
(e.g., differences in record dates and notations in user-defined fields). If this is not possible, then the possible data
inconsistencies should be documented, explaining the controls in place on the source system and justification of why
the migrated data should be trusted.
27.3.3.4	 Usability of Migrated Data in Target System
There are four main issues to consider relating to usability of migrated data on a target system:
•
Target-system functionality does not allow performance of tasks previously carried out in the source system
•
Lack of completeness of migrated data affects the usability of the data
•
It may not be sufficient to migrate the data. Separate migration of metadata or configuration of the target system
also may be required. For example, the source data has some access rights defined for it, such as user groups
and user rights. Migrating the data may not normally migrate this metadata, which is normally separate from the
data. However, these user groups and rights also may be required on the target system.

--- PAGE 245 ---
Page 243
Appendix D7
•
Need for multiple migrations through various versions of a system to ensure full compatibility in the final target
system (version). Consultation with the vendor(s) should occur to understand the changes associated with the
sequential versions of system to appropriately understand and define the required migration plan to ensure final
usability of the data in the target system.
27.3.3.5	 Audit Trails
Audit trails can be problematic for data migration efforts. If the target system has an audit trail but the source system
does not, documentation should be created reflecting that auditing for migrated records began when they were
loaded onto the target system. If possible, these records should be distinguishable from records that were created on
the target system (e.g., using a notation in a user-defined field).
If both the source and target systems have audit trails and it is technically feasible, the audit trail should be migrated
along with the audited data. If it is technically unfeasible to migrate the audit trail (e.g., due to data transformation) or
if it would constitute too great a risk to do so, then the original audit trail should be archived in a format that can be
retrieved and used for support or investigational purposes.
When possible, a computer-generated audit trail should be created during the movement and transformation activities
associated with the data migration effort, because this audit trail serves not only as a verification tool for the migration
team but also as a historical record of changes to the data. If there are instances where the audit trail must be turned
off during the migration effort (i.e., negatively impacts the reliability, accuracy, or integrity of the migrated data), the
rationale for this decision should be appropriately documented and maintained as part of the migration process
documentation. In these cases, the audit trail should be archived in a format that can be retrieved and used for
support or investigational purposes.
27.3.3.6	 Use of System Vendors and Third-Party Contractors
The use of system vendors and third-party contractors to perform data migrations is becoming more prevalent in the
regulated environment due to the complexity and proprietary data base structures and data integrity controls. System
vendors and third-party vendors should be assessed/ audited to ensure they are capable of performing the work and
that tools utilized are validated for their intended use. Master Service Agreements (MSAs), SLAs, Statements Of
Work (SOW), and/or quality agreements should be established to clearly define the project requirements, as well as
the oversight and roles and responsibilities associated with the use of the vendors, including whose procedures will
be utilized, the tools utilized for the project and accountability of validation of those tools, the training requirements,
etc. All of this information should be maintained as part of the migration process documentation.
27.3.4	 Data Migration Plan
Different data migration efforts can require very different activities and deliverables. This appendix is not intended
to provide specific project or technical methodology guidance. However, every data migration project should have
a data migration plan as a required deliverable. Similar to plans for computerized system development projects, the
data migration plan serves as a high-level roadmap that guides project team members in performing a compliant and
successful technical effort.
The data migration plan should describe the entire migration process, including as a minimum:
•
Migration project purpose and scope, including if the migration will be completed in waves or sub-projects due to
the overall size and complexity of the project
•
System description(s)
•
Roles and responsibilities, including the impacted business areas, migration team, vendors, etc.
•
Required deliverables, including who is responsible for creating, managing, and approving them

--- PAGE 246 ---
Page 244
Appendix D7
•
Risk-management strategy, including any risks associated with the use of vendors and third parties
•
Configuration management strategy, including the source, staging, and target environments
•
Software tool overview and strategy for ensuring compliance and fitness for intended use
•
Migration steps, technical activities, and impacted business area activities
•
Data mapping and modeling activities
•
Transformation rules
•
Data verification strategy and acceptance standards
•
Cutover plan, paying special attention to impacted business area activities, especially pre- and post-migration
that ensure the success of the migration project. The cutover plan should also include communication activities
to ensure impacted areas are aware of timeline, scope, entry criteria, completion criteria, and unavailability of the
system.
•
Rollback strategy
The data migration plan should be approved by the process owner, system owner, quality unit, and SMEs as
appropriate.
It may be appropriate to reuse the same data migration plan more than once. An example of such reuse is the
deployment of an EDMS: the approved data migration plan can be used multiple times as different functional groups
or geographic sites migrate their electronic documents into the system. Each time the plan is executed, a data
migration report should be created. If the migration process is something that will be routinely executed, such as part
of software and configuration updates, consideration should be given to the use of a procedure as the migration plan
to ensure an efficient and consistent outcome.
27.3.5	 Data Migration Report
The data migration report summarizes the activities that were conducted during the data migration effort. It describes
any anomalies or deviations that were encountered and lists the results of verification activities (including objective
evidence as appropriate). Because the report will be used to establish the reliability of the migrated data, it should
clearly state the overall outcome of the migration activity (e.g., full success, partial success, failure).
If the migration is being performed in waves or sub-projects, the need for wave or sub-project migration reports
should be considered, especially if the migrated data will be utilized in production prior to the completion of the entire
migration project. A final migration report at the conclusion of the entire migration project should also be considered to
completely close out the migration project.
The data migration report should be approved by the same individuals who approved the migration plan (e.g.,
process owner, system owner, quality unit, and SMEs as appropriate).
In the case where data migration is being performed as part of a computerized system project, such as a system
replacement or upgrade, the data migration report can be documented as appropriate within the project, and may not
need to be a separate document.

--- PAGE 247 ---
Page 245
Appendix D8
Appendix D8
28	Appendix D8 – Agile Software
Development
28.1
Introduction
Agile software development practices are widely adopted by many industries, including medical devices. Agile
approaches focus on delivering quality and value to the customer at speed, and in an incremental fashion, enabling
technical innovation and flexibility.
FDA’s Technology Modernization Action Plan (TMAP) [69] identified Agile software development and DevOps as
foundational requirements for a modern FDA technology infrastructure. Such approaches are very well suited to
the development of GxP regulated systems if correctly applied by trained and qualified practitioners supported by
appropriate tools.
This appendix provides a summary of the principles underpinning Agile and illustrates how it can be implemented in
a way that is aligned with GAMP 5 and GxP principles. The focus is on how to use well-implemented standard Agile
processes to deliver software for GxP applications and does not advocate in some way modifying Agile for GxP, for
example, by superimposing linear (V-model) activities. A more detailed description of how to apply Agile in a GxP
environment is included in the ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT
Service Management [20].
The planning, specification, verification and reporting activities within this Guide are not inherently linear, and
the approach described is designed to be compatible with a wide range of other models, methods, and schemes
including incremental, iterative, and exploratory models and methods. Figure 28.1 demonstrates the approach
described.
Figure 28.1: Iterative and Incremental Approach to Achieving Compliance and Fitness for Intended Use [20]
The key principles behind Agile software development are that of discovery and of iteration (ongoing changes) as
opposed to waterfall software development, where there is a linear flow of defining/collecting all requirements before
transforming these into a complete set of functional and design specifications that are then configured/coded before
testing commences.

--- PAGE 248 ---
Page 246
Appendix D8
With Agile software development, requirements are collected/discovered and then moved into development/
configuration, testing, and release in iterative cycles. This typically requires the ongoing involvement of cross-
functional teams including end users and business process owners.
There are a number of differing frameworks that support Agile, underpinned by the values within the Manifesto
Statements for Agile Software Development [70]:
“Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
Working software over comprehensive documentation
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
Responding to change over following a plan”
These principles need to be taken in the context of emphasis rather than a binary choice. For example, tools are
invariably used, and form an important part of Agile software development, but the manifesto stresses that team
collaboration is more important than simply tools/processes. [20]
28.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
This is a new appendix.
28.2
Scope
Agile software practices can be applied across many types of computerized systems, including custom application
development, and configuration of configurable products in an incremental manner.
Where the regulated company is looking at less clearly defined scope/requirements, especially for customized
developments, Agile is likely to be the preferred approach to commence with a discovery phase to develop the initial
backlog requirements and enable faster initial system deployment and subsequent incremental development.
GAMP 5 discusses the interaction of supplier and regulated company life cycles (see Figure 2.1 in the Main Body).
These may be both Agile or a mixture of Agile and linear approaches.
28.3
Guidance
28.3.1	 Agile Basics
There are many different frameworks for Agile, but to illustrate the general principles the popular Scrum framework
[71] will be used as the reference. The choice of framework can depend on factors such as scale, complexity, and
dependencies, for example, larger programs of work may adopt more formality. Agile is not a reason to accept a lower
level of quality or GxP compliance. The regulated user must ensure that the computerized system is fit for intended
use. Evidence of this may be generated and maintained in tools and supporting systems, rather than in traditional
documentation. Figure 28.2 illustrates the process for Scrum.

--- PAGE 249 ---
Page 247
Appendix D8
Figure 28.2: Scrum Framework Model [71]
Used with permission from Scrum.org, www.scrum.org.
•
A Product Owner is responsible for collecting requirements into a product backlog, typically containing larger sets
of requirements (epics) which are further split into sets of (user) Stories.
•
The Scrum cross-functional team takes a subset of the backlog items and develops/delivers and tests these
during a sprint. This includes backlog refinement activities to ensure the items are sufficiently defined and ready
to be included.
•
A review is conducted of the results of the sprint, called the sprint retrospective, which evaluates the business
value of the completed sprint, and drives continuous improvement in the working methods and process.
•
The cycle then repeats with another subset of the backlog.
Sprints are governed by time and designed to be a short period, 2 to 4 weeks, for example. Backlog items unable to
be completed during the Sprint return to the backlog.
Scrum teams typically are small, multidisciplinary, and are responsible as a whole for delivering to time and quality.
The Scrum product owner provides the customer link (e.g., to the business process owner) and the Scrum master
provides coordination and helps ensure the team adheres to the rules, governance, and processes agreed to by the
team.
Regulated company quality roles typically provide oversight and (in line with the critical thinking and risk-based
approach) subject matter expertise on regulations and potential areas of product quality, patient safety, and regulated
data impact associated with the business process the system will be supporting. Quality should work with the Scrum
product owner, Scrum master, and business process owner to determine how and when they should be engaged.
Ultimate accountability for quality and compliance lies with the regulated company. [20]
In combination with the model in Figure 28.2 are the concepts of a Definition of Ready (DoR), Definition of Done
(DoD), and also perhaps a MVP, to determine the activities to be completed before a requirement (epic/user story)
can be considered complete and to agree/define the minimum set of epics/user stories that need to be completed for
the initial release of the product.
Due to the iterative nature of Agile software development, there is a risk of new functionality impacting previously
developed and tested software, and therefore regression testing, often performed using automated test tools, is
typically applied to ensure stability of the system within sprints.

--- PAGE 250 ---
Page 248
Appendix D8
It may be tempting to try and map artifacts created using Agile methods to the traditional life cycle documents (for
example, mapping user stories/epics to the RS); however, it is more effective to start from established good practice
Agile artifacts and not force-fit the traditional documents. Mapping against the high-level project stages as illustrated
in Figure 28.1 is sufficient, and many activities such as a supplier assessment, user training, and periodic review, are
conducted irrespective of the development method used.
28.3.2	 User Requirements
Many regulated companies expect to see a fully formed URS early in the development life cycle when developing
a GxP regulated system. With Agile, by planning and storing requirements differently and following Agile principles,
teams can successfully deliver effective and useful software in a controlled way that is compliant with GxP
regulations, and where there is a clearly identifiable set of fulfilled requirements at the point the system is released
into the live GxP operational environment.
Ultimately the delivered description of system functionality is provided by the list of completed Agile artifacts, such
as epics and user stories, which can be obtained directly, or as reports, from the Agile software development tools,
including audit trails, version, and history.
28.3.3	 Mindset and Culture
Mindset reflects how culture, values, and priorities manifest themselves throughout the organization. A traditional
mindset is one with fixed standards, workflows, and expectations; a discovery mindset encourages acting, learning,
and rapid continual improvement.
There is a perception that full and accurate sets of requirements can be defined at an early stage and end dates can
be fixed for large linear programs. As a result, final testing phases are often squeezed and reduced because earlier
phases took longer than planned.
For Agile, a shift in culture and behaviors according to the following principles is required [72]:
•
“An agile-first mindset and ways of working, using a Discovery Mindset, rather than a Certainty Mindset
•
A culture of innovation and continuous improvement
•
Empowered teams with the ability to deliver across geographies
•
A consistent and repeatable way of agile delivery
•
Much-improved alignment across all stakeholders”
The discovery mindset is a powerful approach to changing the way teams plan and deliver. This also applies to
business process owners and quality groups. With the traditional approach they are involved at the beginning
(requirements) and end (acceptance testing). Agile is a continuous cycle of involvement and the resourcing and
planning impact of this needs to be taken into account.
28.3.4	 Tools Instead of Documents
Agile is typically used with sets of tools providing control over the product backlog, configuration, testing, and release
activities enabling shorter cycle times, higher quality in delivery, and better user engagement. From a quality and
GxP compliance perspective, tools perform an essential role in demonstrating that the system is fit for intended use,
functionality can be traced back to requirements, and testing completed.

--- PAGE 251 ---
Page 249
Appendix D8
Tools manage a variety of Agile activities such as user-story risk assessments, testing, and traceability, and a
comprehensive toolset can provide an integrated solution to manage them all. With tools in use the need for
documentation and manual sequencing of events in many cases will be eliminated or, at a minimum, be significantly
reduced, for example, by workflows with stage gates to ensure one activity must be completed before the next
step in a process can be started. This also eliminates the risk of transcription errors, versioning errors, content
inconsistencies, or anomalies where parallel electronic and documentation-based systems are in use.
A backlog with continuously changing user stories is extremely difficult to manage on paper, thus, demonstrating
control (a key GxP principle) is equally difficult. A tool can provide an efficient and effective means to manage user
stories in a backlog throughout updates and changes.
Reports may also be generated from tools, providing baseline status at points in time (for example, of user stories),
and used, for instance, during regulatory inspections to provide evidence of status.
Tools provide benefit in measuring, managing, and achieving high-quality results. Tools can provide integrated bug/
defect management and can reduce the chance for human error. Table 28.1 shows a representative listing of tools
in common use with an indication of how they support the development of high-quality software. New and enhanced
tools continue to be developed and used over time.
Table 28.1: Common Agile Tools
Adapted from ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service
Management [20].
Tool
Quality
Backlog Management
Software
Provides real-time status of requirements including traceability (e.g., to testing),
and approval status (for example accepted, done), and includes an audit trail for
changes and reporting functionality.
Testing Management
Provides evidence of test status, using automation and regression test functionality
to provide additional assurance of thorough testing. Can provide functionality to
perform negative and stress testing and reduces the likelihood of test script errors
that occur when tests are developed manually.
Orchestration Software
Provides automated assurance of working and tested code and defined workflow
for the code moving between environments.
Code Repository Software
Reduces the chances of configuration management issues particularly where
multiple developers may be working on the same code, enables traceability from
requirements to code level automatically.
Large Binary File Registry
Enables accurate configuration management and reduces complexity where
multiple repositories are required.
Knowledge Management
Software
A context repository utilizing taxonomy which assists team members in locating
information quickly and accurately.
The tools used as part of Agile are covered within the scope of Appendix D9 and do not require computerized system
validation, but should be subject to risk assessment, assessed for adequacy by appropriate SMEs, used by trained
and qualified individuals, and appropriate controls applied according to the intended use, for example, to ensure that
acceptance test results stored within a tool are trustworthy, complete, and available.

--- PAGE 252 ---
Page 250
Appendix D8
28.3.5	 Approvals and Acceptance
Both the backlog refinement and sprint planning sessions are key governance and approval steps to ensure we build
the right system, with the roles and responsibilities for approvals defined as part of the planning.
There is a misconception that approval means sign, and by extension that there is the need to comply with the life-
sciences regulatory requirements on electronic signatures, for example US FDA 21 CFR Part 11 [73]. This is not
the case and is only applied where the approval is equivalent to a traditional handwritten, legally binding signature
required by a predicate regulation. For software life cycle deliverables, this is only the case for SaMD or software
embedded in a regulated medical device. Approval can also be achieved by many other means such as status
change, email, audit trails, and in many cases evidence of acceptance rather than an approval is sufficient.
Modern tool sets frequently have immutable change logs built into them. These logs record exactly who, did what,
and when against each product backlog item, and can be configured to enforce security rights over exactly who can
do what.
28.3.6	 Software Development and IT Operations (DevOps)
DevOps is an extension of Agile where the development and maintenance activities are combined within a single
team and set of practices so that focus can be placed on important/urgent tasks, silos in the team are avoided, and
team members have a chance to develop through a broader set of activities.
In a DevOps environment, systems will undergo many changes/releases, and this initially seems to be difficult to
reconcile in a GxP regulated environment. This concern can be mitigated with the level of control and oversight of the
process. Also, there is no knowledge loss associated with transition from project to operation support teams, together
with the tools and accountability of the DevOps team for the quality of the product. However, there is still a level of
risk/impact assessment required for higher-risk GxP functions undergoing change.
Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Deployment (CD) (sometimes also referred to as Continuous Delivery)
is an extension of DevOps where there is increased use/reliance on automated software analysis tools; code is
delivered into code repositories and is verified (tested) and integrated using these enhanced tools.
DevOps teams provide CI and CD with faster turnaround times for increments (greater velocity).
DevOps provides for closer integration of the product and the associated toolsets that in turn provide additional
controls such as:
•
No development before an accepted user story
•
Source code review and automated testing as part of the CI process to help avoid the release of bad code
•
Ensuring close alignment and constant engagement with the product owner as feedback on proposals comes
almost instantly
It is important that DevOps teams feel that they have accountability within the team for compliance; if compliance
is perceived as something outside, then the team sticks together and stakeholders outside such as security,
compliance, and auditors are perceived as strangers. [20]

--- PAGE 253 ---
Page 251
Appendix D8
28.4	 Agile Approach to Quality
By following the agreed Agile process and associated ceremonies then a state of control can be demonstrated and
quality built into the product.
When constructing epics and stories and their acceptance criteria, the same considerations for attributes of a good
traditional linear set of requirements should be considered in terms of data, interfaces, environment, performance,
availability, regulatory, maintenance, data migration, and security. Epics/user stories can be assessed against a set
of DoR criteria before being accepted into a sprint backlog. For example, with Agile there are techniques that can be
adopted to help check for good attributes of stories such as “INVEST” [74] where:
•
I – Independent
•
N – Negotiable
•
V – Valuable
•
E – Estimable
•
S – Small
•
T – Testable
A typical GxP regulated system has functional requirements that have GxP impact along with nonfunctional
requirements, for example security, that need to be in place to support GxP regulations including data integrity. The
regulated company should identify these based on the intended use and ensure that these are included within the
MVP for the initial release of the system into productive use.
Where a third-party supplier develops a solution using Agile, take into consideration that the supplier may have
business process and GxP expertise; therefore, the regulated company should work with the supplier if the areas with
GxP impact have already been identified and leverage this.
Acceptance criteria are vital to help the product owner and team have a better understanding of the epics and user
stories and should be captured within the epic and user story. To avoid duplicating the content of the actual tests, they
should be kept at a high-level and succinct.
Demonstrating that a system functions according to its intended use is a basic GxP requirement, and largely
demonstrated with linear models through layers of testing activities ultimately leading to a set of user acceptance
tests. For Agile, testing is always performed within the sprint. There must be a “potentially shippable product at the
end of each sprint;” an untested product is not shippable.
Agile testing uses a combination of exploratory testing and test automation with regression testing to verify that sprint
developments do not impact correct functioning of software developed in previous sprints. Other test practices include
solution walk-throughs or demonstrations where the potential solution is demonstrated to business users early. Any
final acceptance testing should be minimized, and test activities and records are managed and stored within tools.
Agile is by its essence about tightly controlled management of change, and may seem to present a challenge in the
context of GxP and maintaining a state of control. However, this is where Agile, when operated correctly, shows its
strength; to deliver working software Agile processes need to be robust, well managed, and sprints under control
with team accountability and with tools to provide additional control/oversight. Adherence to the defined Agile
process (for example, Scrum ceremonies such as sprint planning, daily (Scrum) meetings, sprint reviews, and
sprint retrospectives) drives quality, ensures timelines can be adjusted quickly, and provides a focus on learning by
addressing issues as they appear. [20]

--- PAGE 255 ---
Page 253
Appendix D9
Appendix D9
29	Appendix D9 – Software Tools
29.1
Introduction
This appendix describes the recommended risk-based approach and considerations when using tools supporting
computerized systems life cycle processes, IT processes, and IT infrastructure processes. Such tools do not directly
support GxP regulated business processes or GxP records and data directly supporting the regulated product life
cycle.
The tools described in this appendix are GAMP software Category 1. Classification as GAMP software Category 3 – 5
applies only to business applications (either GxP or non-GxP). Tools, like systems supporting IT processes, and
infrastructure are all GAMP software Category 1. Such tools should be managed through the application of good IT
practices, within a defined IT management framework, such as that defined by ITIL [54].
As part of their technology and data modernization activities [75], US FDA have described their adoption of industry
standards and good practices including ITIL [54] processes across all operating areas. They noted that increased
automation, sharing, reuse, and consistent, repeatable processes are significantly improving the agility and cost
effectiveness of IT activities.
The term software tool or simply tool in the context of information technology can be very broadly used, and this
appendix seeks to identify tools and distinguish these from use cases where the software is actually a component of
a computerized system supporting a GxP regulated process.
GAMP guidance and the FDA CDRH Case for Quality program [9] strongly encourage the use of software life cycle
management tools and automation, which can bring great quality benefits, and have low GxP risk.
Such tools and systems supporting system life cycles, IT processes and infrastructure should not be subject to
specific validation, but rather managed by routine company assessment and assurance practices and good IT
practices. Compliance and regulatory resources should not be focused on audit and review of activities related to
systems with little or no direct impact to patient safety or product quality.
EU GMP Annex 11 [32] requires that automated testing tools and test environments should have documented
assessments for their adequacy. These should be supported by the application of appropriate controls following good
IT practices.
29.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
This is a new appendix.
29.2	 Scope
This appendix applies to software tools used as part of software development, support, and maintenance activities.
This appendix does not apply to software components/applications that are part of a GxP regulated business process,
or can directly impact GxP data/records directly supporting the product life cycle; in this case risk-based computerized
system validation is required to demonstrate adequate controls are in place. For example, software used to migrate
or convert GxP records would require computerized system validation, however a tool used to mask or obfuscate
data to be used as system test data would not.

--- PAGE 256 ---
Page 254
Appendix D9
Test tools are another commonly used toolset; they perform an important role by helping to assure thorough testing,
often automated and including regression and boundary/stress test features. Such tools also often store the associated
test results but even though these records may support the computerized system life cycle, the test tools themselves
do not require validation. The records they maintain should be preserved and protected, and the tools need to work
reliably, but this can be achieved through a basic risk assessment and application of normal IT practices.
System tools used for monitoring/performance management of systems or tools associated with IT security, do
not require computerized system validation, but a risk assessment approach and basic IT good software support
practices such as defined by ITIL [54], including having an inventory of the tools and where they are deployed.
29.3	 Guidance
29.3.1	 Selection of Tools
Some basic assessments should be performed as part of tool selection, this does not need to be onerous, but the
effort may vary depending on the intended use and risk.
The key criteria are whether the tool is the appropriate tool to support the life cycle process we are trying to automate/
support: does it meet the need of the SMEs who are going to use the tool and do the work, and is it fit for purpose?
Note that it is not envisaged that any tool would need to have anything other than a desktop assessment, unless the
use was considered business critical.
Where tools are to be shared by a supplier and the regulated company then consideration is required around access
to data/records over the operational lifetime of the system, and any handover of the tools and data once the project
phase has completed.
29.3.2	 Risk Assessment
Some of the factors to consider as part of risk assessment are:
•
Is the tool an industry standard one in common use?
•
What data/records are generated/stored by the tool, and does the tool have adequate controls to maintain data
integrity?
•
What is the required operational lifetime of the tool, and how will this be supported?
•
Is the tool open source, are the download locations verified to avoid cybersecurity issues?
•
Will the tool require any level of workflow/configuration, including any key activities that need to be manually
performed?
•
For automated tools, for example, when considering performance monitoring, how are any alerts monitored and
acted upon?
•
If the tool fails, could it impact an operational computerized system or infrastructure operation?
•
Could the tool have any potential negative impact on system or network performance?
•
Could the tool introduce any cybersecurity risks, e.g., facilitate the introduction of malware?

--- PAGE 257 ---
Page 255
Appendix D9
29.3.3	 Inventory/Deployment
As part of good practice, it is sensible to have some form of inventory, for example, within a Configuration
Management Database (CMDB), of what tools are used by the organization, where they are deployed, and the nature
of any data/records potentially supporting GxP (e.g., test records) and required retention period. Identifying a single
point of contact/owner for the tools is also recommended.
29.3.4	 Installation and Configuration
Tools, even when off-the-shelf, often will require some degree of configuration or parameterization in order to
correctly install and establish any workflows and associated aspects such as (project) naming conventions or access
levels, etc. These are basic good software engineering practices that need to be applied along with version and
appropriate change control.
29.3.5	 Life Cycle Management
Tools, as with all software, typically have a defined lifetime, upgrades, and eventually are retired and/or
decommissioned.
One person or role should be designated to be the owner of the tool to provide the required level of oversight; the
oversight effort will depend on the level of criticality, scope of use of the tool, and complexity of the tool.
In general tools, that have the ability to impact system or network performance and hence impact users require more
oversight than those used as part of software development activities.
It is best practice to ensure tools in use are at versions supported by the supplier.
29.3.6	 Security Considerations
Cybersecurity considerations should be included for tools. Tools that are deployed across the network for example,
for performance monitoring, may require more detailed security analysis as the consequences could be severe if a
vulnerability were to be exploited.
Security considerations should be included as part of the initial risk assessment for the tool and also as part of the life
cycle management for example, ensuring tools are maintained as patched and up-to-date/supported releases and
also only downloaded from authorized sources. Access privileges for tools should be set as low as possible to allow
the tool to perform the task.
29.3.7	 Data and Records
Where tools are storing information/records that support the validated status of the system, for example contain
system requirements, design, code or test results, then controls for maintaining the integrity, and in particular the
security and availability, should be determined and applied. Note also that increasingly tools, and the records/data
within them may be cloud based and therefore assuring data integrity and access throughout the retention period
should take account of this.
Note that the full set of data integrity controls that would be applied to primary GxP records are not required as these
tools, by definition, do not maintain GxP regulated records; most tools do support technical and transactional logging
supporting integrity and investigations so for example, audit trail event analysis may be useful in the event of fault
finding.

--- PAGE 258 ---
Page 256
Appendix D9
29.3.8	 Approvals
For tools within the scope of this appendix (i.e., not directly supporting a GxP regulated business process or
maintaining required GxP records) any approvals or acceptances of transactions or results associated with the
tool are not subject to regulatory predicate rules and therefore are not subject to regulated electronic signature
requirements.
Where an approval or acceptance is required, there needs to be traceability to the person approving or accepting,
and also approval roles need to be defined. Many tools will have this traceability and functionality built in as standard.
29.3.9	 Tools over Documentation
There may be a temptation, particularly where tools store test execution records for example, to export information
into controlled GxP documentation when there is no quality benefit in doing so. This approach is not recommended, it
is inefficient and there is the risk that documentation becomes out of step with the information/records within the tools.
Tools should have sufficient controls to preserve the data/records (see Section 29.3.6).
Where tools have reporting functionality, this can be useful for producing brief summary reports to provide baseline
status, for example, a summary report of tests executed, passed and failed would be included in a validation or test
report for the system being tested by the tool.
There is the potential for regulatory inspections of computerized systems to request access to information in tools,
for example, system requirements test results. Process owners need to be aware of what information relating to their
computerized system life cycle activities is managed within tools, and regulated companies and IT departments need
to be prepared to show the information if requested. There may be value in determining in advance how this can be
readily achieved, for example it may be possible to pre-configure reports to extract test results relating to areas of
GxP functionality.
Tools and systems supporting life cycles, IT processes, and infrastructure (rather than directly supporting product
life cycle processes) are not themselves GxP regulated systems and should not be subject to specific validation but
managed by routine company assessment and assurance practices and good IT practices. The activities performed
and the records maintained for these supporting tools should not be viewed as requiring the same rigor with respect
to controls as systems that directly support GxP product life cycle activities. [76]

--- PAGE 259 ---
Page 257
Appendix D10
Appendix D10
30	Appendix D10 – Distributed Ledger
Systems (Blockchain)
30.1
Introduction
Distributed computing using a decentralized infrastructure is rapidly advancing, specifically blockchain and other
distributed- ledger technologies that leverage a combination of cryptography, consensus, smart contracts, and
replication to capture and secure data from multiple participants within the network.
Blockchain technology has many use cases that help to establish trust and transparency among parties and eliminate
silos by providing an end-to-end solution such as track and trace within the supply chain.
As more members of the healthcare technology environment choose to participate in the network it may span entire
supply chains from starting material manufacturers to pharmacies. The network effects of this technology may put
pressure on pharmaceutical manufacturers to participate for both regulatory and business purposes. Even if the
regulated company chooses not to participate, it is very likely that one of their suppliers or customers will.
Given the unique and emerging nature of this technology, this guidance is intended to provide considerations for
organizations to apply when relying on blockchains to support GxP processes. This guidance is not intended to define
the technology or discuss the appropriateness of the technology to meet business needs.
30.1.1	 GAMP 5 Context and Application
GAMP 5 sets out a risk-based approach that allows an organization to conclude that a computerized system is
compliant and fit for intended use. If the entire blockchain is treated as one system, it may be difficult to identify the
intended use; most blockchains by nature are designed to support many use cases. Therefore, applying critical
thinking and modern development methodologies, e.g., Agile, are essential to maintain control over the qualified state
of the blockchain network.
Based on the intended use, risk to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity, as well as the degree of novelty,
complexity, and configuration or customization, a framework and regulated data life cycle model can be developed
that encompasses traceability and considerations of use.
It is important to understand the intended use of the application and its components that leverage unique features of
blockchains so that a risk-based approach can be applied. For example, if a blockchain is considered to be a network
layer that also has some functions of a database and an operating system, it falls into the classic categorization of
infrastructure, which tends to carry a lower risk and shares many attributes with a virtual-computing environment.
Some blockchains have the ability to leverage smart contracts, which operate like small computer programs on the
network; these could be considered customized software (if built for a specific purpose) or configured software (if built
from a recognized standard). When smart contracts begin interacting with other smart contracts, blockchains become
capable of complex business logic. As this can be scenario dependent, it is important to consider the business
process, how the data flows, and the criticality of the decisions made using the information derived from a blockchain
network.
Most blockchains are not intended to be large data stores, but the data contained wherein or the log of transactions
captured may be critical to the organization’s application. In these cases, the concepts laid out in the ISPE GAMP
Guide: Records and Data Integrity [35] apply, particularly the concepts of data retention and retrieval, as blockchains
are designed to be permanent records and highly available.

--- PAGE 260 ---
Page 258
Appendix D10
30.1.2	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
This is a new appendix.
30.2	 Scope
30.2.1	 Objectives
This guidance is written from the perspective of an IT quality professional whose primary concern is ensuring that the
usage of computerized systems does not introduce new risks to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity. It is
assumed that the regulated company has already determined blockchain to be an appropriate solution and selected a
use case and a blockchain protocol to work with.
This guidance is not intended to influence the design of blockchain networks or applications, but to educate the GxP
practitioner in the things to consider when relying on these systems. At the time of production, blockchain technology
is evolving and not widely implemented in regulated life science environments. Whereas most GAMP guidance stems
from lessons learned, pragmatic experience, and response to regulatory findings, these blockchain considerations
are based on proactive insights gained from early proof of concepts and challenges faced in other industries.
As blockchain involves interactions among multiple parties such as regulated companies and suppliers working
together on the development of the system, an Agile methodology and critical thinking can be applied to support an
iterative and exploratory approach for planning, testing, and continual maintenance.
This appendix focuses on large-scale public blockchain implementations that are sufficiently decentralized (for
example, not controlled by a small group of entities) and potentially used for multiple use cases, both GxP and
non-GxP. Small-scale private blockchains can be configured in many ways, but they will either be a subset of public
blockchains or more akin to a shared proprietary system or a shared computing environment, which is covered in
existing GAMP guidance documents (for example, cloud computing).
Addressing public blockchains also addresses the open-source nature of their development and governance,
considerations around the balance of privacy and transparency, the distribution of external stakeholders responsible
for managing the network, the incentives for participants to behave as “good actors,” and ancillary systems that are
necessarily a part of the blockchain ecosystem. These include existing systems that may or may not be regulated, the
interfaces to those systems (often referenced as Application Programming Interfaces (APIs)), traditional databases
and/or distributed storage, and Layer 2 solutions that run on top of a primary (Layer 1) blockchain.
A Layer 1 network refers to blockchain, while a Layer 2 protocol is a third-party integration, secondary framework, or
protocol that can be used in conjunction with a Layer 1 blockchain.
30.2.2	 Governance of Large-Scale Decentralized Networks
With public networks there is often the need for Layer 2 solutions that provide for more efficient transactions, privacy,
and other use-case-specific requirements. A Layer 2 solution can also be an open public network, in which case it is
similar to relying on a Layer 1 public blockchain. Or the Layer 2 solution can be private/permissioned networks, which
can be treated as shared computing environments with proper change controls and governance, similar to the way an
organization would rely upon a cloud-computing provider, but with the added benefit of security and decentralization
provided by the underlying Layer 1 solution.

