--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 9
1
Introduction
GAMP guidance aims to safeguard patient safety, product quality, and data integrity in the use of GxP computerized
systems. It aims to achieve computerized systems that are fit for intended use and meet current regulatory
requirements by building upon existing industry good practice in an efficient and effective manner.
GAMP provides practical guidance that:
•
Facilitates the interpretation of regulatory requirements
•
Establishes a common language and terminology
•
Promotes a system life cycle approach based on good practice
•
Clarifies roles and responsibilities
It is not a prescriptive method or a standard, but rather provides pragmatic guidance, approaches, and tools for the
practitioner.
When applied with expertise and good judgment, this Guide offers a robust, cost-effective approach.
The approach described in this document is designed to be compatible with a wide range of other models, methods,
and schemes including:
•
Quality systems standards and certification schemes, such as the ISO 9000 Series [1]
•
ISO 14971 [2]: Medical devices – Application of risk management to medical devices
•
Schemes for assessing and improving organization capability and maturity, such as Capability Maturity Model
Integration® (CMMI) [3]
•
Software process models such as ISO 12207 [4]
•
Iterative, and incremental (Agile) software development methods and models
•
Approaches to IT service management, such as ITIL [5]
Where possible, terminology is harmonized with standard international sources such as ICH [6] and ISO [7].
This Guide aims to be fully compatible with the approach described in the ASTM E2500 Standard Guide for
Specification, Design, and Verification of Pharmaceutical and Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing Systems and
Equipment [8].
GAMP is an ISPE Community of Practice. For further information see www.ispe.org.
1.1
Rationale for GAMP 5 Second Edition
This Second Edition Guide aims to protect patient safety, product quality, and data integrity by facilitating and
encouraging the achievement of computerized systems that are effective, reliable, and of high quality.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 10
While the overall approach, framework, and key concepts remain unchanged, technical content of the Guide has
been updated to reflect the increased importance of IT service providers including cloud service providers, evolving
approaches to software development including incremental and iterative models and methods, and increased use of
software tools and automation to achieve greater control, higher quality, and lower risks throughout the life cycle.
Associated with this is the reinforcement of the message that the GAMP specification and verification approach is not
inherently linear but also fully supports iterative and incremental (Agile) methods.
Guidance on the application of new and developing technological areas such as Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning (AI/ML), blockchain, cloud computing, and Open-Source Software (OSS) has been included or updated.
The importance of critical thinking and the application of patient-centric, risk-based approaches (aimed at quality
and safety) versus primarily compliance-driven approaches is further underlined. Concepts of computerized systems
assurance as discussed as part of the US FDA Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) Case for Quality
program [9] are also explored and applied.
Links and references to GAMP guidance on the topic area of record and data integrity have been added.
The following ISPE initiatives and topic areas are supported and links and synergies with them have been
considered:
Knowledge Management – focusing on how organizations create, manage, and use knowledge throughout the life
cycle of a product, enabling organizations to better manage their knowledge as a key asset, in turn improving the
effectiveness of the pharmaceutical quality system, and providing operational benefits. [10]
APQ (Advancing Pharmaceutical Quality) – building industry-for-industry tools and programs to help companies
assess and improve their quality operations. [11]
Pharma 4.0™ – providing guidance, aligned with the regulatory requirements specific to the pharmaceutical industry,
to accelerate Pharma 4.0 transformations. Also known as the Smart Factory, the objective of Pharma 4.0 is to
enable organizations involved in the product life cycle to leverage the full potential of digitalization to provide faster
innovations for the benefit of patients. [12]
Digital maturity and data integrity by design are enablers to an effective digitalization strategy and are underpinned by
well-managed automation and information systems. GAMP guidance aims to ensure that GxP computerized systems
are fit for intended use, and that GxP electronic records and data are managed throughout the data life cycle in order
to ensure data integrity. See Figure 1.1.
GAMP guidance adopts a patient-centric risk-based approach that enables innovation while demonstrating
compliance with regulatory requirements. Pharma 4.0 builds on best practices based on ISPE Guidelines that are
enhanced by the digital transformational approach to real time data driven processes.
Figure 1.1: Pharma 4.0 [13]

--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 11
1.2
New and Revised Material
New guidance has been included on the following topics:
•
Appendix D8 – Agile
•
Appendix D9 – Software Tools
•
Appendix D10 – Distributed Ledger Systems (Blockchain)
•
Appendix D11 – Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI/ML)
•
Appendix M11 – IT Infrastructure
•
Appendix M12 – Critical Thinking
Significantly updated guidance has been included on the following topics:
•
Appendix D1 – Specifying Requirements
•
Appendix S2 – Electronic Production Records
As a result of the above additions and revisions, the following guidance included in the previous version of this Guide
have been removed:
•
Appendix D2 – Functional Specifications
•
Appendix O7 – Repair Activity
•
Appendix S5 – Managing Quality within an Outsourced IS/IT Environment
The overall GAMP 5 framework, key concepts, system life cycle, specification and verification approach, and Quality
Risk Management (QRM) process (aligned with ICH Q9 [14]) remains unchanged.
1.3
Purpose
The purpose of this Guide is to provide a cost-effective framework of good practice to ensure that computerized
systems are effective and of high quality, fit for intended use, and compliant with applicable regulations. The
framework aims to safeguard patient safety, product quality, and data integrity while also delivering business benefit.
This Guide also provides suppliers to the life-science industry with guidance on the development and maintenance of
systems by following good practice.
Patient safety is affected by the integrity of critical records, data, and decisions, as well as those aspects affecting
physical attributes of the product. The phrase “patient safety, product quality, and data integrity” is used throughout
this Guide to underline this point.
This Guide is intended for use by regulated companies, suppliers, and regulators. Suppliers include providers
of software, hardware, equipment, system integration services, IT service providers, and IT support services, both
internal and external to the regulated company.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 12
The Guide has been designed for use by a wide range of disciplines and responsibilities, including:
•
Management
•
Quality Unit
•
Research
•
Development
•
Manufacture
•
Laboratory
•
Engineering
•
IT
•
Support Staff
•
All associated suppliers
GAMP documents are guides and not standards. It is the responsibility of regulated companies to establish
policies and procedures to meet applicable regulatory requirements. Consequently, it is inappropriate for regulated
companies, suppliers, or products to claim that they are GAMP certified, approved, or compliant.
1.4
Scope
This Guide applies to computerized systems used in regulated activities covered by:
•
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) (pharmaceutical, including Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API),
veterinary, and blood)
•
Good Clinical Practice (GCP)
•
Good Laboratory Practice (GLP)
•
Good Distribution Practice (GDP)
•
Good Pharmacovigilance Practices (GVP)
•
Medical Device Regulations (where applicable and appropriate, e.g., for systems used as part of production or
the quality system, and for some examples of Software as a Medical Device (SaMD1))
These are collectively known as GxP regulations (see Chapter 2 for full definition).
This Guide provides an approach that is suitable for all types of computerized systems, focusing on those based on
standard and configurable products, but equally applicable to custom (bespoke) applications.
1	 Medical devices have their own regulatory framework and standards (e.g., ISO 13485 [16], ISO 14971 [17], and IEC 62304 [18]), typically require
individual approval, and are often subject to clinical trial evaluation after software verification. GxP computerized systems as discussed in this Guide
usually support internal regulated company GxP business processes, whereas SaMD is typically a product in the hands of patients or health care
providers.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 13
The principles described can be applied to a wide range of computerized systems. Detailed application of these
principles to specific system types (e.g., IT, infrastructure, process control systems, and analytical laboratory systems)
is described in supporting ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guides [15].
Not all the activities defined in this Guide will apply to every system. The scalable approach, with application of critical
thinking, enables regulated companies to select the appropriate system life cycle activities.
This Guide is also consistent with other regulatory demands such as Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX)2 and those associated
with data privacy. The use of this Guide, however, does not guarantee compliance with, or replace, these regulatory
demands, which will define additional requirements where they are applicable.
It is recognized that there are acceptable methods other than those described in this Guide. This Guide is not
intended to place any constraints on innovation and development of new concepts and technologies.
1.4.1
Supplier Aspects
The computerized system life cycle described in this Guide for a regulated company should not be confused with the
need for a defined approach or method for software development, which is the responsibility of the supplier.
This Guide defines activities and responsibilities expected of the supplier in the provision of products and services.
These activities perform an important role in supporting regulated company activities. The supplier may be a third
party or an internal group of the regulated company. Such internal groups should follow processes consistent with the
regulated company Quality Management System (QMS).
This Guide uses various diagrams to represent the system life cycle. These diagrams often present relationships in
a linear representation. This is not intended to constrain the choice of development methods and models. Suppliers
should use the most appropriate methods and models, which may include iterative and incremental (Agile),
evolutionary, exploratory, and prototyping techniques, or the use of DevOps approaches (see also Appendix D8).
Modern systems may have a complex supply chain involving multiple suppliers. This Guide aims to meet the needs of
each group.
1.5
Business Benefits
Effective, reliable, and high-quality computerized systems assist in achieving the primary objectives of patient safety,
product quality, and data integrity, but there are major business benefits in having a defined process that delivers
systems fit for intended use, on time, and within budget. Systems that are well defined and specified are easier to
support and maintain, resulting in less downtime and lower maintenance costs. Adoption of the approaches described
in this Guide will assist regulated companies in managing business risk as well as quality risks.
Specific benefits to both regulated companies and suppliers include:
•
Reduction of cost and time taken to achieve and maintain compliance
•
Early defect identification and resolution leading to reduced impact on cost and schedule
•
Cost-effective operation and maintenance
•
Effective change management and continual improvement
2	 The US Sarbanes-Oxley law [19], specifically Section 404, mandates control of computer systems that generate financial records. Many of the good
practice principles and electronic records management controls are relevant to compliance with this law.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 14
•
Enabling of innovation and adoption of new technology
•
Providing frameworks for user/supplier cooperation
•
Assisting suppliers to produce required documentation
•
Promotion of common system life cycle, language, and terminology
•
Providing practical guidelines and examples
•
Promoting pragmatic interpretation of regulations
1.6
Structure
1.6.1
Overview of GAMP Documentation Structure
This Guide forms part of a family of documents that together provide a powerful and comprehensive body of
knowledge covering all aspects of computerized systems’ good practice and compliance, as shown in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: GAMP Documentation Structure [20]
This Guide comprises a main body and a set of supporting appendices.
The main body provides principles and a life cycle framework applicable to GxP regulated computerized systems.
Practical guidance on a wide range of topics is provided in the supporting appendices.
Separate ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guides [15] cover the application of these general principles and framework to
specific types of systems and platforms. Other GAMP GPGs provide detailed approaches to specific activities and
topics. For information about available ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guides, see www.ispe.org.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 15
1.6.2
GAMP 5 Main Body Structure
The main body introduction covers the purpose, scope, benefits, and structure of this Guide. Subsequent sections of
the main body cover the topics:
•
Key concepts
•
Life cycle approach
•
Life cycle phases:
-
Concept
-
Project
-
Operation
-
Retirement
•
QRM
•
Regulated company activities:
-
Governance for achieving compliance
-
System-specific activities
•
Supplier activities
•
Efficiency improvements
The key concepts, described in Chapter 2, are the five concepts that underpin the rest of the document and should
be applied using critical thinking.
The computerized system life cycle encompasses all activities from initial concept, understanding of the
requirements, through development or purchase, release, and operational use, to system retirement. Chapter 3
describes these activities and how they are related.
Chapter 4 describes the project life cycle phase in more detail, including:
•
Planning
•
Specification, configuration, and coding
•
Verification
•
Reporting and release
The key supporting processes of risk management, change and configuration management, design review,
traceability, and document management are also introduced.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 16
QRM is a systematic approach for the identification, assessment, control, communication, and review of risks to
patient safety, product quality, and data integrity. It is an iterative process applied throughout the system life cycle.
Chapter 5 describes this approach and how these activities should be based on good science and product and
process understanding.
Ensuring compliance and fitness for purpose is the responsibility of the regulated company. Effective and consistent
regulated company activities for individual systems require a defined organizational and governance framework,
covering aspects such as policies, responsibilities, management, and continual improvement. Governance and
system-specific regulated company activities are covered in Chapter 6.
While the responsibility for compliance lies with the regulated company, the supplier has a key role to play. An
overview of typical supplier activities is given in Chapter 7.
This Guide provides a flexible framework for achieving compliant computerized systems that are fit for intended
use, but the full benefits can be obtained only if the framework is applied effectively in the context of a particular
organization. Chapter 8 covers key topics leading to efficiency improvements.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 17
2	 Key Concepts
2.1
Overview
Five key concepts are applied throughout this Guide:
1.
Product and process understanding
2.
Life cycle approach within a QMS
3.
Scalable life cycle activities
4.
Science-based QRM
5.
Leveraging supplier involvement
The relationship between these concepts is shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Key Concepts of this Guide [20]
2.1.1
Product and Process Understanding
An understanding of the supported process is fundamental to determining system requirements. Product and
process understanding is the basis for making science- and risk-based decisions to ensure that the system is fit for
its intended use. An understanding of the intended use of data within the process is also fundamental. Data integrity
cannot be achieved without a complete understanding of the data flow.
As noted in ICH Q10 [21]:
“product and process knowledge should be managed from development through the commercial life of the
product up to and including product discontinuation…Knowledge management is a systematic approach to
acquiring, analysing, storing, and disseminating information related to products, manufacturing processes and
components.”

--- PAGE 20 ---
Page 18
Efforts to ensure fitness for intended use should focus on those aspects that are critical to patient safety, product
quality, and data integrity. These critical aspects should be identified, specified, and verified.
Systems within the scope of this Guide support a wide range of processes, including but not limited to clinical
trials, toxicological studies, API production, formulated product production, warehousing, distribution, and
pharmacovigilance.
For some manufacturing systems, process requirements depend on a thorough understanding of product
characteristics. For these systems, identification of Critical Quality Attributes (CQAs) and related Critical Process
Parameters (CPPs) enable process control requirements to be defined.
Specification of requirements should be focused on critical aspects. The extent and detail of requirement specification
should be commensurate with associated risk, complexity, and novelty of the system. Requirements may be
developed iteratively or incrementally, based upon an initial set of base requirements.
Incomplete process understanding hinders effective and efficient compliance and achievement of business benefit.
2.1.2
Life Cycle Approach within a QMS
Adopting a complete computerized system life cycle entails defining activities in a systematic way from system
conception to retirement. This enables management control and a consistent approach across systems.
The life cycle should form an intrinsic part of the company’s QMS, which should be maintained and kept up-to-date as
new ways of working are developed.
As experience is gained in system use, the QMS should enable continual process and system improvements based
on periodic review and evaluation, operational and performance data, and root-cause analysis of failures. Identified
improvements and corrective actions should follow change management.
A suitable life cycle, properly applied, enables the assurance of quality and fitness for intended use, and achieving
and maintaining compliance with regulatory requirements. A well-managed and understood life cycle facilitates
adoption of a Quality by Design (QbD) approach.
The life cycle approach is fundamental to this Guide and embodies each of the other key concepts. The life cycle is
structured into phases and activities, as described in Chapter 3.
2.1.3
Scalable Life Cycle Activities
Life cycle activities should be scaled according to:
•
System impact on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity (risk assessment)
•
System complexity and novelty (architecture and nature of system components including maturity and level of
configuration or customization)
•
Outcome of supplier assessment (supplier capability)
Business impact also may influence the scaling of life cycle activities.
The strategy should be clearly defined in a plan and follow established and approved policies and procedures.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Page 19
2.1.4
Science-Based Quality Risk Management
QRM is a systematic process for the identification, assessment, control, communication, mitigation, and review of risks.
Application of QRM enables effort to be focused on critical aspects of a computerized system in a controlled and
justified manner.
QRM should be based on clear process understanding and potential impact on patient safety, product quality,
and data integrity. Combining knowledge management and QRM will facilitate achievement of QMS objectives
by providing the means for science- and risk-based decisions related to product quality. For systems controlling
or monitoring CPPs, these should be traceable to CQAs, and ultimately back to the Quality Target Product Profile
(QTPP) and relevant regulatory submissions.
Qualitative or quantitative techniques may be used to identify and manage risks. Controls are developed to reduce
risks to an acceptable level. Implemented controls are monitored during operation to ensure ongoing effectiveness.
A practical risk-management process is described in Chapter 5.
2.1.5
Leveraging Supplier Involvement
Regulated companies should seek to maximize supplier involvement throughout the system life cycle in order to
leverage knowledge, experience, and documentation, subject to satisfactory supplier assessment.
For example, the supplier may assist with requirements gathering, risk assessments, the creation of functional and
other specifications, system configuration, testing, support, and maintenance.
Planning should determine how best to use supplier documentation, including existing test documentation, to
avoid wasted effort and duplication. Justification for the use of supplier documentation should be provided by the
satisfactory outcome of supplier assessments, which may include supplier audits.
Documentation should be assessed for suitability, accuracy, and completeness. There should be flexibility regarding
acceptable format, structure, and documentation practices.
Supplier assessment is described in Chapter 6.
2.2
Key Terms
Computerized System
A computerized system consists of the hardware and software components, together with the controlled function or
process (including procedures, people, and equipment and associated documentation) (see also Appendix M11).

--- PAGE 22 ---
Page 20
Figure 2.2: Computerised System – PIC/S Guidance [22]
This term covers a broad range of systems, including, but not limited to:
•
Clinical trials data management
•
Manufacturing resource planning
•
Laboratory information management
•
Automated manufacturing equipment
•
Automated laboratory equipment
•
Process control and process analysis
•
Manufacturing execution
•
Building management
•
Warehousing and distribution
•
Blood processing management
•
Adverse event reporting (vigilance)
•
Document management
•
SaMD and digital health applications

--- PAGE 23 ---
Page 21
Computerized System Validation
Achieving and maintaining compliance with applicable GxP regulations and fitness for intended use by:
•
The adoption of principles, approaches, and life cycle activities within the framework of validation plans and
reports
•
The application of appropriate operational controls throughout the life of the system
GxP Compliance
Meeting all applicable pharmaceutical and associated life-science regulatory requirements.
GxP Regulated Computerized System
Computerized systems that are subject to GxP regulations. The regulated company must ensure that such systems
comply with the appropriate regulations.
GxP Regulation
The underlying international pharmaceutical requirements, such as those set forth in the US FD&C Act [23], US PHS
Act [24], FDA regulations [25], EU Directives [26], UK MHRA regulations [27], Japanese regulations [28], or other
applicable national legislation or regulations under which a company operates.
These include but are not limited to (further descriptions provided in Appendix G2):
•
GMP
•
GCP
•
GLP
•
GDP
•
Good Quality Practice (GQP)
•
Good Pharmacovigilance Practice (GVP)
•
Medical Device Regulations
•
Prescription Drug Marketing Act (PDMA) [29]
Process Owner
This is the owner of the business process or processes being managed. The process owner is ultimately responsible
for ensuring that the computerized system and its operation is in compliance and fit for intended use in accordance
with applicable company Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). The process owner may also be the system
owner. The process owner may be the de facto owner of the data residing on the system (data owner) and therefore,
ultimately responsible for the integrity of the data. Process owners are typically the head of the functional unit using
the system. (cf. System Owner)

--- PAGE 24 ---
Page 22
Quality Management System (QMS)
Management system to direct and control an organization with regard to quality. (ISO [7]).
(This is equivalent to Quality System as defined in ICH Q9 [14].)
Subject Matter Expert (SME)
Those individuals with specific expertise in a particular area or field. SMEs should take the lead role in the verification
of computerized systems. SME responsibilities include planning and defining verification strategies, defining
acceptance criteria, selection of appropriate test methods, execution of verification tests, and reviewing results.
(ASTM E2500 [8])
System Owner
The system owner is responsible for the availability and support and maintenance of a system, and for the security
of the data residing on that system. The system owner is responsible for ensuring that the computerized system is
supported and maintained in accordance with applicable company SOPs. The system owner also may be the process
owner (e.g., for IT infrastructure systems or systems not directly supporting GxP). For systems supporting regulated
processes and maintaining regulated data and records, the ownership of the data resides with the GxP process
owner, not the system owner.
The system owner acts on behalf of the users. The system owner for larger systems will typically be from IT or
engineering functions. Global IT systems may have a global system owner and a local system owner to manage local
implementation. (cf. Process Owner)

