--- PAGE 261 ---
Page 259
Appendix D10
Figure 30.1: The Blockchain Technology Stack Across Multiple Enterprises
When a network is sufficiently decentralized there are enough independent network operators to make it improbable
that a single entity or a small group of entities hold influence over the core protocol (the primary rules) that operate
the network. When changes are needed, it requires coordination of the majority of network operators. This is
a familiar concept for those that rely on OSS. Generally speaking, core protocol updates positively impact the
operations of the network (e.g., more efficient processing, network operator incentives, better encryption).
Governance also applies in how an entity and its business partners choose to interact with the blockchain. While
some of this is controlled through the smart contracts the entity connects with, much of it has to do with the off-chain
data standards and processes that trigger events on the blockchain, as well as the API through which they connect.
There is no preventive mechanism to stop an entity from posting inaccurate data or triggering fake events. However,
because blockchains are ecosystem-level systems, collusion with other parties would be needed to continually
propagate false information, which is unlikely. In addition, there would always be a clear log of transactions. To
this end it is important to know exactly who the business partners are (that is, the addresses they control on the
blockchain) and to recognize that the system is more secure when looking at the sum of the parts. Because it is
most likely that enterprises will interact with blockchains through APIs, GxP considerations must be applied to the
blockchain network as well as the ancillary systems that push and pull information to it.

--- PAGE 262 ---
Page 260
Appendix D10
30.3	 Guidance
This appendix outlines the current best practices that should be used during the system life cycle when deploying a
blockchain-based system in a production GxP use case. Once the intended use of the system is established, system
planning includes a holistic approach for development and deployment. Although there is not a “one size fits all”
approach for documentation requirements to qualify and maintain a blockchain network, applying methodologies such
as Agile and critical thinking can help identify appropriate controls needed and mitigate the associated risks within the
regulated environment per Appendix D8 and ISPE GAMP RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design [36].
30.3.1	 Concept Phase
Blockchains are often considered to be an ecosystem-level network. From the perspective of an individual
organization there are likely to be external stakeholders that should be involved in all phases of the project, including
the concept phase. Understanding the incentives of each stakeholder as well as their role in the GxP use case is
critical to developing a solution that can meet a broad set of objectives.
During the concept phase of the project, it is important to apply critical thinking and a risk-based approach to
determine exactly which use cases within the blockchain solution are GxP and what ancillary systems and data
elements are required by the blockchain solution. Business-process mapping can help to define those interactions by
documenting:
•
The intended use of the blockchain solution
•
The ancillary systems that the blockchain will pull data from and push data to
•
The high-level risks associated with patient safety, product quality, and data integrity
•
The business logic managed within smart contracts (if applicable)
•
The role blockchain plays in the overarching system
•
The data being managed across the network (on-chain, off-chain, metadata)
•
The type of blockchain protocol and any special considerations
The sequence of process steps, high-level risks, and business activities can be addressed as part of mapping the
business process. It illustrates the manual and computerized aspects of the system and associated risks, such as
manual operations, access controls, and interfaces. Business-process steps enable the IT quality professional to
understand data integrity risks per the regulated data life cycle and assess and evaluate where data is generated,
processed, used, retained, and removed. Business process mapping can support data quality by facilitating the
assessment of data criticality and vulnerability, and identification of system interfaces.
Once high-level risks and business-process steps are understood, data flow can be generated that show the inputs,
outputs, and flow of data through the system. Similar to understanding the integration points for an ERP system or
Manufacturing Execution System (MES), it is helpful to create a swim-lane diagram for the systems that are part of
the overall solution. The individual components and systems may have to be treated differently with different states of
control. Depending on the implementation, the blockchain may be a single swim lane acting as a data repository, or
multiple swim lanes capturing the functionality and interactions of smart contracts.
When deploying and validating a blockchain solution, it is recommended to take a strong systems-engineering
approach, looking at where the various technology systems interact and where those interactions are based on APIs,
or smart contracts, or potentially other technologies.

--- PAGE 263 ---
Page 261
Appendix D10
Data flow can be used to map interactions for an overview of the system landscape and to identify areas of high risk.
Utilizing this approach can provide an integrated-risk overview, whereas a fragmented system-by-system approach
may miss key integrations and interface points of contact between the various systems. An example data flow map is
displayed in Figure 30.2.
Smart contracts are used within blockchain networks to automate actions based on defined quantitative variables that
the contract monitors. The contract then executes actions when the defined criteria are met. An analogy is the familiar
logic trees within PLC programming.
Smart contracts should be assessed as part of the overall-system life cycle of the blockchain network or application.
As they utilize custom coding, standard code-review processes should be used to review the integrity, security, and
integration of the inputs and outputs of the smart-contract logic.
Figure 30.2: Example Data Flow for a Blockchain-Integrated Solution
30.3.2	 Project Phase
30.3.2.1	 System Planning, Stakeholders, and Service Providers
The blockchain network is likely to have many stakeholders, both internal and external. A typical stakeholder/steering
committee approach may be difficult to implement across an entire ecosystem, therefore establishing a governance
structure early in the project phase is recommended. (Refer to Section 30.3.2.6 for additional considerations.)
There are often third parties involved in developing or hosting the blockchain solution. In some cases, a Blockchain
as a Service (BaaS) provider will be selected to manage the integration to, or run nodes on behalf of, the
organization. In these cases, supplier assessments and testing should be leveraged in accordance with Appendix M2.
However, the blockchain-specific elements should also be considered, such as:
•
Is there a process for identifying, adding, and/or removing a node from the network?
•
Is the BaaS also providing off-chain storage and/or transaction caching? If so, what are the data controls around
those services?

--- PAGE 264 ---
Page 262
Appendix D10
•
What is the process for managing blockchain addresses? How is ownership and custody over the private and
public keys managed?
30.3.2.2	 Data and Process Driven Approach
Ultimately blockchains are just systems that humans or other systems use to push and pull information in support of
business processes; therefore, a data and process-driven approach is a suitable method for relying on a blockchain
network in a GxP environment during the project phase. A suggested method for validating the environment is
outlined in the following sections.
30.3.2.3	 Understand Data from Source of Origin, Source of Truth, and Ownership Standpoint
The blockchain will likely serve as a backbone connecting multiple sources of data, and in many cases becoming the
source of truth for which data represents the current state of the overall system. (This trust and shared ownership
of data is often a primary reason for using a blockchain.) However, blockchains are not generally the source of
origin for new data other than identifiers (for example, token IDs), accounts, and timestamps. In these cases, data-
quality controls should be in place to keep the data recorded in the blockchain in sync with data generated in the
source of origin. Data mapping and checks of ALCOA+ requirements can help to identify deficiencies, for example,
potential problems associated with the lack of long-term access to data. The blockchain may provide evidence of
which account(s) signed a transaction on the network, but the organization may need to understand which other
organization(s) control that account, implying the need for a registry or some form of verified credentials.
Illustrative example:
A serialized medicine has the following data attributes:
{“GTIN (01)”:00855245005019
“EXP (17)”:”112023”,
“LOT(10)”:“XYZ123”,
“S/N (21)”:“447018182632”}
A token is generated on a blockchain that represents this single unit; for privacy purposes it is given a random
token ID:
0x778gha0ca303305a92d8d028704d65e4942b7ccc9a999164cf
Included in the transaction that minted the token is a Uniform Resource Identifier (tokenURI) that contains a hash
of the data attributes and a pointer to where the metadata is stored (in some storage systems these may be one
and the same). For example:
1220D5CC15B22D5606BF3DC255979552A4214E29054CD2E60A1446FE570F53F18C6B
(this hash was generated from the data above by using a SHA-256 hash algorithm in a multihash format).
In this example an investigator can access the un-hashed metadata attributes by following the tokenURI. They can
pass the metadata through the same hash algorithm (this is why using a multihash format is important) and if the
hashes match, they have confidence that the un-hashed data was the same as the data used to mint the token. If
the investigator has access to the source system where the product data was generated, they can query the source
system and verify the individual attributes.

--- PAGE 265 ---
Page 263
Appendix D10
30.3.2.4	Identifying the Resulting Controls
After identifying the critical functionality by performing a risk assessment of the business-process logic and the data
flows, define a set of controls that will help to ensure the system is operating as intended. Some items to consider
when defining control sets are:
•
Functionality
-
Input Controls: Events used to trigger transactions and the data posted to the blockchain during a
transaction are typically managed outside of the blockchain itself. However, once a transaction is posted it is
practically immutable; therefore the integrity of the data initially posted should be considered.
>
How are events that trigger blockchain transactions identified in each of the systems that feed data to
the blockchain?
>
For data that is captured either on-chain or off-chain, are sufficient data quality controls in place?
>
If off-chain data changes for legitimate reasons (for example error corrections, updates, etc.), how are
on-chain references updated as hash reference may no longer be valid?
>
Is there any transformation happening through the API when data is pushed to the blockchain?
-
Output Controls: Extracting data from a blockchain can be done in several ways, but often the on-chain data
is only a portion of the information needed to make business decisions. The emphasis on output controls
is to demonstrate the accuracy of the information on-chain to the off-chain data through reconciling and
displaying the completeness of the extracted data by making the query replicable.
>
Is there a mechanism for checking the integrity of off-chain data (for example, hash matching)?
>
Is there any transformation happening through the API when data is queried and extracted?
>
Are there controls in place to ensure that the representation of the data (for example, data visualization
software) shows an accurate and complete picture of the data available on the blockchain?
>
Which specific data elements are relied upon from the blockchain layer (e.g., timestamps, account IDs,
transaction IDs) versus data and events used to generate the transaction?
>
How is the returned data analyzed to determine if transactions were skipped or omitted?
-
Processing Controls: Ensuring that the blockchain solution is continuously used as intended, or if there are
changes to the network that introduce new risks, a set of processing and monitoring controls is required.
>
How are the APIs that integrate systems with the blockchain monitored? Can events recorded on the
blockchain be reconciled back to source systems?
>
How is change control managed for the underlying blockchain protocol? (see Section 30.3.2.5)
>
How are failed transactions monitored and addressed?
>
If applicable, how are transaction costs managed? Is there a risk that the posting accounts will have
insufficient funds to cover the fees?
>
How is the stability of the blockchain monitored to determine if it is still viable?

--- PAGE 266 ---
Page 264
Appendix D10
-
Access Controls: In a blockchain the participants are identified by their blockchain address. Addresses
(sometimes called wallets) can be owned by individuals, entities, systems, or smart contracts; and it is the
address owner who is responsible for posting transactions under that address. Access controls on a blockchain
revolve around who has access to use which addresses, and what a given address is allowed to do.
Operating under the assumption that the blockchain will be used for many different use cases, the
addresses involved in the GxP application will likely be a subset of all active addresses. The IT quality
organization should be involved in the design of access controls between users, ancillary systems, and the
blockchain network. The function responsible for routine administration of access should notify and discuss
any major changes to the level of access that might impact GxP applications with the ITQ organization.
Additional points to consider include:
>
Under what authority are addresses generated and managed?
>
Are the addresses attributable to an entity within the organization, an individual, or a source system?
>
How are users (or underlying systems) authenticated before posting transactions?
>
Is there a process in place for managing custody to the private keys of the transacting addresses?
>
If off-chain data bases are separate from existing systems, have they been implemented following the
organization’s security procedures?
>
If privacy solutions (e.g., zero knowledge proofs, roll-ups, mixer contracts, etc.) are used to obscure
transactions on-chain, who has access to view the transactions and how is that managed?
>
If allow/deny listing (or other similar preregistration approach) is used to grant access to call functions in
a smart contract, how is this being managed?
>
Are the ancillary systems and their APIs that access the blockchain secure in preventing unauthorized
transactions to be posted?
30.3.2.5	 Change Management
The change management of the blockchain solution should be looked at for the entirety of the GxP use case. It is
likely that many of the source systems, off-chain storage, and APIs used to interact with the blockchain network can
be managed using traditional Agile change-management approaches. For public networks, it is likely that the core
protocol used to propagate the blockchain network is open sourced and managed by a community. Refer to Appendix
D8 for guidance on relying on OSS.
30.3.2.6	 GxP Considerations around Governance of Public Blockchain Networks
Specifically for blockchains, there are additional considerations above those of general OSS. Namely how the
governance of the running network is managed by the node operators.
Occasionally there will be significant changes to the core protocol in the network. For those changes to be adopted,
the majority of the node operators must update their software17. Most often the updates are done seamlessly with
no disruption to the network; however, there is a possibility of some nodes choosing not to update their software.
In these cases the network splits (or forks) into two separate blockchains. While this is less likely with improved
governance and becomes even more difficult with larger more decentralized networks, it is still a possibility that
should be considered. As is typical with managing reliance on OSS, it is important for organizations to keep abreast
with updates and changes and determine the GxP impact of updating (or choosing not to update) their applications.
17	For an organization running a node, this would be an action the IT function would take.

--- PAGE 267 ---
Page 265
Appendix D10
30.3.2.7	 Composability of Smart Contracts
Often several smart contracts are strung together to create a Decentralized Application (or DApp). When considering
the governance of large-scale decentralized networks, it is governance of the DApps that carry a higher risk. These
contracts are often deployed with the intent of being composable, which means that the functions within them can be
called by other smart contracts. While this is key to enabling complex logic, it also creates a network of dependencies
that must be understood.
By changing references when certain functions become deprecated, a smart contract can be upgradable, which
implies the need for change-management controls. Because the nature of blockchain within enterprises is such to
encourage broad ecosystems, these contracts are often designed for a broad range of participants. They also have
the capability to ingest data from external sources (referred to as oracles) to trigger certain events within the smart
contracts code.
For example, if a public blockchain was being used to track pharmaceutical supplies with the intention of facilitating
product recalls or managing stockpile levels, there would likely be several smart contracts involved; for example, one
that creates the product on-chain and one that auto-orders replenishment stock. There could be one that listens for
an external signal from a manufacturer or regulator that might flag inventory that has been recalled. Assuming that
the underling blockchain protocol remains stable throughout this process, the greater risk is in the way that the smart
contracts interact or vulnerabilities that those interactions might introduce.
It must also be possible to differentiate between smart contracts that are core to basic use case operations (likely
leveraging standards with very little modification) and smart contracts that have been custom developed for a specific
DApp. The former can be assessed as part of the overall reliance on the blockchain network; the latter would require
specific considerations within the scope of the DApp.
30.3.3	 Retirement or Migration
Most blockchains are designed to be highly available in perpetuity; however, it is possible that networks may become
stagnant and be abandoned by their participants. As the level of decentralization decreases, many of the strengths of
relying on a blockchain solution may be eroded. Considerations should be made for how to retain data in the event
that the blockchain network is retired, in particular where those records are subject to regulatory data-retention or
legal-hold controls. This may be resolved by requesting the organization’s or service provider’s IT function to maintain
a full node of the network and anchoring the last block as data in another secure location (for example, another
blockchain) to demonstrate data integrity until the organization is ready to retire the solution.
Further, real-life use cases of blockchain to support regulated processes have not been around long enough to fully
assess the implications on long-lived data; it is suggested that organizations take a “cryptographic agility” approach
allowing them to evolve as the technology matures. Considerations include:
•
The impact of replacing cryptographic methods (the underlying security guarantees are not automatically
preserved)
•
The impact of storing sensitive data (either encrypted or unencrypted) on the network as future vulnerabilities
may be found in the current state-of-the-art cryptography
•
The ability to maintain and extract data from a blockchain node even if that blockchain is no longer active
It is also possible that the organization may choose to migrate to a different blockchain protocol, in which case many
of the existing procedures and strategies for records migration would apply (refer to ISPE GAMP Guide: Records and
Data Integrity [35]). However, there would be several blockchain-specific considerations:
•
The new network is likely already running; therefore, historical records may not be recreated in a new network
with the original transaction information and ordering

--- PAGE 268 ---
Page 266
Appendix D10
•
Blockchain addresses are inherent to the protocol that generated them; it is not likely that wallet addresses and
contract addresses will be identical. This will require mapping access controls into the new environment.
•
Much of the blockchain security that is rooted in cryptography relies on the network running continuously;
migrating to a new network will impair that security for historical transactions
30.4	 Other Considerations
Additional considerations may need to be taken when using blockchain networks. These fall outside the direct
software-development life cycle but form a critical component of evaluating and demonstrating that a blockchain-
based system is under control and suitable for use in a GxP regulated environment.
30.4.1	 Use of Emerging Technologies
When choosing to use an emerging technology that may not have reached a state of maturity, it is important that a
practitioner takes steps to ensure that a strong evaluation of the technology is performed prior to selection and that
the often rapid pace of architectural change is accounted for in the operation and use.
Key considerations that should be accounted for may include:
•
Maturity of the blockchain:
-
Is the blockchain supported by a large developer community?
-
How long has the blockchain been in operation?
-
Has the blockchain been subject to multiple forks?
•
Vendor support
:
-
Does the blockchain have a commercial support model?
-
Is there a landscape of technology vendors supporting the blockchain?
-
Does the vendor operate a QMS and/or have software-development and management-process controls in
place?
•
Pace of change:
-
Does the blockchain have a mature change-governance process?
-
Are architectural changes well communicated and documented to users?
30.4.1.1	 Use of Standards
Standards are still emerging in this area and are largely driven by the development communities as opposed to
regulators as of this publication. When looking at a blockchain from the perspective of an entire ecosystem, standards
become important to enable interoperability. These will most likely be data standards relevant to all members of the
ecosystem and should be built from existing standards sets.

--- PAGE 269 ---
Page 267
Appendix D10
Standards are also important from a security perspective. Smart contracts deployed on a network execute business
logic when called upon. Similar to any technology, there are multiple attack vectors by which those smart contracts
can be exploited to cause unintended outputs. Where possible, it is recommended to use standard deployments
of smart contracts that have been in use on public networks for some period of time where they may have been
hardened from previous attacks. It is also recommended to utilize third-party specialists to review smart-contract logic
prior to deployment and/or to deploy contracts in a public testnet environment prior to launching in production.
30.4.2	 Reliance on Cryptography and Proofs in Place of Trusted Systems
Using the cryptographic principles of hashing and asymmetric encryption, blockchains generate practically immutable
storage for time-stamped data, which can be attributed to and accessed only by authorized participants. The level of
trust (or assurance) depends on:
•
Linking of blocks based on hash functions that are both easy to verify and computationally intensive to create
•
Asymmetric encryption where knowledge of the public key allows:
-
Storing information that only an authorized recipient can decode using the (secret) private key
-
Verification of signatures generated using the sender’s private key
Much as the use of duplication and error correction in RAID storage eliminates the need for high-level reliability on
hardware and environment conditions (e.g., vibration free), blockchain technologies replace the need for a qualified
hardware (storage) from a mature supplier by mathematically sound algorithms.
From this perspective the validation strategy for the source system may be focused more on data quality than data
integrity. It should also be noted that while an in-depth understanding of the mathematics and cryptography may not
be required, organizations should check that generally accepted or well-known algorithms are used for the process
(similar to the way one might inquire about the security standards used for data encryption).
30.4.3	 Role of Cryptocurrencies and Incentives on Public Networks as They Relate to GxP
Applications
In public blockchain networks the inclusion of new data in the blockchain is done collaboratively by all participating
nodes in the network. Their incentive to process specific transactions on behalf of others is the transaction fee
voluntarily donated to the participant(s) attaching the respective block to the blockchain. Consequently, to post a
transaction on the blockchain, some value (in the form of the chain’s inherent currency) must be transferred at the
time of record creation. Transaction fees (sometimes referred to as gas) are also required to deploy and interact with
smart contracts on the network (both of these activities are transactions). The fees are typically paid by the address
initiating the transaction, implying that the address may hold some value in addition to its access rights, which could
create additional risks for those addresses to be compromised. The following should be considered when relying on
public blockchain networks that have transaction fees:
•
Fees are typically in correlation to the amount of data in a transaction. In addition to incentivizing network node
operators, they also incentivize efficient use of the network. Adding additional data to a transaction “just because”
can quickly make blockchains cost prohibitive.
•
To increase throughput and reduce transaction fees Layer 2 solutions are often deployed; these can be
considered as separate networks that inherit some of the security of the Layer 1 network, but they should be
carefully assessed.
•
The value of the cryptocurrency held by the addresses (both individually and cumulatively across an
organization) can fluctuate wildly, and there may be accounting and tax implications.

--- PAGE 270 ---
Page 268
Appendix D10
30.4.4	 Achieving Privacy and Confidentiality on Public Networks
A fundamental design principle of blockchains is the distributed ledger, that is, the ability for all participants to quickly
come to agreement on the current state of the entire dataset. Early blockchain networks achieved this by having a
fully-open and transparent ledger that is visible to all participants. This approach is often diametrically opposed to a
particular organization’s desire to have private transactions between known business partners. Even if sensitive data
is not included within a transaction, the pattern of transactions between accounts may be considered confidential.
This visibility also extends to the logic of smart contracts operating on the network.
Privacy and confidentiality is a rapidly evolving facet of the technology, as it has been widely recognized as a barrier
for enterprise adoption of public blockchains. There are multiple technology solutions that leverage cryptographic
measures (zero knowledge proofs, optimistic roll-ups, etc.) and scaling solutions (Layer-2 scalability, Layer-1
alternatives, sharding, etc.) that are required to provide the on-chain compute power to support these methods.
Though the technology is evolving there are fundamental elements to consider:
•
Avoiding the storage of sensitive data on-chain
•
Encryption and obfuscation controls for on-chain data
•
The maturity of the cryptographic procedures being used
•
Processes for cryptographic key management
•
Mechanisms used to anonymize transactions or shield the logic in smart contracts
These areas are actively discussed in the ISPE GAMP Community of Practice [77].

--- PAGE 271 ---
Page 269
Appendix D11
Appendix D11
31	 Appendix D11 – Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning (AI/ML)
31.1
Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) are transforming the way in which the life sciences industry is
doing business and processing data. The industry is increasingly relying on such innovative technologies to automate
many functions previously performed by humans. As computer systems become more integrated and datasets
become more extensive, computer science is advancing our ability to learn from that data and draw conclusions.
Underlying algorithms are sophisticated enough to begin making robust decisions in the form of AI.
The use of such AI, along with the subdiscipline of ML, presents the life sciences industry with a challenge in
maintaining the overall quality and regulatory compliance of such IT systems, applications, and/or solutions. This
appendix provides a basic understanding for these digital solutions and guidance on how to ensure compliant
integration and fitness for use in a validated environment. Additional information is available in ISPE GAMP® RDI
Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design, Appendix S1 – Artificial Intelligence: Machine Learning [36].
Additionally, this appendix:
•
Provides a basic understanding of AI and the use of static/dynamic ML sub-systems in industry
•
Presents an overview of a risk-based regulatory compliant AI/ML life cycle framework (e.g., model) in alignment
with GAMP 5 principles and phases (concept, project, operation, retirement)
•
Describes the importance of data integrity to the overall quality of AI/ML in addition to presenting an
understanding of inherent risks
•
Acknowledges the iterative nature inherent in developing AI/ML as a sub-system of the overarching IT application
and/or business solution
31.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
This is a new appendix.
31.2
Scope
This appendix seeks to describe a life cycle framework for ML for use within the life sciences industry and a GxP
regulated environment. It positions and contextualizes the life cycle and management of the ML sub-system or
components within a wider GAMP system life cycle, at the level of general descriptions and guidance.
This appendix applies specifically to the ML component or sub-system, which is typically embedded within a wider IT
system, solution, or application.

--- PAGE 272 ---
Page 270
Appendix D11
31.3
Guidance
There are many similarities in best practice between ML and more traditional algorithmic programming. Successful
implementation of ML requires thorough business analysis and process understanding (e.g., by data scientists),
effective planning, and the application of good software development, engineering, and maintenance practices.
(See Guiding Principles 1 and 2 in Joint US FDA/Health Canada/UK MHRA Good Machine Learning Practice for
Medical Device Development: Guiding Principles, [78].) Where this starts to diverge from previous strategies is that
data management must be implemented during the concept phase because the data is the key resource required to
progress with ML.
Performance metrics are important in the design of any ML sub-system. They act as the technical specifications
for the acceptability of the ML model. These metrics also drive the inherent iterative training, evaluation, and
improvement stages of a ML operation. As the process may have been previously performed by a human, the
performance expectations and grading may shift, and it is important to understand this shift early on by asking
questions such as:
•
Will existing Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) be used to grade against the change?
-
If so, how would they be impacted? What change would show success? For example, is quality expected to
remain at the same level or actually increase?
-
If not, how are the new metrics determined and what insight do they provide to confirm the system is
operating as intended?
Another key aspect of ML development is the tight integration of data and metadata into the development process.
The term data-centric development is sometimes used to reflect this. As a result, data should be managed with
the same care as the code itself with the consequence of additional overheads and controls for data acquisition,
selection, classification, cleansing, and augmentation.
Like other software system development, ML development has business, technical, or project risks commensurate
with the complexity and novelty of the system. Managing these risks requires good process/business analysis, risk
analysis, and cost/benefit analysis at all stages of development to recognize issues and to decide whether to take
mitigating or rectifying steps, or to terminate the project.
Development also requires consideration of human factors (e.g., usability challenges such as alert fatigue),
cybersecurity, and legal liability. This requires transparency, and an understanding of the ability to reproduce outcomes,
adequately interpret the results, and understand the relevance for how the models will be applied without bias.
An in-depth knowledge of the business process and the associated data flows and decisions are essential for
successful implementation of AI/ML. Such an understanding of the business process will also enable critical thinking
to be applied on where and how to scale quality and compliance activities, based on identifying and understanding
the potential risks to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity. (See Guiding Principle 9 in Joint US FDA/Health
Canada/UK MHRA Good Machine Learning Practice for Medical Device Development: Guiding Principles [78].)
31.3.1	 Life Cycle Approach
For most systems that use ML, many aspects of the traditional computerized-system life cycle and compliance/
validation approach are fully applicable (e.g., those related to specification and verification of user interface, reporting,
security, access control, data-integrity controls, and data life cycle management).
Operational ML sub-systems provide different outputs as they evolve, but the verification and validation approach
should be designed to cope with these changes; this must include change and configuration management, version
control, and monitoring.

--- PAGE 273 ---
Page 271
Appendix D11
Figure 31.1 is a high-level model that may be used to position the primary actions and activities of an ML sub-system
within an overarching GAMP life cycle.
Figure 31.1: GAMP 5 Life Cycle with ML Sub-System
In the Concept Phase the business need or opportunity is identified, clarified, and agreed. The specific problem
to be solved is defined, and initial data is identified (e.g., from a data warehouse or data lake), selected, acquired,
and prepared. Prototyping allows the assessment and selection of suitable algorithms and hyperparameters, and
preliminary hyperparameter values. Data management also begins in this phase when the original dataset is collected.
During the Project Phase, following a defined plan, the selected technologies and technical architecture are
specified. Formal risk-management activities commence, as well as other supporting activities including project-based
configuration and change management. Project phase activities for the ML sub-system are typically iterative and
incremental rather than linear. These iterative activities include model design/selection, engineering, model training,
testing, evaluation, and hyperparameter tuning.
Data management should be active during the project phase, including the acquisition of new data, secure storage
and handling, preparation (including labeling), and partitioning into test, training, and validation datasets. The training
and validation datasets are used for model training and unbiased evaluation respectively. The test dataset is excluded
from all training and hyperparameter tuning activities and used to provide an unbiased evaluation of the final model
within the overarching core system. This may be different from approaches in the past where data could be reused
multiple times. Here the understanding needs to be known as to which data can be used multiple times versus which
can only be utilized once. Successful separation of this data needs to be laid out and explained in order to give
confidence that the data is not creating an homogenous state that could only learn from specific values.
In the Operation Phase the performance of the system is monitored and evaluated. As new (also known as live)
data becomes available, further configuration/coding, tuning, training, testing, and evaluation are performed. There is
likely to be a tight and iterative loop of alternating project and operation activities as the availability of new data and
ongoing performance evaluation and quality checks lead to opportunities for improved performance, both proactive
and reactive, or changing scope of use. This requires effective change management, configuration management, and
model versioning. (See also Section 31.3.5.3 on change management).

--- PAGE 274 ---
Page 272
Appendix D11
31.3.2	 Concept Phase
31.3.2.1	 Business Opportunity and Definition/Data Dependencies
The concept phase to implement ML is where the large shift from management of project phases comes about. Until
now, many projects did little or even skipped the concept phase as the business already had a tool in mind. The
transition to embracing the concept phase can be cognitively difficult for people on project teams to adjust to at first,
but it is vital to the success of an AI/ML-based process. Understanding what is within the capabilities of a company
must be determined in the concept phase or the assumptions will create issues on an exponential scale later.
This phase should include research and investigation of which ML algorithms should be considered for development
based on cost and risk of development and expected performance. Likewise, algorithms can also be purchased and
should be scrutinized to ensure the business needs are met. Information to consider from the source is what process
and standards were the algorithms developed against and what evidence will be provided with the purchase.
During the concept phase, the business need is developed and analyzed, the overall process and workflow is defined
and agreed, and how the proposed AI/ML application will support the process is identified. This analysis will help
determine constraints, such as availability of data, deployment hardware, legal liability, and regulatory and Intellectual
Property (IP) factors. Detailed data-related factors such as source, structure, format, and segmentation should also
be determined.
This requires consideration of five primary principles:
•
Transparency – or how the model(s) will behave
•
Reproducibility – or how the outcomes may be trusted
•
Interpretability – or what may produce the outcome(s)
•
Applicability – or how the model(s) shall be applied
•
Liability – or who will be ultimately liable
Once this is accomplished, the primary task is to build a dataset based upon what the organization is trying to
achieve, not forgetting to identify assumptions. However, in order to build an appropriate dataset, an organization
must understand what information is important to them (i.e., meaningful) and find where that data/information
is available, along with how to exclude unwanted/irrelevant data. This is defined by the desired features and/or
parameters that will be directly involved in the ML, which can be small and/or even limited in quantity.
This process should begin with, and/or be supported by, a robust data-governance strategy and a realization that not
all data is created equal. This includes awareness of data size, quality, and prevalence (see also Section 31.3.5.2 on
data governance).
31.3.2.2	 Data Acquisition and Selection
There are many places an organization can begin to look at in order to acquire data. The first place is typically
internal to their company and given operations. Often this is within an existing data warehouse or data lake. Ideally,
the company’s data is organized and not siloed. It may not be possible to converge all siloed data streams, as such it
is usually in an unorganized format and requires preparation and labeling to become useful to an ML model.
It is also possible to obtain data external to the organization to serve as the basis for learning. This data may come
from various sources, some of which may be structured, unstructured, and/or semi-structured. Regardless of the
format, there should exist a data selection and governance strategy that aims for a diverse and non-biased dataset.
The set should also aim for a large number of data points, keeping in mind a reduction of overall data complexity.

--- PAGE 275 ---
Page 273
Appendix D11
One must consider data classification, clustering (e.g., including data privacy needs), regression, and ranking, as well
as what values and/or metadata are critical and which simply add more complexity. It is important to not just have the
appropriate or relevant data but also have it in the correct form or format, which is one of the major challenges in the
use of external data sources.
If obtaining and/or using external data (i.e., open source or public information), an organization must ensure that
they have the right to use such data and that Personal Information (PI)/Personally Identifiable Information (PII)
considerations are taken to comply with regulations such as the EU GDPR [79]. If this is not the case, then certain
data attributes may need to be anonymized.
Data selection considerations include:
•
Source: internal, external open source, external purchase
•
Privacy and controls: data classifications, data use, risk, mitigation controls
•
Structure/format: unstructured, semi-structured, structured; unorganized or organized
•
Segmentation: clustering, priority, or tiering, necessary versus nice-to-have
An initial set of data, free from bias, will be collected from the existing business activities, or needs to be gathered to
provide a starting point for the prototyping. Once identified, this stage identifies the activities required to prepare the
data for the training and evaluation of the models, including data transformation: formatting, cleaning, and feature
extraction. It is also likely that the data needs to be labeled to provide the training inputs and evaluation against which
the prototype sub-system will be evaluated. At this phase, it is not expected that the data be complete, as subsequent
stages will identify the need for additional data and the plan for acquiring and labeling it. It is, however, important to
partition the case data into training and validation sets to avoid compromising future evaluations.
31.3.2.3	 Data Types, Preprocessing and Classification
Data preparation includes, but is not limited to:
•
Profiling (e.g., formatting)
•
Cleansing, transforming (i.e., homogeneous)
•
Anonymizing (e.g., for EU GDPR [79]/privacy)
•
Augmenting to diversify
Datasets are often not immediately usable, thus the need to prepare it prior to making it available for ML activities.
The quality and integrity of the data is critical (the quality of output is determined by the quality of input) and must
be suitably classified and labeled (i.e., assigning tags to make it more identifiable for predictive analysis). The data
needs to be free of bias to certain regions, demographics, etc. This is one of the most time-consuming efforts in
the process and ideally should be done by dedicated data scientists that possess distinct domain knowledge and
expertise of the data. This aids in their ability to decide upon relevant data structuring, cleaning (i.e., removal or
replacement of missing values), labeling, annotating, and preparation for further processing and use. The data
preparation must also be documented and supported with evidence. This is imperative in order to achieve intended
outcomes and regulatory compliance, as the understanding and preparation of data is directly attributable to proper
selection, build, and testing of models.

--- PAGE 276 ---
Page 274
Appendix D11
31.3.2.4	 Data Transformation
Putting together the data in an optimal format is known as feature transformation. This includes the format (e.g.,
differing files), data cleaning (e.g., removing missing values), and feature extraction (e.g., identifying features or data
elements most important for predicting speed and accuracy). Normalizing the dataset also helps to improve these
circumstances by reducing dimensions.
31.3.3	 Project Phase
The output from this phase is an implementation of the AI/ML sub-system integrated into the overarching IT system
together with extensive performance evaluation measures. Integral to this is the development of the training and
performance evaluation infrastructure that supports training, tuning, and evaluating the models during the operation
phase. Additional tools, supporting model construction or data preparation, may also be developed during this phase
that are not be passed onto the operation phase and hence may not be subject to the same regulatory or operation
requirements.
This phase follows an iterative approach where successive versions of the AI/ML sub-system are specified, designed/
selected, implemented, trained, tuned, and evaluated. This phase consists of a series of experiments that iteratively
improves the design, implementation, and hyperparameter selection of the sub-system to optimize performance.
31.3.3.1	 Model Requirements and Specifications
At this stage, the initial set of requirements are defined that drives the development and defines the functionality
required from the system and ML sub-system including performance.
Nonfunctional requirements such as integration and deployment constraints should also be considered at this early
stage to inform the choice of ML algorithms. Nonfunctional requirements also include a set of performance metrics.
These are a detailed description of the output of the ML sub-system and how they compare to the gold standard to
provide quantitative measures of how well the sub-system performs.
31.3.3.2	 Model Design and Selection
A ML model is selected based upon the question it is expected to answer (see Guiding Principle 6 in Joint US FDA/
Health Canada/UK MHRA Good Machine Learning Practice for Medical Device Development: Guiding Principles
[78]). Common types of models include:
•
Classification – categorize data into two or more classes
•
Clustering – recognize patterns by attribute to determine targeted action
•
Outlier – identify anomalous data
•
Forecasting – analyze patterns to predict the future
For every type of model, there is a large selection of model subtypes or architectures. AI/ML projects can benefit
significantly from deploying algorithms and techniques developed and applied to other applications and use cases.
For a new system, it is unlikely that the choice of algorithm is so clear-cut that a decision can be made to fully specify
the component and proceed to development at this stage. In order to determine which algorithm is most suitable and
how it should be trained and evaluated, the candidates should be evaluated against the operational, performance,
and if relevant, regulatory requirements.

--- PAGE 277 ---
Page 275
Appendix D11
31.3.3.3	 Model and Data Engineering
This stage involves constructing the model architectures and the surrounding infrastructure for data input and
evaluation that enables training and hyperparameter tuning of the models. The choice of model architecture
determines the set of hyperparameters. Tasks include selecting and preparing the data for training iterations and
recording results to allow comparison between trials of different hyperparameters and results from different versions
of the architecture. Once setup, the infrastructure is then employed to execute a series of trials in which the model
hyperparameters are altered to determine the set that result in the best model performance. Subsequent iterations of
the development process refine the architecture driven by model test results.
31.3.3.4	 Model Training
Training a series of model instances by varying hyperparameter values and recording the results is performed
during this stage. Hyperparameter optimization may involve manual selection and altering of the parameters after
each iteration, or automated processes using exhaustive search or the more efficient Bayesian optimization of the
hyperparameter space.
Most ML algorithms possess many hyperparameters and hence, define a large hyperparameter space over which to
optimize. However, the parameter space can be greatly reduced by applying knowledge of the algorithm and problem
domain to identify the subset of hyperparameters whose values can be predetermined and fixed. Although libraries and
infrastructures exist that allow for automated hyperparameter tuning, data scientists are advised not to take a completely
hands-off approach to this activity. Dividing the hyperparameter search space experiments into smaller regions, by
allowing only a subset of the hyperparameters to optimize for each experiment run, can provide useful insights on the
effect of hyperparameters on the model training and performance, and lead to a more efficient tuning stage.
During model training, the training dataset is supplied as input to the model and the resulting output is compared to
the training data ground truth to measure the model’s performance and update the model parameters. The validation
dataset is used to evaluate how well the model was trained and assists in fine tuning the model(s). For instance,
does the defined input generate the correct output? This may require human verification and/or the use of tools.
Validation is performed to provide evidence that the accuracy of the model and associated algorithms has detected/
defined per output expectations. It is important to consider the need for multiple datasets as the data used may alter
the original data and make it unavailable to revalidate. There must also be consideration for dealing with bias due to
erroneous assumptions in data selection. This may happen, for instance, when the training dataset(s) is not large or
representative enough.
The output from this stage is a trained model using all the training data and an optimal or near-optimal set of
hyperparameters. This is considered the best model given the existing fixed architecture and parameters that have
been evaluated using the validation data. The iteration of model design – model engineering – hyperparameter
tuning – model training – model evaluation reveals insights into the performance of the latest and previous models.
This yields further evidence as to how the model architecture and training options may be altered to improve the
performance; hence, a redesign or selection of an alternative model may be performed and evaluated.
31.3.3.5	 Evaluation and Model Testing
The evaluation and model testing stage is when the best performing models from the previous training and selection
iteration are subjected to performance evaluation. The performance output from the models is compared to the
gold standard labeled data to produce a set of aggregate and indicative performance metrics, or scorecards.
These scorecards inform on the current performance and determine if additional iterations are required. (See
Guiding Principle 8 in Joint US FDA/Health Canada/UK MHRA Good Machine Learning Practice for Medical Device
Development: Guiding Principles [78].)

--- PAGE 278 ---
Page 276
Appendix D11
Many ML libraries incorporate the validation data evaluation into their training functions, thus automating much of
this process. Data scientists, however, should be wary of relying on the quantitative measures for model evaluation.
Visual qualitative evaluation of the validation results often leads to better insights on how the model is performing,
allowing common error modes to be identified and addressed, and permit crucial refinement of the performance
metrics to provide better alignment with the required outputs.
When target model performance is achieved and/or no further changes to architecture are identified, then the best
performing ML models are selected as the candidates for integration into the overarching IT system and deployed.
31.3.3.6	 Model Integration and Deployment
During this stage, the AL/ML algorithms and models are migrated from the development environment code, which
supports fast prototyping and experimentation, to deployment target code that is cleaned and better fit for deployment
and long-term maintenance. The process involves removing much of the code designed to support prototyping of
candidate algorithms and experimentation. This includes identifying the parameters and algorithm choices to be
adopted and removing candidate algorithms that did not yield the desired properties or performance.
Key to this phase is modularization: to isolate the inference module of the code from the remaining code. Inference
are the components of the code relating to the forward passing of the test or previously unseen data as input through
to the output of the AI/ML sub-system. This excludes any function relating to validating the output against the ground
truth, or code involved in altering the model parameters or hyperparameters.
Integration also requires the specification and implementation of the interface between the AI/ML sub-system and
overarching IT system.
31.3.3.7	 Verification, Acceptance, and Release
The final infrastructure for release, maintenance, and performance verification of the AI/ML sub-system is developed
during this stage. Processes relating to the development, release, and maintenance of the AI/ML sub-system are
defined to specify if, how, and when the functions of the developing AI/ML algorithms are verified. Choices must be
made as to whether the training and possibly tuning of the ML models are included in these processes. For example,
it may be decided to run the complete model training, hyperparameter tuning, and model performance cycle on the
test data at regular intervals to verify functions of the code. Alternatively, it may be deemed that the model training
and hyperparameter tuning are not part of the core code or infrastructure and is excluded from the verification
process.
The training data, excluded from all training and validation activities to date, is used as an independent dataset
to provide confirmation of acceptable performance (i.e., verification) within the overarching application’s User
Acceptance Testing (UAT) prior to deployment. This data provides the assurance that certain performance scoring
and/or defined outcomes are achieved.
At a minimum the process should specify and document how verification of the AL/ML sub-system shall be performed.
The execution of such processes should result in the release of the first version of the AI/ML sub-system.
31.3.4	 Operation Phase
31.3.4.1	 Monitoring and Continuous Evaluation
During the operational phase, the AI/ML sub-system should be continuously monitored and maintained. Such
monitoring may result in the need to change or modify the AI/ML sub-system (see Guiding Principle 10 in Joint US
FDA/Health Canada/UK MHRA Good Machine Learning Practice for Medical Device Development: Guiding Principles
[78]).

--- PAGE 279 ---
Page 277
Appendix D11
For static systems, changes must be made in adherence with the organization’s change-management process
(see Appendix M8), leveraging risk-based evaluation(s) with consideration on the impact to current and future
production data to ensure it is robustly tested before deployment. For dynamic systems, appropriate metrics/KPIs and
acceptable parameters/tolerance limits must be established to ensure that the algorithm is still operating as intended.
A typical request might be that the system is poor at generalizing to a specific subclass of input data. A typical solution
is to acquire and integrate data of this subclass into the training dataset. The integration of additional training data
must be systematic in which every change in the performance is measured, validated, and understood.
For example, upon acquiring the additional data, a portion of it could be assigned to the training set and another
excluded from all model-training activities. Model training would proceed with the augmented training dataset with
the realization that the additional subclass of data may result in an overall drop in performance due to the inclusion
of more challenging data. Once trained, tested, and tuned, performance of the revised model should be staged by
initially executing the evaluation processes with the original model on the augmented test dataset with an expectation
that the performance may drop because of the increased challenge. Then, execution of the evaluation process
with the revised model should take place, with an expectation that the performance measures achieve the desired
acceptable level.
31.3.4.2	 Performance/Trending
In the operational phase it is possible to integrate, enrich, and prepare new data to further refine existing models,
develop new predictive models, and establish performance monitoring measures to track ongoing effectiveness.
There must exist quality control standards and/or measures to ensure acceptable performance throughout the
model(s) usable life. [78]
31.3.5	 Supporting Processes
This section describes additional processes needed to support the life cycle of AI/ML systems. The processes
presented should be used during all project phases.
31.3.5.1	 Risk Management
Risk management helps to drive much of the process and controls needed because it provides a direct indication
of the possible harm that could happen in different scenarios. ML is about increasing efficiency while decreasing
potential harm. It is imperative that possible scenarios and gaps from the traditional risk-management approach
are determined; this means performing risk assessments and then assessing the additional risks of having ML
intervention. This also needs to account for the volume and scope of the initial dataset in ensuring that all scenarios,
features, etc., were properly trained, and that the training data was correctly labeled prior to use, as this could lead to
additional requirements, etc., to be evaluated.
Other risks for consideration include:
•
Use of external vendors/suppliers
•
Retainment of sufficient technical and scientific knowledge within the organization
•
Model maturity and extent of previous usage
•
Changes to production data and/or errant data
•
System performance, downtime, etc. (i.e., consider business continuity and potential data-loss scenarios)
See Chapter 5 of the Main Body and Appendix M3 for additional details on risk management.

--- PAGE 280 ---
Page 278
Appendix D11
If the ML sub-system is static (i.e., offline where there are controlled and identifiable changes to the case data and
algorithm) and all data acquisition and annotation are supervised (i.e., validated prior to being included in the case
data), then standard data validation change-management processes should be sufficient.
Dynamic ML sub-systems (i.e., online learning may be deployed to continually update the model parameters during
operation as additional data is acquired) or the use of unsupervised data (where there is no ability to validate every
single piece of data as it is included in the case data) will require additional controls such as continual and robust
performance evaluation.
In all cases, periodic review and monitoring of the model performance is needed to identify potential bias, overfitting,
etc. The timing of reviews may be determined based on a defined interval and/or by activity such as the incorporation
of new case data.
31.3.5.2	 Data Governance
Data governance is critical to the success of ML. Since all data is not created equal, the strategy should include
awareness for data size, quality, and prevalence.
Prior to the project phase kick-off, it should be determined if additional data will be needed and whether a separate
project is required to obtain that data, determine its appropriateness for intended use, and prepare it for AI/ML sub-
system development. Activities include format specification, selection, and application tools for data annotation and
cleanup.
The extent and format required for the data is driven by the performance metrics previously obtained; therefore, the
training and ground-truth data must be in a form that will enable the desired measurement to be made. For example,
for the task of image analysis object localization, the performance metric is specified as overlap agreement between
the accepted standard and predicted outcome, which is measured by image segmentation. For a classification task,
simple labeling of an image as containing a particular feature may be sufficient.
See Chapter 3 of ISPE GAMP Guide: Records and Data Integrity [35] for additional details on data governance.
31.3.5.3	 Change Management
Change management is where data controls are integrated into system responses and the process used to maintain
control of the system. Defined change management, data management, and quality risk management processes
allow iterative change and retraining to protect patients and maintain compliance.
User stories and system controls along with human intervention are a great place to start. Drafting a visual of the
process with possible scenarios and mitigation can help identify weak points.
Consider using inputs and outputs:
•
Input: Internal procedures may need to be adjusted or managed differently with the use of ML to meet regulatory
needs
•
Output: Necessary regulatory deliverables required for change management such as if it is SaMD or a specific
GxP software (i.e., a clinical system and a laboratory system can have very different approaches and documents
needed for changes)
•
Input: Details about how a change is initiated and how it impacts the data
See Section 4.2.5.2 of the Main Body and Appendix M8 for additional details on change management.

--- PAGE 281 ---
Page 279
Appendix D11
The motivation for changes to the AI/ML system may be driven by external factors, including:
•
Performance Requirements – changes made to improve performance may result in retraining or tuning of the
models on existing datasets
•
Additional Inputs – changes to case data and/or algorithms to expand compatibility and increase generalization
•
Intended Use – changes made to significance of information, healthcare situation, condition

