--- PAGE 25 ---
Page 23
3	 Life Cycle Approach
Compliance with regulatory requirements and fitness for intended use may be achieved by adopting a life cycle
approach following good practice as defined in this Guide.
A life cycle approach entails defining and performing activities in a systematic way from conception, understanding
the requirements, through development, release, and operational use, to system retirement. Figure 3.1 shows a
general specification, design, and verification process described in ASTM E2500 [8].
Figure 3.1: The Specification, Design, and Verification Process [8]
Reprinted with permission from ASTM E2500-20 Standard Guide for Specification, Design, and Verification of
Pharmaceutical and Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing Systems and Equipment, copyright ASTM International, 100
Barr Harbor Dr., West Conshohocken, PA 19428. A copy of the complete standard may be obtained from ASTM at
www.astm.org.
This section of the Guide introduces the computerized system life cycle, a general approach to specification and
verification, a framework for computerized system validation, and the application of critical thinking.
3.1
Computerized System Life Cycle
The computerized system life cycle encompasses all activities from initial concept to retirement.
The life cycle for any system consists of four major phases:
•
Concept
•
Project
•
Operation
•
Retirement

--- PAGE 26 ---
Page 24
During the concept phase, the regulated company should consider opportunities to automate one or more business
processes based upon business need and benefits. Typically at this phase, initial requirements will be developed and
potential solutions considered. From an initial understanding of scope, costs, and benefits, a decision is made on
whether to proceed to the project phase. An initial risk assessment or GxP assessment should be performed, so that
GxP regulated systems are identified before the project phase commences.
The project phase involves planning, supplier assessment and selection, various levels of specification, configuration
(or coding for custom applications), and verification leading to acceptance and release for operation. Risk
management is applied to identify risks and to remove or reduce them to an acceptable level.
System operation is often the longest phase and is managed using defined, up-to-date, operational processes and
procedures applied by personnel who have appropriate training, education, and experience. Maintaining control
(including security), fitness for intended use, and compliance are key aspects. The management of changes of
different impact, scope, and complexity is an important activity during this phase.
The final phase is the ultimate retirement of the system. It involves decisions about data retention, migration, or
destruction, and the management of these processes.
Suppliers of products and services should be involved as appropriate throughout the life cycle. It may be appropriate
to delegate many of the described activities to suppliers, subject to satisfactory supplier assessment and control
measures.
These life cycle phases are shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Life Cycle Phases
An inventory of computerized systems should be maintained. Further details are given in Chapter 6. A GxP
assessment should be performed by the beginning of the project stage to determine whether a system is GxP
regulated, and if so, which specific regulations apply, and to which parts of the system they are applicable. This
should be performed as part of the initial system risk assessment (Step 1 as described in Chapter 5). For similar
systems, it may be appropriate to base the GxP assessment on the results of a previous assessment provided the
regulated company has an appropriate established procedure.
The computerized system life cycle described in this section should not be confused with the need for a defined
approach or method for software development by the supplier. Chapter 7 discusses supplier activities in more detail.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Page 25
3.2
Specification and Verification
The GAMP specification and verification approach is not inherently linear; it also fully supports iterative and
incremental (Agile) methods, as shown below.
A linear approach is particularly suitable when system requirements are fully understood and defined upfront. Figure
3.3 shows a linear approach for achieving computerized system compliance and fitness for intended use within the
system life cycle. The specification activities have equivalent verification steps to determine whether the specification
has been met. A hierarchy of specifications may be required for larger systems, while specifications may be combined
for smaller, simpler, or standard systems. Specifications are addressed by appropriate verification steps.
Figure 3.3: Linear Approach to Achieving Compliance and Fitness for Intended Use
The application of this general approach will vary widely depending on the risk, complexity, and novelty of the system.
Specific examples showing typical activities for different types of systems are provided in Chapter 4.
As shown in Figure 3.4, the life cycle and specification and verification approach described in the Guide is not
inherently linear.
Figure 3.4: Iterative and Incremental Approach to Achieving Compliance and Fitness for Intended Use [20]

--- PAGE 28 ---
Page 26
This Guide supports the use of Agile approaches for product development, the development of custom applications,
and incremental product configuration. Factors for the successful adoption of Agile include a robust QMS within an
appropriate organizational culture, well-trained and highly disciplined teams following a well-defined process supported
by effective tools and automation, and proper customer or product owner involvement. (See also Appendix D8)
This Guide describes the overall GxP system life cycle from the perspective of the regulated company and does not
define the software development process in detail.
While this section provides a suggested approach for activities performed by a regulated company, it is recognized
that other models and approaches are equally acceptable.
3.3
Computerized System Validation Framework
GAMP advocates a computerized system validation framework to achieve and maintain GxP compliance throughout
the computerized system life cycle.
The framework is based on system-specific validation plans and reports and the application of appropriate
operational controls. Validation plans and reports provide a disciplined and consistent approach to meeting regulatory
requirements, leading to appropriate documentation at the right level. Such documents are valuable both in preparing
for, and during, regulatory inspections.
The framework is applicable for the majority of computerized systems. This Guide has built on these principles by
clarifying the scalability of the approach, and the central role of QRM, to effectively and efficiently cover the very wide
range of systems in scope.
Where a computer system is regarded as one component of a wider manufacturing process or system, particularly in
an integrated QbD environment, specific and separate computerized system validation may not be necessary. This
environment requires both complete product and process understanding and that the CPPs can be accurately and
reliably predicted and controlled over the design space. In such a case, the fitness for intended use of the computer
system within the process may be adequately demonstrated by documented engineering or project activities together
with subsequent process validation or continuous quality verification of the overall process or system. The same
principle applies to the adoption of Process Analytical Technology (PAT).
For automated manufacturing equipment, separate computer system validation should be avoided. Computer system
specification and verification should be part of an integrated engineering approach to ensure compliance and fitness
for intended use of the complete automated equipment. Further information can be found in ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Volume 5 – Commissioning and Qualification (Second Edition) [30].
This framework is described in Appendix M1 and Appendix M7.
3.4
Critical Thinking Through the Life Cycle
Critical thinking promotes informed decision-making and good judgment on where and how to apply and scale quality
and compliance activities for computerized systems. It relies on knowledge of the business process and on the
detailed comprehension and analysis of where the business process can potentially impact patient safety, product
quality, and data integrity. A better understanding of risks results in more confidence in the assessment and control of
those risks, and therefore supporting robust scaling of controls and validation activities.

--- PAGE 29 ---
Page 27
The extent and depth, formality, and level of documentation formality may, and should, vary to a considerable degree
between different business processes, types of systems, functions within a system, and applications. Significant
efficiency improvements can be achieved by focusing on what is essential in individual situations and avoiding
unnecessary work. Critical thinking is not a one-time activity and should be applied throughout the computerized
system life cycle. As such, critical thinking should become a habitual mindset based on an intellectual commitment to
continual improvement.
Figure 3.5 illustrates critical thinking for computerized systems whereby proactive adoption of a risk-based approach
suitable for the intended use of the computerized system takes into account the multiple layers of assurance provided
elsewhere within the business process. In other words, combining technical, procedural, and behavioral controls
applied throughout the business process is used when assessing the risk of the computerized system. These layers
of assurance may exist upstream or downstream of the system within the business process it supports and include
supplier activities [20].
This holistic approach requires an initial investment of time and effort to analyze the overall business process that the
computerized system will support, and the associated regulated data. For example, the value of strong, validated data
integrity technical controls in the system could be negated by errors caused by manual transcription of regulated data
into the system. Data integrity cannot be recovered once lost. Business process mapping and data flow diagrams
capture this knowledge and facilitate the identification and understanding of the potential risks to patient safety,
product quality, and data integrity to determine where assurance is most needed.
Figure 3.5: Critical Thinking for Computerized Systems [20]
Regulatory authorities are adopting critical thinking to help determine whether controls are fit for intended use to
ensure patient safety, product quality, and data integrity. Practitioners should not consider that the level of regulatory
compliance achieved is directly proportionate to the amount of paperwork produced. Too much paperwork can
confuse and make it harder to maintain and inspect computerized systems. Regulators look for scaled and targeted
activities with well-organized information and records that have an appropriate level of detail, supported by clear and
unambiguous rationales explaining the critical thinking applied. The information/records contained within software
development and support tools offer the opportunity to demonstrate control in areas where separate documentation
was previously considered a necessity, and these should be leveraged [31]. (See also Appendix D9)
Further information can be found in Appendix M12 and the ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation –
Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service Management [20].

--- PAGE 31 ---
Page 29
4	 Life Cycle Phases
This section further describes the phases of the computerized system life cycle introduced in Chapter 3.
The life cycle approach described is not inherently linear, and is designed to be compatible with a wide range of
models and methods, including iterative and incremental (Agile) approaches. References to documentation and
deliverables should not be interpreted as always requiring traditional documents. The maintenance of records and
information in appropriate and effective software tools is encouraged.
4.1
Concept
Detailed activities in this phase will depend on company approaches to initiating and justifying project
commencement. Gaining management commitment to provide appropriate resources is an important pre-project
activity. An initial risk assessment or GxP assessment should be performed so that GxP regulated systems are
identified before the project phase commences.
4.2
Project
This section describes the following project stages in more detail:
•
Planning
•
Specification, configuration, and coding
•
Verification
•
Reporting and release
The key supporting processes of risk management, change and configuration management, design review,
traceability, and document management also are described in this section.
Figure 4.1 shows how these project stages and supporting processes form part of the computerized system life cycle.
The stages are equally applicable to the project phase and to subsequent changes during operation.
This is a simplified general model that describes a staged approach to the project phase. For example, it covers both
configuration and coding, which are required only for certain types of systems. Specific examples of how to use this
staged approach for typical types of systems are specified in Section 4.2.6.
Each project stage typically involves multiple activities; for example, planning may involve:
•
Preparing project plans
•
Establishing project teams
•
Developing requirements
•
Conducting supplier assessments
•
Defining the extent and formality of verification activities

--- PAGE 32 ---
Page 30
While the project phase is made up of generally sequential stages, detailed activities often will be performed in
parallel or with some overlap. For example, verification activities may occur through several stages. Iterative and
incremental approaches may also be used.
Information produced during the execution of these stages provide the evidence that the system is fit for its intended
use. Some of this may be used by the regulated company during regulatory inspections to provide justification of the
suitability of the system.
Figure 4.1: Project Stages and Supporting Processes within the Life Cycle
4.2.1
Planning
Planning should cover all required activities, responsibilities, procedures, and timelines.
As described in Section 2.1.3, life cycle activities should be scaled according to:
•
System impact on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity (risk assessment)
•
System complexity and novelty (architecture and nature of system components, including maturity and level of
configuration or customization)
•
Outcome of supplier assessment (supplier capability)
For further details on computerized system validation planning, see Appendix M1. In some cases, specific
computerized system validation plans may not be required as described in Section 3.3.
A clear and complete understanding of the process to be supported and initial user requirements facilitates effective
planning. Initial requirements are often gathered during the concept phase and refined and enhanced during the
planning stage.
The extent and detail of requirements gathering and specification should be sufficient to support risk assessment,
further specification, development of the system, and verification. These activities may be linear or iterative and
incremental (Agile). Comparison of available solutions may result in refinement of the requirements.

--- PAGE 33 ---
Page 31
The approach should be based on product and process understanding and relevant regulatory requirements. Where
appropriate, e.g., for process control systems, requirements should be traceable to relevant CPPs and CQAs.
Requirements are the responsibility of the user community and should be maintained and controlled.
See Appendix D1 for further details on Requirements Specifications (RS).
4.2.2
Specification, Configuration, and Coding
The role of specification is to enable systems to be developed, verified, and maintained. The number and level of
detail of the specifications will vary depending upon the type of system and its intended use. For example, software
design specifications are not expected from the regulated company for non-custom products.
Specifications should be adequate to support subsequent activities, including risk assessment, further specification
and development of the system, verification as appropriate, and system maintenance and update.
The requirements for configuration and coding activities depend on the type of system (see Section 4.2.6 for examples).
Any required configuration should be performed in accordance with a controlled and repeatable process. Any required
software coding should be performed in accordance with defined standards. The need for code reviews within the
organization producing the software should be considered.
Configuration management and version control are intrinsic and vital aspects of controlled configuration and coding.
Figure 4.1 shows specification as a separate activity to configuration and coding. However, specification activities
may be distinct from, or tightly linked to, configuration and coding activities depending on the software development
method being adopted.
Specifications should be maintained and controlled. See Appendix D1 and Appendix D3 for further details on
specification, configuration, and design. See Appendix D4 for further details on the management, development, and
review of software.
4.2.3
Verification
Verification confirms that specifications have been met. This may involve multiple stages of reviews and testing
depending on the type of system, the development method applied, and its use.
While verification is shown as a single box on Figure 4.1, verification activities occur throughout the project stages.
For example, design reviews should verify specifications during the specification stage. See Section 4.2.5 for further
details on design reviews.
Terminology used to cover verification activities is described in Section 4.2.6.4.
Testing computerized systems is a fundamental verification activity. Testing is concerned with identifying defects so
that they can be corrected, as well as demonstrating that the system meets requirements.
The use of effective and appropriate testing tools is encouraged. Such tools should have documented assessments
for their adequacy (refer to EU Annex 11 Clause 4.7 [32]) and be controlled in use; however, validation is not required.
Testing is often performed at several levels depending on the risk, complexity, and novelty. Different types of testing
are covered in Appendix D5, Section 6.
Tests may be defined in one or more test specifications to cover hardware, software, configuration, and acceptance.

--- PAGE 34 ---
Page 32
An appropriate test strategy should be developed based on the risk, complexity, and novelty. Supplier documentation
should be assessed and used if suitable. The strategy should define which types of testing are required and the level
and purpose of test specifications. The test strategy should be reviewed and approved by appropriate SMEs.
See Appendix D5 for further details on testing and development of an appropriate test strategy.
4.2.4	 Reporting and Release
The system should be accepted for use in the operating environment and released into that environment in
accordance with a controlled and documented process. Acceptance and release of the system for use in GxP
regulated activities should follow a defined process and involve oversight and input of the process owner, system
owner, and the appropriate quality function as necessary and applicable. This may be a continuously managed
process rather than a one-off event, for example Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment (CI/CD), and
Software as a Service (SaaS).
A computerized system validation report should be produced summarizing the activities performed, any deviations
from the plan, any outstanding and corrective actions, and provide a statement of fitness for intended use of the
system. See Appendix M7 for further details.
The incorporation of lessons learned/after action review stage gates in the project should be considered (see ISPE
Good Practice Guide: Knowledge Management in the Pharmaceutical Industry, Appendix 6 [10]).
In some cases, specific computerized system validation reports may not be required, as described in Section 3.3.
A well-managed system handover from the project team to the process owner, system owner, and operational users
is a prerequisite for effectively maintaining compliance of the system during operation. See Section 8.6 and Appendix
O1 for further details on system handover.
4.2.5
Supporting Processes
4.2.5.1	 Risk Management
An appropriate risk-management process should be established.
See Chapter 5 and Appendix M3 for further details on risk management.
4.2.5.2	 Change and Configuration Management
Appropriate configuration management processes should be established such that a computerized system and all its
constituent components can be identified and defined at any point during its life cycle.
Change management procedures covering software, hardware, and documentation should be established. The point
at which change management is introduced should be defined. Appropriate change processes should be applied to
both project and operational phases.
Any involvement of the supplier in these processes should be defined and agreed.
See Appendix M8 for further details on project change and configuration management.
4.2.5.3	 Design Review
At suitable stages during the life cycle, planned and systematic design reviews of specifications, design, and
development should be performed. This design review process should evaluate deliverables to ensure that they
satisfy the specified requirements. Corrective actions should be defined and progressed.

--- PAGE 35 ---
Page 33
The rigor of the design review process and the extent of documentation should be based on risk, complexity, and
novelty.
Design reviews are mainly applicable for custom applications and within the supplier product development processes.
See Appendix M5 for further details on design reviews.
4.2.5.4	 Traceability
Traceability is a process for ensuring that:
•
Requirements are traceable back to business process needs
•
Requirements are addressed and traceable to the appropriate functional and design elements in the
specifications
•
Requirements can be traced to the appropriate verification
As well as demonstrating coverage of design and verification, traceability can greatly assist the assessment and
management of change.
Traceability should be focused on aspects critical to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity. The use of
traceability tools and automated traceability methods is encouraged.
See Appendix M5 for further guidance on traceability.
4.2.5.5	 Documentation Management and Knowledge Management
Management of documentation includes preparation, review, approval, issue, change, withdrawal, and storage.
See Appendix M9 for further details on documentation management. Information and records may be maintained in
appropriate and effective tools rather than in traditional documents.
Documentation, tools, and systems contain explicit knowledge that is captured and codified, whereas implied
knowledge is context-specific knowledge acquired through personal experience or internalization rather than physical
media or information systems. Both need to be considered for successful initial and subsequent system deployments.
See the ISPE Good Practice Guide: Knowledge Management in the Pharmaceutical Industry [10] for further details
on knowledge management.
4.2.6
Practical Examples
This section shows how the general approach may be applied in a scalable manner to three common types of
systems, using Categorization of software. Categorization assists in selecting appropriate life cycle activities and
deliverables, as described in Appendix M4, based on the nature of the component and likelihood of defects.
Computerized systems are generally made up of a combination of components from different GAMP Categories
(as described in the following subsections). For example, core functionality within a computerized system may be
Category 3, with Category 4 workflow configuration, and custom interfaces to other systems being Category 5.
Categories 3 to 5 should be viewed as a continuum with no absolute boundaries. The software category is just
one factor to consider in a risk-based approach. Life cycle activities should be scaled based on the GxP impact,
complexity, and novelty of the system. In all cases, the emphasis should be on ensuring fitness for intended use
based on appropriate technical activities following current good practice. Table-driven approaches purely based on
categorization decisions should be avoided.

--- PAGE 36 ---
Page 34
For convenience the activities shown in this section are a linear representation, but iterative and incremental (Agile)
approaches are equally acceptable as described in Section 3.2 and Appendix D8.
These examples are intended to be indicative and for illustration purposes only. Actual approaches for specific
systems should be based on the results of supplier assessments and risk assessments, in addition to the
categorization of system components, as described in Appendices M2, M3, and M4.
The terminology used in these examples is discussed in Section 4.2.6.4.
4.2.6.1	 Example of a Standard Product
Many computerized systems comprise commercially available software products running on standard hardware
components.
Software products that are used off-the-shelf (i.e., standard and not configurable for a specific business process),
are typically classified as GAMP Category 3. This includes off-the-shelf components used for business purposes. It
includes both those that cannot be configured to conform to business processes, and those that offer defined ranges
of factory-provided values or ranges (also called parameterization, as may be found in process control systems and
simple laboratory devices). In both cases, configuration to run in the user’s environment is possible and likely (e.g.,
for printer setup).
In such cases, and based on satisfactory supplier and risk assessments, a simple approach consisting of one level of
specification and verification is typically applicable (see Figure 4.2).
Figure 4.2: Approach for a Standard Product (Category 3)
Testing typically covers:
•
Correct installation
•
Tests that demonstrate fitness for intended use and allow acceptance of the system against requirements
•
Any further tests as a result of risk and supplier assessments
Regulated companies typically perform the required specification and verification. While the system is not configured
for a business process, there may be some limited configuration such as run-time parameters or printer setup.
Supplier activities typically include supply of the product, and provision of documentation, training, and support and
maintenance.

--- PAGE 37 ---
Page 35
4.2.6.2	 Example of a Configured Product
A common type of computerized system involves the configuration of commercially available software products
running on standard hardware components. These may be installed on-premise by the regulated company, or
increasingly for IT applications such as SaaS, hosted by an IT service provider/supplier.
Commercial software products that are configured for a specific business process are typically classified as GAMP
Category 4.
In such cases, and based on satisfactory supplier and risk assessments, a flexible approach to specification and
verification may be applied. The number of deliverables required to cover the required specification and verification of
functionality delivered via configuration will depend on the size, complexity, and technical architecture of the system
(see Figure 4.3). For example, in many cases, functionality and configuration aspects may be combined into one
specification, or the definition of configuration to meet defined requirements is all that is required.
In some cases, for example, complex on-premise solutions such as process control systems, but not typically for
commercially available IT products or SaaS solutions, a project-specific functional specification and subsequent
functional testing may be defined and agreed between the regulated company and the supplier.
The illustrative diagrams in this section show the project phase activities from the regulated company perspective.
Reference to functional and other project specifications should not be confused with the supplier’s internal core
product functional specifications, technical, architectural, and design specifications that are maintained within the
supplier QMS as part of their product life cycle information.
Figure 4.3: Approach for a Configured Product (Category 4)
Testing typically covers:
•
Correct installation
•
Configuration of the system

--- PAGE 38 ---
Page 36
•
Functionality that supports the specific business process based on risk and supplier assessments (this is an area
where supplier activities may and should be leveraged as much as possible, see Section 8.3)
•
Tests that demonstrate fitness for intended use and allow acceptance of the system against requirements
•
Any further tests as a result of risk and supplier assessments
Regulated companies should decide upon the required levels of specification and verification, and many of the project
phase activities and documents may be delegated. Since the system is configured for a business process, testing
should be focused on this configuration.
Supplier activities typically include:
•
Supply of the product
•
Production of specifications and test specifications, as required, on behalf of the regulated company
•
Support during configuration and testing
•
User documentation
•
Training
•
Support and maintenance activities
The supply of the product and configuration may be performed by different suppliers.
Note that projects that are predominantly Category 4 may also require development of new custom software
components, such as interfaces.
4.2.6.3	 Example of a Custom Application
Some computerized systems are developed to meet individual user requirements, where no commercially available
solution is suitable. These may be developed using a linear (waterfall) approach or by using iterative and incremental
(Agile) methods. (See Figure 4.4)
The software developed for such systems is classified as GAMP Category 5.
In complex cases an approach consisting of various levels of specification and verification may be applied. The
number of deliverables required to cover these levels will depend on the complexity and impact of the system.
For example, for a small simple system the specification and design specifications may be combined. References
to documentation and deliverables should not be interpreted as always requiring traditional documents, and the
maintenance of records and information in appropriate and effective software tools is encouraged. For automated
process equipment, computer system specification and verification should be part of an integrated engineering
approach to ensure compliance and fitness for intended use.

--- PAGE 39 ---
Page 37
Figure 4.4: Approach for a Custom Application (Category 5)
Testing typically covers:
•
Correct installation
•
Functionality and design
•
Tests that demonstrate fitness for intended use and allow acceptance of the system against requirements
•
Any further tests as a result of risk assessments and supplier assessments
Regulated companies should decide upon the required levels of specification and verification, and many of the project
phase activities and deliverables may be delegated. Since the system is new, rigorous testing should be performed at
both functional and design levels.
Supplier activities typically include production of specifications and test specifications on behalf of the regulated
company, development of new software, testing, user documentation, training, and support and maintenance
activities.
Complex systems may require a further hierarchy of specifications covering hardware design specifications and
configuration specifications.

--- PAGE 40 ---
Page 38
4.2.6.4	 Terminology
The specific terminology used to describe life cycle activities and deliverables varies from company to company and
from system type to system type. There are a number of reasons for this, including:
•
Regulated companies having different approaches
•
Difference in emphasis of GLP, GCP, GMP, GVP, and medical devices
•
Difference in emphasis of various regulatory agencies
•
Different international or local standards being followed
•
Different types of computerized systems (e.g., IT, manufacturing, and laboratory systems)
•
Suppliers using a range of different development models and approaches
This Guide aims to be flexible and does not intend to prescribe any one set of terms to the exclusion of others.
This section describes how qualification terminology, as traditionally used, relates to the activities described in this
Guide. See Table 4.1. This will assist readers who use this terminology with the application of this Guide.
This Guide does not use traditional pharmaceutical process validation terminology such as IQ/OQ/PQ to describe
system life cycle activities. This aligns with the US FDA, who also chose not to use the terminology in General
Principles of Software Validation; Final Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff [33] because the terminology may not
be well understood among many software professionals. This qualification terminology is also not well aligned with
current good software engineering and IT/IS practice, or typical software supplier practices, and implies an inherently
linear approach. Such terminology may, however, be appropriate for the qualification of, for example, simpler stand-
alone manufacturing or laboratory equipment.
Whatever terminology is used for verification activity, the overriding requirement is that the regulated company can
demonstrate that the system is compliant and fit for intended use.
Table 4.1: Relationship between Traditional Qualification Terminology and GAMP 5 Activities
Traditional Term
Description
GAMP 5 Verification Activity
Design
Qualification (DQ)
Documented verification that
the proposed design of facilities,
systems, and equipment is suitable
for the intended purpose
Design review
(See Section 4.2.5 for further details)
Installation
Qualification (IQ)
Documented verification that a
system is installed according to
written and approved specifications
Checking, testing, or other verification to
demonstrate correct:
•
Installation of software and hardware
•
Configuration of software and hardware
(See Appendix D5 for details)
Operational
Qualification (OQ)
Documented verification that a
system operates according to
written and approved specifications
throughout specified operating
ranges
Testing or other verification of the system against
specifications to demonstrate correct operation of
functionality that supports the specific business
process throughout all specified operating ranges.
(See Appendix D5 for details)

--- PAGE 41 ---
Page 39
Table 4.1: Relationship between Traditional Qualification Terminology and GAMP 5 Activities (continued)
Note: The use of qualification terminology in relation to computerized systems and the relationship between OQ and
PQ in particular, varies from company to company. The comparisons in Table 4.1 provide a general interpretation only
and are not intended to be prescriptive.
Regulated companies should decide on a verification approach appropriate to a specific system. Testing activities
should be selected based on the risk, complexity, and novelty of the system as described in Section 4.2.3.
The examples in Section 4.2.6 illustrate the typical different levels of testing applied to different categories of system,
such as:
•
Module testing
•
Integration testing
•
Configuration testing
•
Functional testing
•
Requirements testing
Table 4.1 lists various GAMP verification activities. There is no one-to-one relationship between the levels of testing
and the GAMP verification activities, as the following examples show. Note that these examples are intended as
illustrative and not prescriptive, and that critical thinking and technical experience and knowledge should be applied
to the selection of the appropriate life cycle approach.
•
For a typical Category 3 system, testing of both installation and configuration are covered by requirements
testing.
•
For a typical Category 3 system, tests are executed to demonstrate fitness for intended use and to allow
acceptance of the system against user requirements. There is typically no need for further testing to demonstrate
correct operation of standard functionality of the product.
•
For a typical Category 4 system, while testing of configuration is covered by configuration testing, testing of
installation may occur at any of the testing levels depending on the project.
•
For a typical Category 5 system, correct operation of functionality that supports the specific business process
may be covered by module testing, integration testing, and functional testing, and may be supplemented by pre-
delivery testing.
The relationship between the required verification and the different levels of testing, particularly for GAMP Category
4 and GAMP Category 5 systems, may be complex. The verification or test strategy for a particular system should
ensure that the required verification activities are adequately covered.
Traditional Term
Description
GAMP 5 Verification Activity
Performance
Qualification (PQ)
Documented verification that a
system is capable of performing
the activities of the processes it is
required to perform, according to
written and approved specifications,
within the scope of the business
process and operating environment
Testing or other verification of the system to
demonstrate fitness for intended use and to
allow acceptance of the system against specified
requirements.
(See Appendix D5 for details)

--- PAGE 42 ---
Page 40
Acceptance of the system by the regulated company as being fit for release for operational use includes satisfactory
completion of an agreed set of verification activities. For some systems, this may occur in stages including the
leveraging, wherever possible, of testing or other acceptance activities performed prior to, and after, delivery.
Commonly used terms within such a process include Factory Acceptance Testing, Site Acceptance Testing, and
System Acceptance Testing. Verification activities should not be duplicated unnecessarily.
Whichever terms are used, the verification strategy should clearly define which activities should be satisfactorily
completed to allow acceptance of the system for release into operational use by the regulated company.
See Appendix D5 for further guidance on aspects of testing.
4.3
Operation
This section provides guidance on system operation. Not all the activities will be directly relevant to all systems. The
approach and required activities should be selected and scaled according to the nature, risk, and complexity of the
system in question through the application of critical thinking.
For more detailed information on system operation topics see the ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based
Approach to Operation of GxP Computerized Systems [34].
As part of preparing for final acceptance and formal handover for live operation, the regulated company should
ensure that appropriate operational processes, procedures, and plans have been implemented, and are supported by
appropriate training. These procedures and plans may involve the supplier in support and maintenance activities.
Depending on the deployment model and degree of outsourcing, the supplier (or service provider) may host
and administer, as well as support, the system. Appropriate contracts and agreements are essential to define
expectations, responsibilities, and performance measures.
Once the system has been accepted and released for use, there is a need to maintain compliance and fitness for
intended use throughout its operational life. This is achieved by the use of established and up-to-date procedures and
training that cover use, maintenance, and management.
The operational phase of a system may last many years, and may include changes to services, software, hardware,
the business process, and regulatory requirements. The integrity of the system and its data should be maintained
at all times and verified as part of periodic review. The use of supporting systems and tools to digitize and automate
processes for efficiency, consistency, and process adherence is encouraged.
As experience is gained during operation, opportunities for process and system improvements should be sought
based on periodic review and evaluation, operational and performance data, and root-cause analyses of failures.
Information from the incident and problem management and Corrective and Preventive Action (CAPA) processes can
provide significant input to the evaluation.
Change management should provide a dependable mechanism for prompt implementation of technically sound
improvements following the approach to specification, design, and verification described in this Guide. The rigor of the
approach, including the extent of documentation and verification, should be based on the risk and complexity of the
change through the application of critical thinking.
Note that operational GxP computerized systems as discussed in this section are those that support internal
regulated company GxP business processes, whereas operational SaMD is typically a product in the hands of
patients or health care providers. In these cases further medical device-related requirements such as the need for
post-market surveillance also apply.

--- PAGE 43 ---
Page 41
Maintaining system compliance involves many interrelated activities. Figure 4.5 shows the major relationships
between related groups of these activities. Service management and performance monitoring occur throughout the
operational life of the system. Other activities, such as change management, occur when triggered.
Figure 4.5: Major Information Flows between Operational Activities

--- PAGE 44 ---
Page 42
Some of the groups of activities shown in Figure 4.5 contain several individual related processes, procedures, and
plans, as described in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Grouping of Operational Processes
Group of Processes
Process
Appendix
Handover
Handover
O1
Service Management and System
Monitoring
Establishing and Managing Support Services
System Monitoring
O2
O3
Incident and Problem Management,
Deviation, and CAPA
Incident Management and Problem Management
Corrective and Preventive Action
O4
O5
Configuration Management
Operational Change and Configuration Management
O6
Audits and Review
Periodic Review
(Internal Quality Audits not covered by GAMP 5)
O8
Continuity Management
Backup and Restore
Business Continuity Management
O9
O10
Security and System Administration
Security Management
System Administration
O11
O12
Records Management
Archiving and Retrieval
O13
These processes are supported by QMS activities, such as document management, records management,
knowledge management, training management, and the maintenance of up-to-date end user procedures. Further
information is available in ISPE GAMP® Guide: Records and Data Integrity [35] and ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Knowledge Management in the Pharmaceutical Industry [10]
The individual support and maintenance processes required to maintain the compliance of computerized systems
during operation are briefly described below and covered in more detail in the Operational Appendices as shown in
Table 4.2.
The use of good IT practices (e.g., ITIL [5]) supported by IT service management tools and automation is encouraged
to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness of support processes and an auditable record of support activities.
4.3.1
Handover
Handover is the process for transfer of responsibility of a computerized system from a project team or a service group
to the operations team or a new service group.
This is an important process; achieving compliance and fitness for intended use on its own may not be enough to
guarantee a successful transfer into the operational phase.
The handover process will typically involve the project team (development group and/or supplier), process owner,
system owner, and Quality Unit. The support group should be involved at the earliest opportunity to ensure effective
knowledge transfer and establishment of operational procedures. A period of elevated support and maintenance,
often referred to as Hypercare Services, may be arranged to facilitate the transfer.

--- PAGE 45 ---
Page 43
Implied context-specific knowledge acquired through personal experience or internalization, as well as explicit
knowledge captured and codified in documentation, tools, and systems should be considered. See ISPE Good
Practice Guide: Knowledge Management in the Pharmaceutical Industry [10] for further details on knowledge
management.
See Appendix O1 for further details.
4.3.2
Service Management and Performance Monitoring
Figure 4.5 shows the major relationships between operational processes. Service management and performance
monitoring are shown related to records management due to records generated to demonstrate proper operation
and performance of a system. In addition, there is potential interaction with incident and problem management and
CAPA and change management when the results of the service or monitoring indicate there are issues that need
addressing. For clarity, these interactions are not shown in Figure 4.5.
4.3.2.1	 Establishing and Managing Support Services
The support required for each system, and how it will be provided, should be established. Support may be
provided by external service providers or internal resources. This process should ensure that service agreements,
maintenance plans, SOPs, support systems, and tools are established.
See Appendix O2 for further details.
4.3.2.2	 Performance Monitoring
Performance monitoring detects issues that could impact the availability and performance of the system in order
to facilitate mitigation before problems occur. Detected issues are managed through the incident management and
problem management processes. Monitoring tools and automation are increasingly used to detect potential issues,
report issues, and escalate to support organizations for timely intervention and rectification, and are encouraged.
The need for performance monitoring should be considered, and required activities scheduled and documented. This
may change during the operational life of a system.
See Appendix O3 and Appendix D9 for further details.
4.3.3
Incident and Problem Management and CAPA
4.3.3.1	 Incident Management and Problem Management
The incident management process aims to categorize incidents to direct them to the most appropriate resource or
complementary process to achieve a timely resolution; whereas problem management involves analyzing root causes
and preventing incidents from happening in the future. There should be a procedure defining how problems related
to software, hardware, and procedures should be captured, reviewed, prioritized, progressed, escalated, and closed.
This includes the need for processes to monitor progress and provide feedback. Incident and problem management
processes may be supported by service management tools that support the incident and problem management
process, associated action planning, and traceability of actions taken to address the incident or problem.
See Appendix O4 for further details.
4.3.3.2	 Corrective and Preventive Action
CAPA is a process for investigating, understanding, and correcting discrepancies based on root-cause analysis, while
attempting to prevent their recurrence.

--- PAGE 46 ---
Page 44
In the operational environment the CAPA process should feed into the overall CAPA system used for GxP operations.
When incidents occur, or when opportunities to reduce process/system failures are identified by other means, CAPA
should be identified and processes established to ensure that these are implemented effectively. CAPA can provide a
solution to problem control as described in ITIL Problem Management [5].
See Appendix O5 for further details.
4.3.4
Change Management
4.3.4.1	 Change Management
Change management is a critical activity that is fundamental to maintaining the proper functioning and controlled
status of systems and processes. All changes that are proposed during the operational phase of a computerized
system, whether related to software (including middleware), hardware, infrastructure, or use of the system, should be
subject to a formal change-control process (see Appendix O6 for guidance on replacements). This process should
ensure that proposed changes are appropriately reviewed to assess impact and risk of implementing the change.
Regression analysis and regression testing may be required. The process should ensure that changes are suitably
evaluated, authorized, documented, tested, and approved before implementation, and subsequently closed.
The process should allow the rigor of the approach, including the extent of documentation and verification, to be
scaled based on the nature, risk, and complexity of the change, by application of critical thinking. Some activities
such as replacements and routine system administration tasks should be covered by appropriate repair or system
administration processes.
Change management should provide a mechanism for prompt implementation of continual process and system
improvements based on periodic review and evaluation, operational and performance data, and root-cause analysis
of failures.
See Appendix O6 for further details.
4.3.4.2	 Configuration Management
Configuration management includes those activities necessary to precisely define a computerized system at any
point during its life cycle, from the initial steps of development through to retirement.
A configuration item is a component of the system that does not change as a result of the normal operation of the
system. Configuration items should only be modified by application of a change management process. Formal
procedures should be established to identify, define, and baseline configuration items, and to control and record
modifications and releases of configuration items, including updates and patches.
See Appendix O6 for further details.
4.3.4.3	 Repair Activity
The repair or replacement of defective computerized system components, which are often but not exclusively
hardware or infrastructure related, should be managed in accordance with a defined process. Such activities
should be authorized and implemented within the wider context of the change management process. Many repair
activities are emergencies and require rapid resolution, so the incident and change management processes should
be designed to allow such activities to occur without delay or increased risk to the operational integrity of the
computerized system.
See Appendix O6 for further details.

--- PAGE 47 ---
Page 45
4.3.5
Periodic Review
Periodic reviews are used throughout the operational life of systems to verify that they remain compliant with
regulatory requirements, fit for intended use, and meet company policies and procedures, including those related to
data integrity. The reviews should confirm that, for components of a system, the required support and maintenance
processes and expected regulatory controls (plans, procedures, and records) are established.
Periodic reviews should be:
•
Scheduled at an interval appropriate to the impact and operational history of the system. Risk and other
assessments should be used to determine which systems are in scope and the frequency of periodic review.
•
Performed in accordance with a predefined process
•
Documented with corrective actions tracked to satisfactory completion
See Appendix O8 for further details.
4.3.6
Continuity Management
4.3.6.1	 Backup and Restore
Processes and procedures should be established to ensure that backup copies of software, records, and data are
made, maintained, and retained for a defined period within safe and secure areas.
Restore procedures should be established, tested, and the results of that testing documented.
See Appendix O9 for further details.
4.3.6.2	 Business Continuity Planning
Business Continuity Planning (BCP) is a series of related activities and processes concerned with ensuring that an
organization is fully prepared to respond effectively in the event of failures and disruptions, covering local and global
infrastructure, data, and the application.
Critical business processes and systems supporting these processes should be identified, and the risks to each
assessed. Plans should be established and exercised to ensure the timely and effective resumption of these critical
business processes and systems.
A business continuity plan defines how the business may continue to function and handle data following failure. It
also defines the steps required to restore business processes following a disruption and, where appropriate, how data
generated during the disruption should be managed. Plans should be prioritized based on patient and business risk,
in case of disruption to multiple systems.
The BCP also identifies the triggers for invoking the business continuity plan, roles and responsibilities, and required
communication.
See Appendix O10 for further details.

--- PAGE 48 ---
Page 46
4.3.6.3	 Disaster Recovery Planning
As a subset of BCP, plans should be specified, approved, and rehearsed for the recovery of specific systems in the
event of a disaster. These plans should detail the precautions taken to minimize the effects of a disaster, allowing the
organization to either maintain or quickly resume critical functions. There should be a focus on disaster prevention,
e.g., the provision of redundancy for critical systems. Disaster Recovery (DR) plans often require a shared
responsibility model between internal organizations of the regulated company (e.g., business, IT) and external service
providers (e.g., cloud service providers).
See Appendix O10 for further details.
4.3.7
Security and System Administration
4.3.7.1
Security Management
Computerized systems and data should be adequately protected against willful or accidental loss, damage, or
unauthorized change. Procedures for managing secure access, including adding and removing privileges for
authorized users, virus management, password management, and physical security measures should be established
before the system is approved for use.
Role-based security should be implemented, if possible, to ensure that sensitive data and functions are not
compromised. Security management procedures should apply to all users, including administrators, superusers,
users, and support staff (including supplier support staff).
Security provisions should ensure that data is protected against unauthorized intrusions including cyber security
attacks. Intrusion prevention and detection processes, supported by relevant IT tools and automation, should be in
place.
See Appendix O11 for further details.
4.3.7.2	 System Administration
Once a system is in operation the users of the system will require support. The system administration process
provides administrative support for systems, including performance of standard administration tasks. The extent of
this process varies greatly depending on the nature of the system.
See Appendix O12 for further details.
4.3.8
Record Management
4.3.8.1	 Retention
Policies for the retention of regulated records should be established, based on a clear understanding of regulatory
requirements and existing corporate policies, procedures, standards, and guidelines.
See Appendix O13 for further details.
4.3.8.2	 Archiving and Retrieval
Archiving is the process of taking records and data off-line by moving them to a different location or system, often
protecting them against further changes. Procedures and processes for archiving and effective and accurate retrieval of
records should be established based on a clear understanding of regulatory requirements including retention periods.
See Appendix O13 for further details.

--- PAGE 49 ---
Page 47
The ISPE GAMP Guide: Records and Data Integrity [35] and ISPE GAMP® RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity
by Design [36] give further details on record retention, archive, and retrieval.
4.4
Retirement
This activity covers system withdrawal, system decommissioning, system disposal, and migration of required data.
4.4.1
Withdrawal
Withdrawal is the removal of the system from active operation, i.e., users are deactivated, interfaces disabled. No
data should be added to the system from this point forward. Special access should be retained for data reporting,
results analysis, and support.
4.4.2	 Decommissioning
Decommissioning is a controlled process by which an application or system is removed from use in an organization
once it has been retired and/or has become obsolete.
4.4.3
Disposal
Data, documentation, software, or hardware may be permanently destroyed. Each may reach this stage at a different
time. Data and documentation may not be disposed of until they have reached the end of the record-retention period,
as specified in the company’s record-retention policy, following an authorized and documented process.
Due to the volume of data and records involved, retirement can be a major task for IT systems in particular.
Consideration should be given to:
•
Establishing procedures covering system retirement, including withdrawal, decommissioning, and disposal as
appropriate
•
Documentary evidence to be retained of actions taken during retirement of the system
•
GxP records to be maintained, their required retention periods, and which records can be destroyed
•
The need to migrate records to a new system or archive, and the method of verifying and documenting this
process
•
Ability to retrieve these migrated records on the new system
Further guidance is also provided in the ISPE GAMP Guide: Records and Data Integrity [35] and ISPE GAMP RDI
Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design [36].
See Appendix M10 for further details.
4.4.4	 Data Migration
Data migration may be required when an existing system is replaced by a new system, when an operational system
experiences a significant change, or when the scope of use of a system is changed. The migration process should be
accurate, complete, and verified.
See Appendix D7 for further details.

