--- PAGE 71 ---
Page 69
7	 Supplier Activities
Although the responsibility for compliance with GxP regulations lies with the regulated company, the supplier may
have considerable involvement in the process (see Section 6.1.4).
Regulated companies may be able to leverage supplier knowledge and documentation, subject to suitability following
formal assessment. This may involve an audit, depending on risk, complexity, and novelty.
This section is written specifically to help suppliers to meet the requirements and expectations of the regulated
company. Some information from previous sections is included to give suppliers a more complete picture.
7.1
Supplier Products, Applications, and Services
Suppliers provide a range of products, applications, and services for hardware, software, and related technologies
including the provision of cloud-computing services. The relationship between supplier and regulated company
will vary significantly depending upon the product, application, or scope of service being provided. Consultants, for
instance those acting as implementation partners, should have sufficient education, training, and experience to advise
on the subject for which they are retained.
7.1.1
Standard Product (GAMP Category 3)
If the product is purchased off-the-shelf and does not require configuration to support business processes, or only
offers defined ranges of factory-provided values or ranges4, supplier involvement with the regulated company is,
typically, limited to the provision of documentation, training, support, and maintenance. The product should be
developed and maintained by the supplier in accordance with good practices (see Section 7.2).
7.1.2
Configured Product (GAMP Category 4)
If the product requires configuration to support specific business processes, supplier involvement with the regulated
company will, typically, include support with specification, configuration, verification, and operation of the system (see
Chapter 4).
Procedures to follow should be agreed between the regulated company and the supplier and be documented in
the appropriate plan. Procedures adopted may be those of the regulated company or from the supplier QMS (see
Section 7.2).
The product itself should be developed and maintained by the supplier in accordance with good practices (see
Section 7.2).
7.1.3
Custom Application (GAMP Category 5)
For a custom application, the regulated company typically contracts a supplier to develop the application based on
defined requirements. Therefore, the supplier will be involved during the full project life cycle of the system, and
also to provide support during system operation as described in Chapter 4. Procedures to follow should be agreed
between the regulated company and the supplier and be documented in the appropriate plan.
Procedures adopted may be those of the regulated company or from the supplier QMS (see Section 7.2).
4	 This is also called parameterization, as may be found in process control systems and simple laboratory devices.

--- PAGE 72 ---
Page 70
7.1.4
Service Provision
Suppliers that provide IT/IS services (including the provision of cloud-computing services) should operate within a
QMS (see Section 7.2). Quality planning should define the activities, procedures, deliverables, and responsibilities for
establishing delivery and monitoring of the service. Such a plan is a contractual document, and as such, should be
approved for use by both the supplier and the regulated company.
The required information may be satisfactorily covered by other contractual documents such as a service level
agreement, in which case a separate plan would not be required.
The extent to which the good practices described in Section 7.2 apply to the provision of services will vary
considerably depending on the scope and nature of the service and should be defined as part of the supplier QMS.
Further guidance specific to IT/IS service providers and cloud service providers is available in the ISPE GAMP
Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service Management, Chapter 4: IT Service
Management [20].
7.2
Supplier Good Practices
Table 7.1 lists good practice activities that apply to product and application development, support and service
provision. These are further described in this section.
Table 7.1: Supplier Good Practices
Step
Practice
Description
1.
Establish QMS
The supplier QMS should:
1. Provide a documented set of procedures and standards
2. Ensure activities are performed by suitably competent and trained staff
3. Provide evidence of conformance with the defined procedures and
standards
4. Enable and promote continual improvement, including adoption of current
software methods, good practices, and appropriate tools and automation
2.
Establish Requirements
The supplier should ensure that clear requirements are defined or provided
by the regulated company.
3.
Quality Planning
The supplier should define how their QMS will be implemented for a
particular product, application, or service.
4.
Assessments of Sub-
Suppliers
Suppliers should formally assess their sub-suppliers as part of the process
of selection and quality planning.
5.
Produce Specifications
The supplier should specify the system to meet the defined requirements.
6.
Perform Design Review
The design of the system should be formally reviewed against requirements,
standards, and identified risks to ensure that the system will meet its
intended purpose and that adequate controls are established to manage the
risks.
7.
Software Production/
Configuration
Software should be developed in accordance with defined standards,
including the use of code review processes.
Configuration should follow any defined rules or recommendations and
should be documented.

--- PAGE 73 ---
Page 71
Table 7.1: Supplier Good Practices (continued)
Step
Practice
Description
8.
Perform Testing
The supplier should test the system in accordance with approved test plans
and test specifications.
9.
Commercial Release of
the System
System release to customers should be performed in accordance with a
formal process.
Note: This is not release into GxP environment, which is a regulated
company activity.
10.
Provide User
Documentation and
Training
The supplier should provide adequate system management documentation,
operational documentation, and training in accordance with agreed
contracts.
11.
Support and Maintain the
System in Operation
The supplier should support and maintain the system in accordance with
agreed contracts. The process for managing and documenting system
changes should be fully described.
12.
System Replacement
and Retirement
The supplier should manage the replacement or withdrawal of products/
services in accordance with a documented process and plan.
The supplier also may support the regulated company with the retirement of
computerized systems in accordance with regulated company procedures.
7.3
Quality Management System
It is recommended that suppliers follow a QMS, preferably based on recognized standards. The QMS should define:
•
The process being followed to deliver and support the product, application, or service
•
The process being followed to understand customer business process needs, and capture customer
requirements (including business, quality, and regulatory requirements)
•
Responsibilities, including clear separation of authority between Quality Assurance (QA) and other groups such
as product development, product support, finance, or marketing
•
Deliverables
•
Management of documentation, records, and information
•
Planned reviews of the QMS and internal audits
•
Management of incidents/problems/non-conformities
•
Approach to continual improvement, including the adoption of current software development models, methods
and good practices, and associated selection of supporting tools and automation
The QMS should be based on a life cycle concept for the development and subsequent support of the computerized
system. There are many equally valid life cycle approaches that may be used by suppliers, including Agile. This
Guide does not recommend any particular approach, but rather highlights those activities expected of suppliers to
support the regulated company in achieving and maintaining compliance.

--- PAGE 74 ---
Page 72
The QMS should include procedures covering the activities that support system development and support, such as:
•
Software management, control, and release
•
Development change control
•
Configuration management
•
Traceability
•
Training of supplier staff
•
Document, records, and information management
•
Backup and restore
Many systems developed today are based on software products and packages, which are configured to meet
user requirements. Such products, normally, will come with supporting documentation, and where possible this
documentation should be used in the system life cycle. Further modules of custom software may be required to
provide specific functionality, such as interfaces and reports. The design and development of such software should be
fully documented.
The QMS should cover the approach to continual improvement. For example, CMMI [3] provides an approach based
on a framework for assessing and improving organizational capability and maturity. The use of metrics for measuring
and improving the quality of software and hardware should be considered as part of the approach to improvement.
The use of infrastructure and IT service delivery approaches such as ITIL [5] is encouraged. Industry guidance, such
as ISPE GAMP [38], should be treated as supporting information and should not override the supplier’s established
QMS.
7.4
Requirements
Requirements are captured, defined, and developed internally by the supplier (in the case of product development),
and/or may be provided by the customer (for a configured product, custom application, or a service).
The requirements should define clearly and precisely what the system should do and state any constraints.
Requirements should be developed, reviewed, and approved in accordance with the development method
implemented by the supplier whether it be linear or iterative.
Changes to requirements should be controlled. Changes to subsequent specification documents that affect the
requirements should lead to an update of the requirements.
Regulated companies wish to maximize the use of supplier testing to support their compliance activities. Therefore,
requirements should be written such that they can be tested. Individual requirements should be traceable through the
life cycle.
For configured products and custom applications, the regulated company should describe the business processes
to be automated. In the case of configured products, these processes should be aligned with the functionality of the
product to be used. This may require significant process reengineering.
The use of appropriate and effective software tools should be considered by suppliers to manage information/records
that may otherwise have been managed via paper documentation.

--- PAGE 75 ---
Page 73
See Appendix D1 for further details on RS. See Appendix D8 and Appendix D9 for details on managing requirements
using an Agile approach.
7.5
Supplier Quality Planning
The supplier should define how the QMS will be implemented for a particular product, application, or service.
This should include defining the life cycle model being followed and the project organization, activities, procedures,
deliverables, and responsibilities for establishing the fitness for intended use of the system. The approach may
include prototyping or other software development techniques. The role of supplier QA should be clearly defined.
These supplier quality requirements may be captured in a separate document entitled quality plan or other supplier
documentation. In each case, the quality requirements should be clearly documented, reviewed, approved,
accessible, and followed.
See Appendix M6 for further details on quality and project planning.
7.5.1
Prototyping
Prototyping methods may be used to clarify user requirements or to evaluate areas of risk. Typically, a prototype is
used to evaluate the acceptability of a user interface, the performance of critical algorithms, suitability of the overall
solution, or aspects of system performance such as capacity and speed.
To be effective, the aims and objectives of the prototype should be clearly defined, and the prototype evaluated
against these to ensure the objectives are met. Suppliers should define how information gained can be incorporated
into the product in a controlled manner. Prototyping is often used as part of Agile software development where control
is achieved through processes such as the Agile ceremonies (e.g., daily Scrum), control of the sprint backlog, use of
tools, and sprint reviews and retrospectives (see Appendix D8 for more information).
7.6
Sub-Supplier Assessments
Suppliers should formally assess their sub-suppliers as part of quality planning. They also should be periodically
reassessed in accordance with the QMS.
The decision whether to perform an audit of their sub-suppliers should be documented and based on a risk
assessment.
In some cases, such as those sub-suppliers related to the location and hosting of GxP regulated data, sub-supplier
management may have a direct impact on regulated company compliance, and should be made transparent.
See Appendix M2 for further details on supplier assessments.
7.7
Specifications
For product development, the supplier should document the functionality and design of the system to meet the
defined requirements. This should cover software, hardware, and configuration.
References to documentation and specifications should not be interpreted as requiring traditional documents, and
the maintenance of records and information in appropriate and effective software tools is encouraged. The illustrative
terminology used in this section and elsewhere is not prescriptive and not intended to imply that use of modern
terminology associated with, for example Agile methods, is not acceptable.

--- PAGE 76 ---
Page 74
Functional specifications should clearly and completely describe what the product will do. They should be produced
such that objective testing can be subsequently performed.
Design specifications should be based on the functional specifications and should be sufficiently detailed so that the
product can be developed.
Specifications may be covered by one or more documents depending on the complexity and risk of the product.
Specifications should be reviewed and approved with traceability established between related documents. They
should be managed under change control with the awareness that change to one document may lead to a change
being required in others.
It is recognized that not all suppliers use the specification terms described in this Guide, but may still meet the
objective of providing adequate specifications through the provision of other documentation or other specification
methods.
See Appendices D1 and D3 for further details on specifications.
If the supplier is involved in configuring a product, service, or developing a custom application, the number and
level of specifications can vary considerably and should be agreed with the regulated company (see Section 6.2.7).
Section 4.2.6 provides examples of specification requirements for configured products and custom applications.
7.8
Design Reviews
Design reviews evaluate deliverables against standards and requirements, identify issues, and propose required
corrective actions. They should be planned and systematic reviews of specifications, design, and development, and
should be planned to occur at suitable stages during the life cycle, based on risk, complexity, and novelty. Design
reviews aim to identify and eliminate issues that would otherwise lead to changes at a later stage.
See Appendix M5 for further details on design reviews. See also Appendix D8 for details on managing design reviews
using an Agile approach.
7.9
Software Production/Configuration
The supplier should establish and maintain a formal system for controlling software production. Appropriate methods
and tools should be used and the use of these should be defined. Rules and conventions, such as acceptable
languages, coding standards, version control, and naming conventions should be established. The use of code
reviews should be considered.
Existing software should be used in accordance with documented build processes and taking into account any
changes in the system hardware, interfaces, and peripherals.
If the supplier is involved in configuring a product, it should be performed in accordance with the controlling
configuration specification and follow appropriate guidelines and recommendations.
See Appendix D4 for further details on management, development, and review of software.

--- PAGE 77 ---
Page 75
7.10
Testing
For product development, the supplier should test the product in accordance with approved test plans and test
specifications.
The test specifications, when executed, should demonstrate that all requirements, functionality, and design have been
met.
This may involve one or many stages of testing, depending on the nature of the product. For example, a simple
product may only need one test specification while a complex product may have:
•
Module (unit) testing
•
Integration testing
•
System testing
Test records for each stage should be reviewed and approved, and retained for a period defined in the QMS (not to
be shorter than the supported lifetime of the current software version).
Test failures should be managed in accordance with a formal documented process.
See Appendix D5 for further details on testing of computerized systems.
If the supplier is involved in configuring a product or developing a custom application, the number and level of test
specifications can vary considerably and should be agreed with the regulated company (see Section 6.2.9).
7.11
Commercial Release
System release to customers should be performed in accordance with a formal process that describes the criteria
for release, responsibilities, records to be retained, and items to be released, including software, hardware, and
documentation. Clear policies and criteria should be established for the acceptability or otherwise of product release,
based on the number and severity of known defects. Release notes defining fixes, changes, known problems, and
new features should accompany each release, including minor releases and patches.
This activity is particularly applicable to commercially available products and services. For custom applications, the
regulated company would typically accept the system following regulated company procedures.
Note that commercial release by a supplier is not a release into the GxP environment, which is a regulated company
activity (see Section 6.2.10).
7.12
User Documentation and Training
The supplier should provide adequate system management documentation, operational documentation, and training
for both maintenance and operation in accordance with agreed contracts.

--- PAGE 78 ---
Page 76
7.13
System Support and Maintenance During Operation
The supplier should support and maintain the system in accordance with agreed contracts. Formal procedures should
be followed, typically covering areas such as:
•
Operational change control
•
Configuration management
•
Patch management
•
Incident management
•
Documentation management
•
Backup and restore
•
Business continuity
•
Disaster Recovery (DR)
•
Managing software product releases
•
Training of supplier staff
•
System maintenance
•
Security management
These topics are covered by separate sections and appendices in this Guide.
7.14
System Replacement and Retirement
The supplier should manage the replacement or withdrawal of products or service in accordance with a documented
process and plans. Sufficient notice of the retirement of a system or version should be given to regulated companies
to allow them to plan for their required activities.
The supplier also may support the regulated company with the retirement of computerized systems.

--- PAGE 79 ---
Page 77
8	 Efficiency Improvements
This Guide provides a flexible framework for achieving compliant computerized systems that are fit for their
intended use. The benefits will be obtained only if the framework is applied effectively in the context of a particular
organization.
In this Second Edition of the Guide many examples of efficiency improvements are also discussed in the context of
critical thinking (see Section 3.4 and Appendix M12).
Aspects that can assist efficiency include:
•
Establishing verifiable and appropriate user requirements
•
Making risk-based decisions
•
Leveraging supplier input
•
Leveraging existing records and information
•
Using efficient testing practices
•
Employing a well-managed handover process
•
Managing changes efficiently
•
Anticipating data archiving and migration needs
•
Using tools and automation
8.1
Establishing Verifiable and Objective User Requirements
Requirements should be analyzed to ensure that they are fully defined and are verifiable and objective. For example:
Incomplete Requirement: Room shall be controlled at 20°C.
Complete Requirement: Room shall be controlled at 20°C ± 2°C. Excursions of no greater than 7°C are permitted
for < 10 minutes.
The level of detail is dependent on the novelty and complexity of the processes and system being implemented.
Table 8.1 lists some aspects to consider when developing verifiable and objective requirements.

--- PAGE 80 ---
Page 78
Table 8.1: Considerations When Developing Requirements
Aspect
Purpose
Process Knowledge
In order to identify key requirements of the system that are related to the
business or manufacturing process
Business Knowledge
To ensure that requirements are challenged against business need and
benefits can be realized
Ownership
To ensure clarity and understanding of the stated requirements
Analytical
To ensure that requirements are challenged to confirm they are complete and
accurate
Technical/Product
To ensure that requirements are practical in terms of available technology
Process/Product Impact
To ensure requirements that impact the process or product are clearly
identified (including those related to a CQA or CPP)
Technical Authorship
To ensure that requirements are written in concise, correct, and unambiguous
language
8.2
Making Risk-Based Decisions
Risk management provides an opportunity to scale life cycle activities. However, benefit may also be achieved if
organizations use risk assessments as input to decisions to omit or include an activity. Examples of areas where risk
assessments may help with scaling include:
•
Number and depth of design reviews required
•
Need for, and extent of, source-code review
•
Rigor of supplier assessment
•
Depth and rigor of testing
Similar opportunities exist during system operation, for example:
•
Extent and level of specification and verification of changes
•
Rigor of the backup and restore process
•
Level of business continuity required
•
Frequency and level of DR
•
Degree to which identity checks are completed prior to providing access rights
•
Scope and frequency of periodic reviews
The benefits of risk-based decision-making can be maximized only if the conclusions and decisions can be leveraged.
Therefore, there should be a practical, searchable means of access to conclusions and decisions available to those
involved in decision-making, e.g., during subsequent assessments or reviews, during change management, and on
subsequent projects. Organizations may use a risk register to achieve this.

--- PAGE 81 ---
Page 79
The risk-based approach should be focused and resourced for maximum effectiveness and efficiency in managing
risk to an acceptable level. Organizations should not invest more effort and time into the risk-management process
than is commensurate with the potential impact on the supported business processes, patient safety, product quality,
and data integrity.
8.3
Leveraging Supplier Input
Supplier activities, including testing, may be used by the regulated company as part of verification, provided the
regulated company has assessed the supplier processes as suitable. This assessment may include a supplier audit,
depending on the risk, complexity, and novelty of the system.
The regulated company should assess the supplier for evidence of:
•
An acceptable supplier quality system
•
Supplier technical capability
•
Supplier application of good practice such that activities performed by and information obtained from the supplier
will be complete, accurate, and suitable to meet the purpose of verification
Supplier documentation, information, and records should be assessed for content and quality. Regulated company
procedures and processes should be flexible regarding acceptable format and structures so that supplier
documentation may be leveraged. Regulated companies need to apply critical thinking during the assessment of
suppliers and be familiar with current approaches to IT/IS service and solution delivery.
If inadequacies are found in the supplier quality system, technical capability, application of good practice, or
documentation, then the regulated company may choose to manage potential risks by applying specific, targeted
additional verification checks or other controls, rather than repeating supplier activities and replicating supplier
documentation.
The decision and justification to use supplier activities to support the verification of the computerized system should
be based on the intended use of the system and should be documented and approved by SMEs, which may include
the quality unit or other quality function as relevant, for aspects critical to patient safety, product quality, and data
integrity.
Suppliers also may have tools or techniques unique to the specification and testing of their product or used in their
QC, which may be leveraged by the regulated company during specification and testing.
See also ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service Management,
Section 4.4: Leveraging Supplier Effort [20].
8.4
Leveraging Existing Information
In addition to the use of supplier activities and information, regulated companies should also leverage their own
activities and information related to existing systems when introducing new, similar systems. Examples include:
•
Laboratory equipment
•
Secondary manufacturing equipment
•
Packaging equipment

--- PAGE 82 ---
Page 80
Relevant information to reuse may include risk assessments, RS, various plans, test specifications, test results, and
design reviews.
The new system should be assessed and any differences with the existing system identified and managed by the
introduction of appropriate specification and verification as required. A review of existing information should determine
which may be used as is or updated as required. These conclusions should be documented.
The new system should be subject to installation and verification based on user requirements. The validation report
should explain the rationale for reuse of documentation.
8.5
Using Efficient Testing Practices
Testing is a major, time-consuming exercise. It perhaps offers the greatest opportunity for efficiency savings.
8.5.1
Reuse of Test Results
Many systems have large amounts of test results available due to suppliers following a QMS independently of a
regulated company. On a project, there may be pre-delivery testing, which may include factory acceptance testing.
Wherever possible, regulated companies should clearly communicate to suppliers the testing and document
requirements in advance such that supplier test documentation is of the required standard to support compliance
activities.
Testing also may take place to meet other business or legal requirements, such as HSE, and finance such as SOX
[19]. If so, unnecessary duplication of testing should be avoided. This is particularly true for large business systems.
8.5.2
Extent of Required Testing
The level and type of testing should be risk-based and based on the nature of the component involved (for example,
whether they are standard, configurable, or custom). Types of testing include:
•
Normal case (positive)
•
Invalid case (negative)
•
Repeatability
•
Performance
•
Volume/load
•
Regression
•
Structural testing
See Appendix D5 for further details. The choice of controls to manage identified risks may result in some of these
types of testing being required.
While user requirements should be verified by the regulated company through performing installation and acceptance
tests demonstrating fitness for intended use, other required tests should be identified based on risk, complexity, and
novelty. A review of the existing tests and results can then determine what, if any, further testing is required by the
regulated company. The regulated company’s procedures should allow for the use of such existing test evidence
subject to a documented and justified review and approval by an SME, which may include the quality unit or other
quality function as relevant, for aspects critical to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity.

--- PAGE 83 ---
Page 81
8.5.3
Secondary Test Evidence
The generation and retention of secondary supporting hard copy or image evidence such as screenshots, in addition
to the primary test result or output, is unnecessary in most cases and does not add value. It often adds significant
cost without associated benefit, as well as adding unnecessary complexity. Such additional evidence should be
generated and maintained only where value-added and necessary for effective testing.
Examples where additional test evidence may be useful include:
•
Complex results, which may be difficult or time consuming to record manually, or where printouts are more
efficient than manual recording
•
When the result is something essentially visual or pictorial and easier to review in that format
•
Where there is a need for before and after comparisons
Test evidence may be retained electronically provided adequate security and retention mechanisms are established.
Also, systems may also have data audit trails or other system logs that capture much of the information that may
have been traditionally captured by screen prints.
Test results should be sufficient for objective review by the SME.
The application of various test methods to achieve the objectives of testing is discussed in ISPE GAMP RDI Good
Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design, Appendix S2: Computer Software Assurance [36]. The involvement of
trained, experienced, qualified testers and other software professionals will allow the most appropriate test methods
and techniques to be used.
8.5.4	 Use of Test Witnesses
The use of witnesses during testing is not a requirement and involves a significant overhead, without added benefit.
A regulated company may, however, choose to witness some tests, e.g., site or factory acceptance testing, for
commercial, contractual, communication, education, or training reasons. It is disproportionate and unnecessary to
require test witnessing or requiring the tester to initial every test step to affirm they followed the instructions.
Decisions to use witnesses should consider:
•
Knowledge and experience of testers:
-
Trained testers with sufficient knowledge of the system should be used, for example, nominated end users
who have been given appropriate training in testing
•
Practical issues:
-
Systems, e.g., process control systems, may require two people; one in a control room and one operating/
observing equipment on-site
•
Level and degree of review by an SME:
-
Use of independent witnesses may form part of the review process
•
Degree of automation of the tests and the resulting test evidence, e.g., audit trails or system logs
See Appendix D5 for further details on testing of computerized systems.

--- PAGE 84 ---
Page 82
8.6
Employing a Well-Managed Handover Process
System handover (from the project team to the process owner, system owner, and operational users) should be well-
managed. It is a prerequisite for the effective maintenance of system compliance during operation. Handover should
be planned in accordance with agreed criteria and should consider:
•
Support requirements for maintenance, as defined by IT or engineering
•
Outstanding problems or deficiencies
•
How long business processes can be stopped to enable handover
•
Ability and steps required to roll back to a previous operational state
•
Situations where updates are not optional, e.g., updates pushed to SaaS applications
•
Information required at handover (e.g., specification and verification documentation, user and maintenance
manuals or guides), or new or updated user procedures
•
Training needs (user, support, and maintenance)
•
Clear communication between groups, e.g., with application support and client service groups who may need to
provide help desk support
•
The impact, e.g., on the change-control process to apply during the handover period, when handover is to be
phased
•
Responsibilities during handover, e.g., for accepting the system and for assessing the severity of outstanding
problems or deficiencies
•
Potential need of a period of elevated support and maintenance, often referred to as hypercare
•
Preservation of implied as well as explicit knowledge, e.g., through SME lists and recording of lessons learned
8.7
Managing Changes Efficiently
Efficient change management should be executed in conjunction with configuration management. Key elements
include:
•
Documented description and business benefit of the change
•
Confirmation of availability of resource
•
Assessment of the impact of the change on the application, the underlying infrastructure, the people (users and
engineering support staff), and the documentation
•
Leveraging the risk assessment information from the original project and assessing any new risks introduced by
the change to define the strategy for maintaining compliance - this includes the need for any regression testing
•
Evaluation of the change from the financial, technical (IT or engineering), and compliance perspectives at the
lowest technically competent level prior to management approval

--- PAGE 85 ---
Page 83
•
Establishing and maintaining the distinction between changes at the pharmaceutical quality system level
(impacting the medicinal product life cycle) versus changes at the IT delivery and service management level
•
Minimizing the number of approval points in the process
•
Documentation and communication of the decision
•
Execution and verification of the change, using traceability to identify existing applicable tests
•
Closing the change record in a timely manner
Weaknesses in change management systems that may lead to inefficiencies include:
•
Lack of scalability, e.g., for minor changes or for standard infrastructure components that change regularly
•
Failure to execute change management steps in the appropriate sequence
•
Failure in scheduling or in identifying dependencies
•
Abuse or misapplication of emergency change processes
•
An inability to prevent unnecessary changes
•
Failure to keep specifications current
•
Failure to leverage existing documentation relating to risk assessment and control, traceability matrices, or
protocols
•
Lack of follow-up processes to close a change record
•
Independent change processes leading to duplication of effort for processes, equipment, and computer systems
•
The inappropriate application of like-for-like principles in change management (see Appendix O6 for further
details)
•
Inadequate management of changes conducted by a supplier, leading to life cycle documents and configuration
management records that are out-of-date
•
Lack of adequate follow-up after emergency changes (see Appendix O6 for further details)
See Appendix O6 for further details on change management. See also ITIL [5] for further details on change
management within an IT service environment.

--- PAGE 86 ---
Page 84
8.8
Anticipating Data Archiving and Migration Needs
Data archiving and migration requirements should be considered to ensure that data structures and formats are
efficient. For detailed discussion see also the ISPE GAMP RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design,
Chapter 3: Retention Strategy [36].
8.8.1
Different Retention Periods
It may be difficult to archive data with different retention periods that share the same data structures.
It may be difficult to destroy retained data that is no longer required, e.g., to reduce risk exposure to lost data and
retention costs, where data with different retention periods share the same data structures.
A data structure that separates data by retention period can address the requirements of archiving and data
destruction, but may involve a complex database design.
8.8.2
Data Formats
The migration of custom data formats to a replacement system requires special attention and may cause difficulties.
The use of standard data formats should assist subsequent data extraction and migration.
8.8.3
Static and Dynamic Data
Data migration may be complicated where static and dynamic data is combined in a form that is difficult to separate.
Refer to Appendix D7 and ISPE GAMP RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design [36].
8.8.4	 Data Ownership
Lack of clear data ownership can lead to failure to appropriately dispose of data at the end of its retention period or
make such processes and decisions unnecessarily difficult.
8.9
Using Tools and Automation
The use of appropriate tools and automation to support IT process and infrastructure management, system life cycle
management, and software specification, development, and testing, can bring significant efficiency improvements,
while also increasing quality and lowering risk. The use of such tools is discussed in Appendix D9.

