--- PAGE 349 ---
Page 347
Appendix S1
Appendix S1
46	Appendix S1 – Alignment with ASTM
E2500
46.1
Introduction
There is a requirement in several of the GxP regulations to validate those parts of computer and control systems that
are critical for the health and protection of the patient. In some cases, regulated companies have chosen to perform
an inefficient process of installing and commissioning equipment, and then validating it in a separate exercise. This
often resulted in wasted effort and repeated activities. Some of the documentation generated during the process did
not add value in contributing to fitness for intended use. The principles and practices described in all the versions
of the GAMP Guides have been aimed at cost reduction, but separate and duplicated activities are inefficient and
unnecessarily costly.
New standards and guidance documents18 are emerging that aim to make the implementation process for GMP
manufacturing control systems more cost effective and value-added, focusing only on those aspects of systems
critical to the protection of the patient. These new standards and guidelines are based on a science- and risk-based
philosophy that focuses on the risk to the patient in combination with Good Engineering Practices (GEP)19. If used
correctly, the combination of:
•
GEP
•
A science- and risk-based approach
•
Understanding of the process
•
The appropriate involvement of SMEs from relevant organizational areas
These can all be combined in a streamlined effort within an overall framework that meets all regulatory requirements.
These emerging standards have influenced GAMP 5, the associated Good Practice Guides, and the terminology
used, especially in the context of GMP process systems and equipment.
46.2	 Focusing on Patient Risk
While GAMP 4 and previous guides provided an overall life cycle framework for systems and controlled equipment,
they recognized that the practicalities are different for different system types. As a result, a series of Good Practice
Guides were produced to support the understanding of these differences and provide more practical detail.
Many pharmaceutical companies undertake complex, time consuming, and expensive qualification practices. There
are aspects of qualification that can add value in terms of ensuring the equipment and systems are fit for intended
use, but there are other aspects that often do not add this value. Some of the prescriptive and rigid conventions and
practices that surround qualification as often practiced can detract from its overall value. GMP regulations provide
the basis for the activities that are called qualification, but no specific requirements that relate to how qualification is
practiced.
18	From ICH [6] and ASTM [83] (including the ASTM E2500 - Standard Guide for Specification, Design, and Verification of Pharmaceutical and
Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing Systems and Equipment [8].
19	GEP is defined as those established engineering methods and standards that are applied throughout the life cycle to deliver cost effective solutions
that minimize risk to the patient.

--- PAGE 350 ---
Page 348
Appendix S1
By focusing on the risk to the patient and leveraging the expertise of the supplier and SMEs based on GEP,
verification is considered as a set of integrated activities that can replace the activities previously called IQ and OQ.
Regulated company IQ and OQ activities may then be omitted or limited to an assessment of the supplier’s activities
and documentation, and if necessary performing mitigation activities to close gaps. This eliminates much of the
costly duplicated testing that does little or nothing to protect the patient. Finally, the overall performance and fitness
for intended purpose can be ensured through Performance Qualification or Verification, which focuses on critical-
to-quality attributes. Overall, this will demonstrate that the equipment or system is performing satisfactorily for its
intended purpose, the process with which it is involved is controlled, and the risks to the patient have been effectively
managed, thus meeting the regulatory requirement for validation.
It is important to select the right tool for a specific need, such as design review, inspection, or testing (e.g.,
Commissioning, Qualification, IQ, or OQ). The term verification is used in ASTM E2500 [8] and aims to promote
flexibility in choosing the right approach. (See Figure 46.1.)
A science- and risk-based approach is inherent in the thinking behind verification, where the level and extent of
verification is based on scientifically assessed risk to the patient from specific processes, equipment, and systems.
This is directly in line with the principles described in ICH Q8 [84], Q9 [14] and Q10 [21] documents for the
development, quality risk management, and quality management of pharmaceutical products throughout their life
cycle.
Figure 46.1: The Specification, Design, and Verification Process [8]
Reprinted with permission from ASTM E2500-20 Standard Guide for Specification, Design, and Verification of
Pharmaceutical and Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing Systems and Equipment, copyright ASTM International, 100
Barr Harbor Dr., West Conshohocken, PA 19428. A copy of the complete standard may be obtained from ASTM at
www.astm.org.
It is, of course, still appropriate to create a plan describing and justifying the approach taken to ensure the equipment
is fit for use in a GxP regulated environment, and to have a report available providing the necessary evidence to
support this claim.
Performed in this way, the process for the specification, design, and verification of controlled process equipment
meets all GxP regulatory expectations.

--- PAGE 351 ---
Page 349
Appendix S1
46.3	 Different Types of Computerized Systems
For integrated manufacturing systems or equipment where a computer-based system is part of the overall
functionality, a specific and separate computerized system validation may not be required.
For example, where the computer-controlled equipment can be regarded as one component of a wider manufacturing
or process control system the verification can be an integrated part of the overall process validation effort. The
verification of fitness for intended use may be adequately demonstrated by documented integrated engineering or
project activities together with subsequent process validation, and the overall approach may be defined based on
each regulated company’s policies and preferences.
Validation is the common term used in regulations worldwide to describe a process that demonstrates that systems
are fit for intended use. Some computerized systems are intimately involved in many regulated business activities
outside the manufacturing area and are critical for the health and protection of the patient. Examples include the
collection of clinical trials data, the management of donor details in blood collection, the recording of adverse events
and complaints, the release of product for sale, and the recall of defective product.
Such IT systems have no direct correlation with the manufacturing and release of the product. Consequently, there
is no direct parallel with the manufacturing process and associated process validation. Acceptance of the system is
dependent on the satisfactory completion of a functional test, such as the traditional OQ or equivalent tests, prior
to a controlled cut over into the live environment. (Some further testing, e.g., stress or performance testing, may be
necessary which some organizations call PQ but it is not an activity parallel to the PQ testing of controlled process
equipment.)
The principles described in ASTM E2500 [8] should be interpreted with attention to the special characteristics of
particular systems, and suitable verification that the critical-to-quality requirements of the system have been met
should be completed before the computer system can be approved for use in a GxP regulated environment.
The ideas that led to the development of ASTM E2500 [8] are applicable to all computerized systems. GAMP 5 has
tried to describe a process that follows the same principles:
•
The requirements of the system should be clearly defined
•
Requirements critical to the health and protection of the patient (critical-to-quality requirements) have been
identified and the risks identified and controlled
•
The principles of GEP are applied throughout
•
Testing carried out and documented by the supplier should be leveraged as much as possible
•
The critical-to-quality requirements are appropriately verified and reported by the regulated organization in line
with regulatory expectations
It is also recommended that a plan describing and justifying the approach taken, and a report supporting the claim
that the system is fit for intended use, are created.
Performed in this way, the process described above for computerized systems meets all the GxP regulatory
expectations for validation.

--- PAGE 352 ---
Page 350
Appendix S1
46.4	 Terminology
Since GAMP 5 covers both systems involved in manufacturing of pharmaceuticals and systems for other critical types
of IT applications, this Guide uses terminology that enables appropriate selection of the relevant life cycle activities,
depending on the specific context.
Some organizations have already taken the decision to adopt the term “verification” and apply it to both computer
and control systems. Others have indicated that they will stay with the word “qualification” but adopt the principles
described in the ASTM E2500 [8]. Still others have changed to verification for controlled process equipment but
retained “qualification” for computer systems.
The GAMP Community of Practice aims to strongly support and promote innovation. GAMP Guidance is neither
mandatory, nor prescriptive, but aims at enabling innovation in a compliant and cost effective manner.
Descriptions of current industry practices should not be read as constraining in any way the development and adoption
of other approaches. Individual companies should and will decide what terms and precise approach they will use.
GAMP 5, like previous versions of GAMP, is a guide that supports good quality management practices. The enhanced
focus on science and the increased focus on risk to the patient are important to the future of the pharmaceutical
industry. GAMP will continue to support evolving good practices for the pharmaceutical industry at large, its
regulators, and suppliers.

--- PAGE 353 ---
Page 351
Appendix S2
Appendix S2
47	Appendix S2 – Electronic Production
Records
47.1
Introduction
This appendix describes concepts and high-level descriptions of approaches and technologies that reflect what has
been observed to be best practice when determining requirements for Electronic Production Records (EPRs) related
to manufacturing operations.
Principles are presented to facilitate the implementation and use of EPRs in GxP environments supporting quality
processes required for:
•
Review by Exception (RBE)
•
Real-time disposition
•
Cloud technology
•
Blockchain technology
Software design principles and regulatory requirements provide a framework to help define activities and
methodologies to ensure the integrity of data across integrated computer systems’ functionality in a manufacturing
domain. Formal data definitions including purpose, format, and usage are critical to the establishment of system
designs, policies, and procedures ensuring the accuracy of data in the domain.
•
Technologies, including cloud computing and blockchain, allow for efficiencies and security enhancements for life
sciences manufacturing to help meet regulatory requirements and ensure patient safety.
•
Generation of reports for RBE and other functionality from EPR can be performed in real time or after completion
of operations for supervision and review of process execution.
•
The same design and implementation principles may be applied to electronic records portions of hybrid paper/
electronic systems.
ANSI-ISA-88.00.01-2010 [85] provides a basis for establishing electronic systems terminology equivalent to paper-
based batch record systems. This and additional terminology supporting the implementation of EPR is defined further
in Appendix G2.
This appendix will utilize ISA [86] terminology as the model to represent batch, assembly, and continuous
manufacturing paradigms such as Master Recipe and Control Recipe versus Master and Production Batch Records.
Various industry guidance and/or regulatory documentation may reference different terminology, such as batch
production and control records (FDA [87]), batch processing record (EU [88]), master production records (FDA [89]),
and manufacturing formula and processing instructions (EU [88]). These are represented by equivalents in the ISA
model independent of region or origin.
A clear distinction is made between EPRs and reports generated from such data for review, disposition, investigation,
and process performance or improvement. Table 47.1 shows paper and ANSI-ISA 88 [85] terminology equivalents.

--- PAGE 354 ---
Page 352
Appendix S2
Table 47.1: Paper and Electronic Record System Equivalents [90]
Paper System
Electronic System
Equivalent Structure
Description
Master Batch
Record (MBR)
Master Recipe
Contains product name or designation, recipe designation
or version, formulas, equipment requirements or classes,
sequence of activities, procedures, normalized bill of
materials (quantity per unit volume to produce)
Work Instructions
(optional)
Additional detailed instructions – may include electronic
SOPs or SOP references
Critical Process
Parameters (optional)
Required Process Parameters that are to be checked or
monitored or are to be downloaded to other systems such as
automation
Production Batch
Record
Control Recipe
•
A Master Recipe dispatched or otherwise made available
in manufacturing-related areas for execution
•
Includes Master Recipe information with the addition of
schedule, specific quantity to make, actual target bill of
materials quantities, and other data for the batch and
production instance
Electronic Production
Record
•
A store of data and information created by systems or
entered by personnel during execution of Control Recipes
•
May be located in one or more systems or databases
•
Data may or may not be stored in human-readable format
Batch (Production) Report
Data and information in human-readable format, presented
either in electronic or paper format for activities, such as
review, disposition, investigation, audit, and analysis
47.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
Technologies have significantly evolved since GAMP 5 was first published and allow for efficiencies and security
enhancements within life sciences manufacturing. They are addressed as appropriate in this significantly revised
appendix:
•
Greater adoption of cloud computing technologies
•
Usage of blockchain technology
•
Real-time generation of reports for RBE and other functionality from EPR
•
Clarification on data audit trails and data audit trail review
47.2
Considerations for Electronic Production Records
47.2.1	 GxP-Relevant Data
Activities such as a strategic assessment of the current and desired future state of operations, and standard design
and review cycles should determine what data is relevant for the intended use of each system based on identification
of CPPs and CQAs of materials, products, assemblies, and intermediate stage production output. Data impacting
GxP production and decision-making may be generated by non-process systems with at least some functionality
supplying or processing GxP-relevant data. Such GxP-supporting systems functionality should be verified.

--- PAGE 355 ---
Page 353
Appendix S2
Systems must be capable of reconstruction of GxP-relevant data in appropriate formats for evaluation. The following
are examples of information to be defined:
•
Production record data requirements (GxP and non-GxP)
•
Data Audit trails
•
Methods to manage a multiple language user base across regions
•
External documents that are linked or otherwise made available to systems
•
Security, user rights, and roles
•
Master data, metadata, and specifications
•
Methods for time zone, time stamp recording, and reconciliation
47.2.2	 Audit Trail Terminology
This Guide uses the same terminology as the ISPE GAMP Guide: Records and Data Integrity [35] when referring to
data audit trails as clearly distinguished from system technical logs and other event logs.
Data audit trails, as required by various regulations [91, 32, 75, 92], record operator actions that create, modify, or
delete GMP records during normal operation, and should be clearly distinguished from other system and technical logs.
In a traditional paper-based system, if a user recognizes that a specific data entry is wrong, they strike out the wrong
data in a way that it is still readable and put the correct value next to it with their initials, date, and in some cases, the
reason.
In an electronic system, the data audit trail provides equivalent traceability when users create, modify, or delete GMP
records and data as part of normal operations by recording the original and new values, the user, the time stamp, and
in some cases, the reason.
In a paper-based manufacturing system, modifications made to the production batch record during normal operation
are traced manually while the master batch record and SOPs are likely controlled via a separate (document
management) system. Note that changes to approval status are traceable within the record, and that destruction
of the approved production batch record at the end of the retention period is also traceable through entries in an
indexing system.
In the equivalent electronic manufacturing system, the data audit trail captures modifications that are part of normal
operations. It also tracks activities that change the status of a record (e.g., applying an electronic approval signature)
and to deletion of the production record at the end of the retention period. [93]
47.2.3	 Data Audit Trail Review
Audit trail review should be part of the routine data review and approval process usually performed by the operational
area which has generated the data, such as manufacturing or the laboratory. There may be also specific GxP
requirements for quality unit review. Data audit trail review is described and explained in regulatory guidance from
FDA [94] and MHRA [37]:
“Who should review audit trails?
Audit trail review is similar to assessing cross-outs on paper when reviewing data. Personnel responsible for
record review under CGMP should review the audit trails that capture changes to data associated with the record

--- PAGE 356 ---
Page 354
Appendix S2
as they review the rest of the record (e.g., §§ 211.22(a), 211.101(c) and (d), 211.103, 211.182, 211.186(a),
211.192, 211.194(a)(8), and 212.20(d)). For example, all production and control records, which includes audit
trails, must be reviewed and approved by the quality unit (§ 211.192). The regulations provide flexibility to
have some activities reviewed by a person directly supervising or checking information (e.g., § 211.188). FDA
recommends a quality system approach to implementing oversight and review of CGMP records.”
“How often should audit trails be reviewed?
If the review frequency for the data is specified in CGMP regulations, adhere to that frequency for the audit
trail review. For example, § 211.188(b) requires review after each significant step in manufacture, processing,
packing, or holding, and § 211.22 requires data review before batch release. In these cases, you would apply the
same review frequency for the audit trail.”
“If the review frequency for the data is not specified in CGMP regulations, you should determine the review
frequency for the audit trail using knowledge of your processes and risk assessment tools. The risk assessment
should include evaluation of data criticality, control mechanisms, and impact on product quality.”
“The relevance of data retained in audit trails should be considered by the organisation to permit robust data
review/verification. It is not necessary for audit trail review to include every system activity (e.g. user log on/off,
keystrokes etc.).”
“Routine data review should include a documented audit trail review where this is determined by a risk
assessment. When designing a system for review of audit trails, this may be limited to those with GXP relevance.
Audit trails may be reviewed as a list of relevant data, or by an ‘exception reporting’ process. An exception report
is a validated search tool that identifies and documents predetermined ‘abnormal’ data or actions, that require
further attention or investigation by the data reviewer.
Reviewers should have sufficient knowledge and system access to review relevant audit trails, raw data and
metadata…”
47.2.4	 EPR Data Types
Design and implementation of computer systems requires an understanding of the various types of data to be created
and managed. Exercises such as data mapping help define these types. Figure 47.1 provides example types and
related data processing actions.
Figure 47.1: Scope of EPR Data Types
ALCOA+ principles should be applied to EPR data.

--- PAGE 357 ---
Page 355
Appendix S2
Systems design and/or procedural controls should ensure that the versions of all master data and system
configurations are known and controlled.
Within an EPR, only the records and data required by applicable regulations are considered GxP electronic records.
Other information such as trends and warnings recorded as an output of manufacturing are often used by production
and quality personnel to determine long-term effects of operational tolerances and variances, but are not part of GxP
production records unless directly related to GxP decision-making.
The life cycle of manufacturing and process data and records, and data integrity considerations for such records are
described in detail in ISPE GAMP RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity – Manufacturing Records [93].
Along the manufacturing process numerous data relevant for an EPR is input to and output from all electronic
systems with functionality in the manufacturing domain as described in the ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide:
Manufacturing Execution Systems – A Strategic and Program Management Approach, Chapter 7 [90]. Systems with
functionality within the manufacturing domain may include:
•
Document management system
•
Supply chain management system
•
Manufacturing execution system
•
Data historian
•
Enterprise resource planning
•
Process control system (supervisory and automation/controls)
•
Laboratory information management system
Computerized systems across the manufacturing domain may generate or transfer source data for master and control
recipes, as well as serve as a repository for part or all of an EPR as required by designs and technology in a given
implementation. Data can be made available by means of interfaces for further human or machine review of in-
process or post-production activities and results.
Operational processing may have master data such as material specifications, process parameters, alert and alarm
limits, or process step sequences controlled by several systems with functionality in the manufacturing domain
(see Figure 47.1). Recipes may combine master data from one or more sources either by direct entry or by links to
systems for the production environment for execution. Systems design and/or procedural controls should ensure that
the version of all master data is known and controlled and can be demonstrated for any specific master recipe.
Particularly within the manufacturing execution layer, data flows can be complex and require a detailed data-flow
mapping exercise to identify what data is required for each business process in addition to critical parameters and
aspects. To enable fit-for-purpose process maps, a business analysis team uses appropriate techniques to interview
operational staff. (See ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Manufacturing Execution Systems – A Strategic and
Program Management Approach, Chapter 6 [90] for strategic assessment methods.) Designed process steps and
system workflow mapping sessions typically include data specialists to ensure comprehension of data challenges
and where the data will be exchanged through multiple platforms within future system architecture. Where data flows
result in duplication of data sets, definition of where the primary records reside is required.

--- PAGE 358 ---
Page 356
Appendix S2
47.2.5	 Data Capturing/Data Input
Execution of manufacturing-related processes generate data and records that may reside in, or be linked to, multiple
systems.
Creation of a master recipe based on product processes and environmental requirements typically requires input from
multiple data sources associated with manufacturing systems functionality. These would be regarded as regulated
records. The design and the transformation from paper to an EPR requires verification of processes used to perform
the transformation and confirm equivalency of the electronic form.
Master recipes are transferred by appropriate means to production systems creating control recipes that when
executed produce EPRs with content in various systems. ALCOA+ principles should be applied.
47.2.6	 Data Processing
Based on established CPPs and CQAs, key factors in processing data include verified rounding rules and other
mathematical standards, calculation definitions, alerts, alarms, and specific events that may automatically create
data or initiate other actions or further processing. Data audit trails and procedures for data review, (including audit
trail reviews where relevant), is essential for process management, review and improvement, and investigations.
Appropriate and effective security features, user management, and privilege management is essential.
47.2.7	 Data Output
At any desired point, reports may be generated for operator or quality approval from live data or the EPR as a check
point to facilitate operator or system intervention, continuation of processing, or production reports. Systems such as
ERP or LIMS may set the status of materials (output) and provide the results (output) to other systems.
Verified methods must be in place to generate reports from EPRs to present all required information accurately in
timely, human-readable form to facilitate disposition, investigation, and other GxP activities.
EPRs often contain data for efficiency and other process indicators that are non-GxP. Such reports should be verified
for engineering or other non-GxP purposes.
An important aspect of data output are interfaces to adjacent systems. Interfaces require specific attention to design,
development, and verification. Early involvement of interface partners is recommended in order to move from
simulators to actual interfaces before entering formal verification stages.
47.3
Understanding Manufacturing, Production Processes, and Data Flow
The processes and data flows within the manufacturing and production areas within a life-sciences organization
should be understood. It may be necessary to periodically review (or document and develop if not in place) in order
to provide a detailed understanding of the process/data flows and associated controls though the processes. Critical
thinking should be used to determine critical/important records/data. Associated systems should be formally assessed
for data integrity gaps. Any gaps found should subsequently be assessed for risk and remediation actions determined
by a panel of business, data, and system SMEs and owners.
Gemba walks are a way of gaining knowledge of the processes and linked critical records data. Gemba is the action
of going to see the actual process:
•
Understand the work being conducted, ask questions, show respect to the SMEs, and learn the business
•
Do the same with the data structures

--- PAGE 359 ---
Page 357
Appendix S2
•
Do the same with the data along the data life cycle
•
Do the same with the actual system usage on the shop floor
47.4
Completion of Production Activities
EPRs residing in various data repositories are processed by verified means combining data from all sources to create
reports (output) for automated or human review/disposition of assemblies, intermediates, and products as necessary.
These reports are the equivalent of what was formerly a paper batch record; however, reports may be generated for
presentation in either electronic or physical media form. Reports may be divided as desired into focused sections for
review by various departmental personnel responsible for each part of process execution/output. An overall review/
disposition of the complete report is performed to verify completion of each subsection review.
Two methodologies may be used to facilitate review and approval/disposition activities by automated functions,
human review, or a combination thereof: RBE and real-time disposition.
47.4.1	 Review by Exception
RBE may also be known by other terminology such as focused review or limited review. Data from manufacturing-
related operations is screened by verified systems functionality to create reports for review that include all critical
process exceptions and information, and reduce or eliminate the need for reviewing in-tolerance data, trends, and
information.
The RBE method:
•
Does not eliminate or change data in EPRs
•
Is a verified extension of existing systems report-generation functionality
•
Filters EPR data presented to personnel
-
Includes human process/system interaction such as disposition and alarm processing
-
Includes any critical exceptions or deviations to the process whether mechanized, computer related, or
human instigated such as exceptions to CPPs or CQAs
-
Reduces or eliminates reporting in-tolerance operational data, events, or alerts not required to support
critical exceptions
•
Is applied to well-understood processes or portions of processes
•
May be implemented in electronic or hybrid systems
The concepts underlying RBE have been part of the regulatory environment for several decades. However, regulatory
authorities will review and determine the acceptability of a company’s RBE strategy.
The goal of RBE is to provide risk-based efficient manufacturing and quality review processes by dividing data review
operations between human and systems functionality, leveraging the comparative strengths of each.
Modern automation systems generate very large volumes of data, and a practical human review can only be based
on statistical methods such as data samples, averages, or other processed summaries such as trend graphs.
Detailed review by personnel of all data from validated computerized systems is considered a redundant operation
that diverts human-review efforts from more critical disposition activities.

--- PAGE 360 ---
Page 358
Appendix S2
47.4.2	 Implementation of RBE
Implementation of RBE is based upon the following requirements:
•
System functionality, accuracy, and reliability are clearly defined
•
Processes or process steps subject to RBE are well-defined
•
Operational experience with processes and process steps is established
•
Novel processes or process steps may require parallel generation and comparison of more complete reports with
exception reports to verify accurate filtering of data and information
•
A risk-based analysis determines the complexity and length of exception report verification efforts
•
Data that would be manually reviewed in non-RBE type reports is retained and can be presented in human-
readable form for the appropriate retention period
•
The computerized means of review is at least as comprehensive and accurate as a manual review
•
RBE functionality is appropriately specified, verified, and periodically reviewed as part of configuration
management
•
Communications or other systems errors that could prevent the report of a critical exception are alerted and
noted in an RBE report or otherwise made available to reviewers
•
When no critical exceptions occur during operations, the associated exception report indicates that operations
were completed without error. A report is always generated and examined by appropriate approvers even when
no exceptions occur.
RBE may be implemented in a phased approach until complete process steps or processes use the method.
•
This approach provides RBE reports for segments of processes or equipment for which there is no current
automated exception analysis and reporting capability
•
Individual RBE reports may be used in conjunction with other reports where appropriate procedural and technical
controls define methods to manage the overall review process
RBE can be applied to the execution of product recipes generating logical or physical inventory such as intermediate,
product, sub-assembly or device, and non-product recipes such as asset preparation, which may include equipment
selection, setup, cleaning, and sterilizing.
Exception instances in reports should include sufficient contextual information to allow reviewers to procedurally or
automatically retrieve data associated with each exception to support investigations and other activities. This may
include actual data, links, or references to data sources.
RBE is enabled by the GAMP approach, where systems are appropriately specified and verified to ensure CPPs and
overall systems operations are implemented correctly, and are appropriate to each process, process step, or system
function. Following the GAMP approach should ensure the following:
•
Processes are maintained within predefined tolerances
•
Data and events are accurately recorded contemporaneously

--- PAGE 361 ---
Page 359
Appendix S2
•
Process data is monitored and checked at appropriate rates for processes
•
All defined process or system alerts and alarms are generated when tolerances or other operating constraints
are exceeded
•
Electronic records are accurate, trustworthy, secure, and available in a timely fashion
•
Production reports for process/product review are demonstrated to be accurate
47.5
Migration to Real-Time Disposition
With the implementation of EPRs and RBE, quality assurance and quality control activities can be performed at time
intervals close to actual process execution. These activities can be performed either at the physical process location
or remotely via verified interfaces and approved activities as appropriate. An example of an implementation migration
is shown in Figure 47.2.
Figure 47.2: Example of Migrating to Electronic Records and RBE

--- PAGE 362 ---
Page 360
Appendix S2
Automated systems may be designed with programmed control logic to determine if results from operations meet
criteria for advancing to next steps either with or without human approval as defined in process definitions. Where
human intervention is required, necessary real-time production record contents are made available to required
personnel for disposition or approval to facilitate efficient continuation of manufacturing processes. For example,
there is a regulatory requirement for human intervention in EU GMP for a Qualified Person to perform batch
certification as described in EU GMP Annex 16 [95].
47.6
Technology and Architecture Considerations
47.6.1	 Cloud Computing
Migrating process control technologies to utilize cloud services requires additional analysis to determine where the
risk of interrupting or delaying real-time process execution may be encountered with remotely hosted applications
and/or databases. Mapping of data flows is a prerequisite to understanding the potential threats to data integrity, the
output of which will be used both in defining user requirements and in data integrity risk management.
Selection of cloud service providers includes the determination of adequate protection against unintended data/
application access, exporting, or sharing.
Two cloud paradigms are possible for cloud implementation: central cloud and edge cloud. Edge cloud indicates the
service provider is physically closer with shorter data connections to the customer/user. When utilizing cloud services
for hosting systems critical to real-time process automation, using edge cloud may mitigate risks of data or software
operation interruptions, while improving response times for data transfer and user interface activities.
Regardless of the cloud configuration, the end user organization is responsible for procedural and electronic controls
to ensure that its cloud-based systems are reliable and minimize risk. To maintain the validated state, the end user’s
transfer and updates of information among local and remote systems must be accurate, monitored, and appropriately
documented. The end user is always ultimately responsible for determining and maintaining the validated state of the
systems and services they utilize, regardless of whether or not they are implemented in a cloud.
Cyber security implications and vulnerabilities should also be considered. Global organizations typically have
cybersecurity measures in place, yet occasional large data breaches still occur. Denial of service attacks may not
alter data but can cause delays or interruptions in access and communications between local and remotely hosted
systems. Cloud computing may have the potential to increase security risks, although properly applied network
security methods can mitigate most of them.
47.6.2	 Blockchain
Blockchain technology uses a distributed computer network to create a digital ledger acting as a virtual database
storing uniquely identified transaction records. By definition, every network server or node assigned to a blockchain
veriﬁes each data entry and archives all transactions that have been recorded. Transaction data stored in a
blockchain is not kept in a central repository but distributed across many designated nodes that may be local to the
production environment or widely dispersed geographically. The distributed nature of blockchain ensures records are
immutable. This effectively defines a write once and read only data storage implementation.
Candidates for blockchain implementations include audit trails as these records must provide accurate confirmation
of human activities for company and regulatory agency review for all computer systems with functionality in the
manufacturing domain.
As part of risk-based data integrity design and assessments, it may be appropriate to utilize blockchain technology for
some subsets of EPR data associated with QbD methodologies based on risk-mitigation efforts.

--- PAGE 363 ---
Page 361
Appendix S3
Appendix S3
48	Appendix S3 – End User Applications
Including Spreadsheets
48.1
Introduction
This appendix gives guidance on the use of end user applications such as spreadsheets, small databases, statistical
applications, and other small applications in a GxP environment.
Application tools are available for creating a wide range of end user applications, including customized statistical
analyses, the creation of local databases, data mining, and multivariate analysis. These may be used for GxP
regulated activities, and they present particular compliance challenges.
Among end user applications spreadsheets tend to be the most under-documented systems used in GxP
environments, for the following reasons:
•
Users regard them as part of the desktop
•
Users may not understand or be aware of quality procedures
•
The ease with which applications can be built without much training
•
The data processing power that they can have
The flexibility and power of the spreadsheet allows users to create tools that range from performing simple
calculations to sophisticated analysis of a major clinical study. Special emphasis is placed on spreadsheets in this
appendix because users may have the opportunity and ability to create a spreadsheet application, and may use
them to process regulated data. Consideration should be given to the standard requirements to build a template. This
includes standard headers and footers, font size, etc., in the creation of all spreadsheets regardless of type for use in
support of GxP operations.
The level and rigor of specification and verification applied to end user applications should be based on risk,
complexity, novelty, and intended use. This appendix provides guidance to help users determine the appropriate
approach. While the examples given in this appendix are mainly spreadsheets, the same principles can be applied to
other end user applications.
48.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
Additional data integrity considerations and detailed risk-based recommendations have been included.
48.2	 Application Types
This section considers typical examples of end user applications found in the GxP environment.
48.2.1	 Disposable Spreadsheets
Spreadsheets may be used in the same way as a hand calculator. For example, 10 output values from a laboratory
test are input for the purpose of calculating a mean and standard deviation. In this scenario, the electronic copy is not
retained.
This should be documented in the same way the use of a non-printing calculator would be documented, i.e., the
values and result are recorded and signed.

--- PAGE 364 ---
Page 362
Appendix S3
The results can be printed, labeled, and signed. Alternatively, they may be saved to a static format and signed via
an external electronic signature tool. In either case, these are now documents, and the guidance in Section 48.2.2
applies. It should be clear on the page exactly what arithmetic manipulation was done. This can be facilitated in most
spreadsheet tools by printing a copy of the spreadsheet displaying the cell formulas.
Calculations used to process GxP data should be verified. This does not mean that algorithms used by native
functions of the spreadsheet need to be checked for accuracy every time the sheet is run, but rather to demonstrate
that they are the correct calculations during the verification stage. For example, (a+b)Îc is a very different expression
from a+(bÎc), and errors like this are easily made. Verification of the calculations can be accomplished by printing the
cell formulas, or by a third-party review. Such calculation verification is appropriate for any GxP spreadsheet.
48.2.2	 Spreadsheets Retained as Documents
In many cases, the way in which spreadsheets are used is more like a word processing document than a traditional
application. The main difference is that the spreadsheet can be used to both record GxP data and to manipulate it.
The flexibility of manipulation that makes spreadsheets useful makes it advisable to manage them as documents
rather than applications. It is likely to be extremely difficult to establish that all subsequent saved copies are the same
as the original. Calculations should, therefore, be verified and fully explained, as they would be in a text document.
This should include proof that the intended formulas have been used, as described in Section 48.2.1.
The level of risk related to data integrity should be a consideration when choosing a control strategy. There are a
variety of options for achieving adequate control, such as:
•
Using the spreadsheet tool’s internal security options, such as password protecting cells or sheets
•
Storing the spreadsheet in a secure directory
•
Managing the spreadsheet in an EDMS
If the spreadsheet cannot be adequately controlled through these or other means, it may be advisable to consider a
static version, for example, a secure PDF or even hardcopy, as the primary record.
Spreadsheets that are effectively documents should be managed in compliance with the applicable regulations. For
example, a common use of spreadsheets is to manipulate and maintain GxP laboratory data, where compliance with
electronic record and signature regulations is a particular concern.
48.2.3	 Spreadsheets as Databases
Another popular use of spreadsheets is as a simple database, i.e., to manage or store GxP data electronically. In a
GxP environment, this presents a risk because data may be frequently updated on spreadsheets that lack the intrinsic
controls necessary to ensure data integrity. For example:
•
Spreadsheets generally have limited or no capability to limit a user’s ability to edit data
•
Spreadsheet do not support audit trails where needed
•
Every time data is added or removed from the spreadsheet and saved, and entirely new database is also saved;
this means that someone adding data may inadvertently or intentionally change the database “code”, and it could
go unnoticed.
If a compliant solution is to be developed using a spreadsheet, external controls should be developed to overcome
these shortcomings. While there are commercially available products intended to provide audit trail capability to
spreadsheets, as a general rule the use of spreadsheets where audit trails are required is inadvisable.

--- PAGE 365 ---
Page 363
Appendix S3
Users should be fully aware of the limitations and weaknesses of spreadsheets as databases when proposed. A far
better alternative is to use an actual database application.
48.2.4	 Template Applications
A very common use of spreadsheets is the development of template solutions, where data can be subjected to a
standard manipulation and the result saved as a unique document or even exported to an application. Statistical
analysis or data mining applications may also fit this subtype. Templates may be used, e.g., in tabulating and
processing data from a clinical study, or similarly, for calculations based on QC test results prior to product release.
When developing such templates, users and developers should fully understand and document the required
manipulation. This allows clear confirmation of design intentions against standard package features to be established
and confirmed. The following should also be considered:
•
Calculations should be verified to be correct.
•
Will the template run on a single workstation, or will it be available for download from a single location? If not,
how is it ensured that everyone is using the correct version? Version control should be established, supported by
an effective change management process.
•
How will access to the application and data fields by users and developers be controlled? Ideally, all cells other
than data entry should be locked and inaccessible to users.
•
How will functionality be configured? Is there a custom script requirement when using application wizards? A
macro is custom software. Even when created by keystroke capture, there is a program in a language such as
Visual Basic® for Applications (VBA) behind each macro.
•
Will there be more than one module? Integration testing is appropriate in such circumstances. For spreadsheets
this may involve direct cell links to other worksheets. These links can be affected by changes and should be
addressed as part of the change control process.
•
Will data input be only via keyboard? External data feeds need configuration, and a spreadsheet may not be
sophisticated enough to deal with unusual input (e.g., a character string that is too long).
•
Will output be saved to a file or only printed? Electronic record controls may be necessary if the document is
retained electronically.
•
Will the master template be locked and stored under version control in a separate location from daily use?
•
How is the result secured to protect data integrity?
-
Should the forms be automatically numbered when downloaded?
-
Is the completed form protected from further editing?
-
Is there protection to ensure that the form cannot be deleted and replaced?
48.2.5	 True Desktop Databases
Both proprietary and open-source desktop databases offer superior solutions to managing large volumes of data
compared to spreadsheets, but they still are often significantly less secure than more sophisticated database
management systems developed to run in IT-managed server-based environments (e.g., Oracle®). This may present
significant issues if the information in the database is GxP regulated. External controls may be required.

--- PAGE 366 ---
Page 364
Appendix S3
48.2.6	 Other End User Applications
There are myriad tools that can be developed by end users that may impact decision-making, for example a
multivariate statistical analysis using a tool such as SAS®. The level of GxP impact may vary from negligible in the
case where the user is trying to optimize manufacturing yield by manipulating setpoints within already validated
ranges, to critical when analyzing data related to clinical safety. Therefore, it is important to understand how the data
from any end user application will be used.
48.3	 Risk-Based Approach
End user applications can vary significantly in risk and complexity. The following are, however, required for all
applications:
•
Risk assessment and appropriate risk control measures to manage identified risks
•
Appropriate specification and verification to demonstrate that the application performs as intended.
The strategy for specification and verification of the application being built should be based on:
•
System impact on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity (risk assessment)
•
System complexity and novelty (architecture and categorization of system components)
•
Appropriate security to mitigate the risk of unauthorized changes to data or the application
•
Management of the application under change control
Company policies and procedures should define their specific approach to achieving and maintaining compliance and
fitness for intended use of end user applications.
This section of the appendix:
•
Describes how the use of GAMP categories assists with understanding novelty and complexity
•
Provides advice on appropriate risk-based controls
•
Provides examples of typical approaches for different applications
48.3.1	 Use of GAMP Categories
The tool on which the application is built, such as the spreadsheet package, should be considered as Category 1.
Categories for spreadsheets and other end user applications should be viewed as a continuum that spans Categories
3, 4, and 5 (see Figure 48.1). Assignment of a category is a function of the complexity and novelty of the spreadsheet
or application. Note, however, that a spreadsheet that merely makes use of the tabular editing power and does no
calculations should be considered a document. The intended use of the analyzed data should be considered when
determining the rigor of verification and the controls to be put in place. A simple spreadsheet (Category 3) may pose a
high GxP risk depending upon the use of the data.

--- PAGE 367 ---
Page 365
Appendix S3
A spreadsheet that simply uses native functions to make calculations in place of a hand calculator is typically
Category 3. For example, a laboratory analyst might create a unique spreadsheet to do a calculation related to an
out of specification investigation. When the spreadsheet’s arithmetic functions are used, the calculations should be
fully explained, as they would be in a text document. This should include verification that the intended formulas have
been used properly, and that the data being analyzed is the right data. Such verification could easily be documented
by having another analyst or a supervisor examine the spreadsheet and approve it. No further verification is required,
since there is no need to challenge the accuracy of the calculations.
When developing spreadsheets as templates, such templates could be Category 3 to 5, depending on complexity,
see Section 48.2.4. For the purpose of end user applications, the definition of Category 4 is altered: it focuses on
complexity as opposed to configurability (see Figure 48.1).
For example:
•
A template is used by analysts in a laboratory to do a routine calculation of averages and standard deviations
of experimental results. This is a straightforward arithmetic operation with no configuration, so the template is
Category 3.
•
A spreadsheet template requires the user to input tablet strength, so that the application automatically branches
to different cells to use strength-specific calculations based on this initial input. Such a simple operation would
make the sheet Category 4, as it has some simple Boolean operations based on user input.
•
A spreadsheet application that employs custom macros or sophisticated or nested logic or lookup functions
should be treated as Category 5
Figure 48.1: Continuum of Categories for End User Applications

--- PAGE 368 ---
Page 366
Appendix S3
48.4	 Risk-Based Controls
GxP risk20 should be assessed. The following aspects should be considered:
•
Data integrity related to the control of data files, as most end user applications process data
•
The complexity of the application, based on the assumption that undetected systemic errors are more likely
in software not developed under a rigorous development method, and more complex applications have more
opportunities for errors
•
Intended use of the data in support of GxP operations
•
Potential impact on patient safety, product quality, or data integrity
Based on these risk assessments, controls should be established that focus on:
•
Degree of verification (for example boundary condition testing might be more rigorous where risk is high.
However, in a spreadsheet, ready access to the actual calculations to prove boundaries are correctly handled
could alleviate the need for six-point testing.)
•
Security control (for both the application code and any GxP records that are in the application or files created by
or from it)
•
Control of changes
•
Version control of the spreadsheet in alignment with the history of changes
•
Control of the infrastructure on which the end user application is built
48.4.1	 Degree of Verification
The extent and rigor of verification should be based on risk, complexity, novelty, and intended use.
One level of testing may be appropriate for simple and low risk systems, or several levels may be required.
Complex and higher risk applications require more rigorous testing. The amount of logical branching in the application
is a good gauge for complexity; if many logic functions (IF, AND, OR, etc.) or lookup tables are used, complexity is
higher. Although they are native functions, these introduce more potential pathways through the application, and such
branching requires a more sophisticated or thorough test strategy.
Macros also increase complexity because these are effectively embedded secondary applications. Even when
created by keystroke capture, there is a program in a high-level language like VBA behind it. Macros that simply
automate a string of actions are less of a concern than ones that contain logical branches, although they still
introduce risk. Macros should be challenged in documented functional testing. Macros that include logical branches
should be subject to greater rigor, with attention paid to multiple logic paths.
See Appendix D5 for further details on testing.
20	Note that while this Guide focuses on GxP risks, the process is also readily applicable to business process risks.

--- PAGE 369 ---
Page 367
Appendix S3
48.4.2	 Security Control
Security considerations for end user applications are similar to those for server or web-based applications, such as
access to the application, access to data through the application, and access at the operating system level to data
or the application code. Security within the environment should be adequate for the type of information stored or
processed. As with server-based applications, security is a fundamental part of ensuring data integrity.
For many end user applications, a combination of infrastructure controls (e.g., restricted access to directories)
and controls available through the application (e.g., password protection of spreadsheet cells) can provide some
security against unintentional change. These controls may, however, be ineffective in keeping the application author
from making changes outside of a change control process, especially if the application resides on an individual
workstation. In some cases, it may be possible to improve security by running the end user application on a network
drive on which the user’s rights are limited, and which includes a regular scheduled back-up process.
Data is often saved within the application itself, especially in spreadsheets. Ensuring adequate data integrity
held in spreadsheets requires the use of strict controls, including any required electronic record controls. Where
spreadsheets are subject to edit, it is difficult to establish whether original data in subsequently saved copies has
been edited. In such cases adequate control can be provided through the use of an EDMS. Alternatively, it may be
necessary to maintain controlled copies in an unalterable format, e.g., PDF or hardcopy. In general, GxP data should
be saved to a secure, backed-up local disk drive.
If the output of an end user application is a separately saved file, data integrity controls should be in place. Solutions
could include:
•
Forcing the file save path to go to a protected directory that disallows overwriting or deletion of files and prohibits
unauthorized access
•
Maintaining the files in an EDMS
If the degree of security that can be provided is not adequate for the data being managed, consideration should be
given to the use of applications that operate in a more robust environment.
48.4.3	 Change Control
End user applications that process GxP data should be subject to change control. Version management is difficult for
such applications. In some cases, especially spreadsheets, management of the application within an EDMS may be
an appropriate solution, as an audit trail of application versions will be retained. Another solution is to use library tools
that are often used by developers to manage code. These can be used to manage any type of file, can be effective
and reasonably easy to implement, and are less expensive than an EDMS. The use of either approach may also
control risks related to security of the environment.
As with any change control process, changes to end user applications should have a change record that includes
a description of the change and an assessment of the impact. Where appropriate, associated testing should be
documented.
48.4.4	Control of the Infrastructure
End user application environments and products are Software Category 1 (see Appendix M4). These tools provide an
application environment for the spreadsheets, databases, programs, or scripts that are developed by users.
The installation of the environment should be verified and the environment should to be managed under change and
configuration management, considering:
•
Standard records created by IT are adequate for such infrastructure, and are a standard part of the desktop build.

--- PAGE 370 ---
Page 368
Appendix S3
•
In most companies, the IT department will also control the addition of non-standard desktop software. The
processes they use to verify compatibility with the standard build are typically adequate to ensure proper control.
•
If the desktop infrastructure software is added directly by the user without IT involvement, release notes should
be perused for any known incompatibilities, and any irregularities in the installation process should be noted and
investigated.
48.5	 Examples of Typical Approaches
Figure 48.2 illustrates six different end user applications and a brief summary of potential approaches based on
consideration of GxP impact and the complexity of the application. These examples are intended to be illustrative
only, and not definitive. As in all risk-based approaches, applying critical thinking principles is imperative when
considering the approach to end user application compliance, and should include the overall risk of the business
process and the place of the end user application within it.
The analysis is based on an assumption of a constant level of risk. If the risk for a particular application is high, then
the rigor should be increased.
Note that in all cases where “standard” documentation is recommended, for end user application these documents
will typically be far smaller and easier to produce based on the fact that the applications themselves are smaller and
have less functionality. For example, an RS will probably be a page or less in length. In all cases information may be
combined into fewer deliverables than for larger, more complex applications.
Figure 48.2: Examples of Typical Approach Based on Impact and Complexity

--- PAGE 371 ---
Page 369
Appendix S3
A.
Simple spreadsheet template for arithmetic calculation for content uniformity test:
•
High impact, low complexity
•
Recommended approach:
-
RS, documented verification by a third party that the calculations are the right ones
-
Security to ensure the sheet is protected against unauthorized change
-
Security to ensure the users can access only the approved version
-
Secure storage of electronic document
-
Change control
B.
Spreadsheet record of training attendance
•
Low impact, low complexity
•
Recommended approach
-
No specific functionality requiring specification and verification
-
Standard controls for electronic documents containing evidence for GxP compliance
C.
Desktop database for analyzing toxicology study
•
High impact, medium complexity
•
Recommended approach:
-
Full Category 4 approach:
>
Validation plan
>
RS
>
Functional/design specification (may be combined)
>
Traceability
>
Documented testing against acceptance criteria
>
Validation report
-
Security to limit access to authorized users
-
Change control
D.
Spreadsheet for statistical analysis of a clinical study, with VBA macros
•
High impact, high complexity

--- PAGE 372 ---
Page 370
Appendix S3
•
Recommended approach:
-
Full Category 5 approach:
>
Validation plan
>
RS
>
Functional/design specification (may be combined)
>
Traceability
>
Documented testing against acceptance criteria
>
Validation report
-
Security to limit access to authorized users
-
Change control
E.
Spreadsheet for statistical analysis of manufacturing data for purpose of statistical process control of parameters
within validated ranges (includes complex logic and lookup functions)
•
Low impact, high complexity
•
Recommended approach:
-
Documented verification by a third party that the calculations are the right ones
-
Change control
-
Security to ensure the sheet is protected against unauthorized change
-
Security to ensure the users can access only the approved version
F.
Desktop database tracking disposition of printed labels
•
Medium impact, medium complexity
•
Recommended approach:
-
Abbreviated Category 4 approach:
>
Validation plan
>
Combined RS/functional/design specification
>
Documented testing against acceptance criteria
>
Validation report
-
Change control
-
Security to limit access to authorized users

--- PAGE 373 ---
Page 371
Appendix S4
Appendix S4
49	Appendix S4 – Patch and Update
Management
49.1
Introduction
This appendix describes the compliance aspects to consider when planning security patches, hot fixes, or service
pack upgrades.
There may be a frequent need for such patches and updates, for reasons including:
•
Widely integrated and connected applications may be vulnerable on several levels to abuse and exploitation with
malicious intent. Examples include:
-
Theft of personal data or IP
-
Theft of computing power and bandwidth for malicious software agents
•
Complex software may be released with defects. Such defects may affect critical processes and require fixes to
be issued by the supplier.
•
Periodic software updates from suppliers
Appropriate management of patches and upgrades is particularly important to maintain compliance and fitness for
intended use of GxP regulated computerized systems.
49.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
Clarification added regarding the role of the quality unit in patch management decisions.
49.2	 Approach to Patch and Update Management
Regulated companies should develop an approach to patch and upgrade management that:
•
Provides criteria for determining enterprise threat levels, and thus the urgency for applying patches
•
Allows for flexibility in patch application that considers risks to both the enterprise and risks to the compliant
status of regulated systems
•
Generates configuration records that show the version and patch level for a system at any point in its life cycle
•
Generates change records that describe what level of testing was done. This may include general testing at
the enterprise level and/or application-specific tests. It may be determined by analysis of release notes that an
application is unaffected, and no testing is required.
There is a need to determine what effect applying (or electing not to apply) a patch or upgrade will have on the
compliance status of GxP regulated computerized systems. Many patches are released by suppliers to address
urgent security vulnerabilities, and exploits may already be known or may be imminent. The time required to evaluate
and test all affected GxP regulated computerized systems prior to implementation of the patch may therefore increase
the risk to the integrity of these systems and their data.

--- PAGE 374 ---
Page 372
Appendix S4
Regulated companies should develop a risk-management approach for patch and upgrade management that
considers both regulatory compliance and the level of threat to the system and the wider computing environment. The
approach should ensure there is a requirement for clear communication at the appropriate times.
Application-specific patches should be planned as part of normal change management procedures. Patches that
must be applied enterprise wide are far more difficult to plan. Figure 49.1 illustrates some of the strategies that may
be considered for such patches. The more aggressive options tend to minimize risk to the enterprise as a whole by
expediting the fix, thus reducing exposure to the problem addressed by the patch. This has the side effect, however,
of increasing the risk to the compliance status of individual applications because the impact of the change has not
been considered fully in the context of each application.
The quality unit should approve the process for risk evaluation of all patches, but generally is not involved in
the assessments. The evaluation should be performed by appropriate SMEs. If the quality unit is involved in an
assessment, they should not have final say in how the patch is managed. Enterprise risk typically has to be given
precedence over GxP risk. If a patch must be applied that is considered to have undesirable GxP risk, business
process owners and the quality unit should work together to mitigate the risk. This could involve verification activities,
a temporary business process change, or other approaches.
The process should define the criteria and required approvals for selecting and following each defined strategy,
such as those shown in Figure 49.1. Roles and responsibilities should be defined. The process should also include
notification to affected parties of the patch application, including the help desk in case unanticipated effects are raised
as incidents.
Figure 49.1: Patch Strategies and Related Risk Levels
The selection of the strategy for applying the patch should consider the degree of risk reduction.
For example, for a fix to an operating system level security problem that threatens a wide range of GxP regulated and
unregulated systems, it may appropriate to follow Strategy 1 since this patch reduces risk to all of the applications.
Alternatively, the infrastructure group or other SMEs may be able to assess a risk level as being very low, e.g., when
a patch disables a software port that is typically unused by applications. In this example the risk evaluation may
conclude that there is no risk to the applications and therefore any of the patch strategies in Figure 49.1 may be
selected. Furthermore, testing at the application level would not be necessary in this example based on knowledge of
the application and the nature of the patch.

--- PAGE 375 ---
Page 373
Appendix S4
49.2.1	 Configuration Management
Accurate and complete configuration management records support patch and update management in several ways,
including:
•
Planning future patching activities: Sometimes patches must be applied sequentially, so it is important to
know the current patch level.
•
Interoperability: If a system is running at multiple locations, there may be compatibility issues if different sites
are at different patch levels. External applications may also require an interfaced system to be at a particular
version and patch level.
•
Troubleshooting: Thorough knowledge of a system’s configuration is often critical to understanding what went
wrong.
•
Data Integrity: Application of a security patch may be crucial to data integrity, especially if exploits are widely
published. It is important to be able to demonstrate that security gaps have been closed, and when this was
achieved.
Configuration records for systems and infrastructure should be sufficient to show the current as-built state and when
patches or upgrades have been applied.
See Appendix O6 for further details on these topics.

--- PAGE 377 ---
Page 375
Appendix S5
Appendix S5
50	Appendix S5 (Retired)
Appendix S5 Managing Quality within an Outsourced IS/IT Environment has been withdrawn and the revised material
renamed as Appendix M11.

--- PAGE 379 ---
Page 377
Appendix S6
Appendix S6
51	 Appendix S6 – Organizational Change
51.1
Introduction
This appendix provides guidance on how to deal with organizational change.
For many years there has been a global trend within the life sciences sector toward organizational consolidation and
outsourcing of services, and this trend is likely to continue. However, additional challenges have been raised as a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic and its resulting digital transformation that have stimulated and enabled more agile
ways of working and thinking in the sector.
This appendix considers the impact of such changes on GxP regulated computerized systems and provides guidance
in terms of areas to be considered for ensuring continued compliance and system availability.
51.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
While the approach to managing organizational change is essentially unchanged, minor revisions to some
terminology have been made where appropriate.
51.2
Initiators for Change
Reasons for organizational change may include:
•
Internal reorganization
•
Being acquired by another company
•
Divesting part of an organization to a third party (including activities such as offshoring and outsourcing)
•
Supplier or service provider ceasing to trade
51.3
Scope and Impact of Change
Organizational change may apply to any aspect of the system supply chain, including regulated companies, system
integrators, and base product and infrastructure suppliers.
Organizational change can occur during any stage of a computerized system’s life cycle, and the impact of the
change will depend on the stage. Aspects to consider include:
•
Changes in the business process that a computerized system supports to enable optimization of collaborative
efforts and strategies (for example, parallel phases of clinical development)
•
Changes in how an existing system is used
•
Moving systems from one location to another
•
New or different regulatory and compliance requirements
•
Impact on regulated records and any associated signatures

--- PAGE 380 ---
Page 378
Appendix S6
•
Changes in how security (both physical and logical access control) is handled
•
Clarification of where the primary data is located
•
Clarification of who the process and system owners are or will be
•
Timing and need to perform an audit of a reorganized supplier
•
Business relationships with the supplier
•
Impact of the change on any service level agreements
•
Impact on company strategies with regard to preferred solutions
•
Interim measures/solutions
•
Maintaining expertise on systems (both with regard to the supplier and the regulated company)
•
Validity of any support contracts with suppliers
•
Postponement or cancellation of existing system implementation projects
•
Acceleration or advancement of existing system implementation projects
•
Changes in personnel and/or individual responsibilities.
51.4
Organizational Factors
Organizational challenges include:
•
Maintaining multiple/parallel systems for the same business process
•
Developing interfaces between these multiple/parallel systems
•
Migrating data or subsets of data from one system to another
•
Maintaining data sets for third parties for (possibly significant) periods of time
-
Will all data be treated in the same manner?
-
Will the data remain in the same format?
-
Will some data be converted to paper/fiche records?
-
Will some data be discarded?
•
Systems likely to be retired
•
the Location of life cycle records and information (paper and electronic) and inspection support on an ongoing
basis
•
Maintaining multiple/parallel compliance practices and documentation

--- PAGE 381 ---
Page 379
Appendix S6
•
Harmonizing compliance practices, documenting the rationale for change (and justifying with regulator), and
training in new practices
•
Changes in regulatory expectations and subsequent impact life cycle activities and information
•
How change management and configuration management will be handled across the changed organizations
•
Ensuring that operation and maintenance activities are clearly identified and transitioned across to the revised
organizations
•
Increased focus/profile of incident monitoring during the transition period
51.5
Outsourcing
Where the organizational change is associated with outsourcing, then the following additional aspects should be
considered:
•
Whether the regulated company continues to own the equipment or whether this transfers to the outsource
company
•
Whether the outsource organization Quality Management System (QMS) is used or the regulated company QMS
•
Need to both initially and periodically audit the outsource organization (the audit scope should be both
compliance and financial)
See Appendix M11 for further details.
51.6
Loss of a Supplier
Where the change is associated with a supplier ceasing to trade consideration should be given to:
•
Ensuring business continuity plans are established and accurate for the related systems
•
Invoking any escrow agreements to gain access to application source code (if relevant)
•
Record and system migration options
•
Retrieval of any regulated company owned components, including hardware, software, records, and associated
documentation retained from the supplier

--- PAGE 382 ---
Page 380
Appendix S6
51.7
Risk Assessment of Organizational Change
A risk assessment process to identify and rank risks should be executed in order to develop a plan. As part of the risk
assessment process, projects should be considered as well as operational systems, the likely approach will depend
on the nature of the change. Table 51.1 illustrates some possible scenarios:
Table 51.1: Possible Scenarios Resulting from Organizational Change
51.8
Affected Stakeholders
Whether dealing with internal or external organizations, agreement has to be reached between all affected
organizations on any decisions concerning the system(s), the data, information, and documentation.
All affected stakeholders (from all organizations) should be involved, and where required should approve the strategy
and decisions made.
Representatives from the following business areas typically would be involved:
•
Business process owners
•
Compliance/quality/regulatory
•
Legal
•
IT and Engineering
•
Purchasing groups and in some cases finance
One of the key tasks for the business area stakeholders is to review and update as appropriate information and
documentation affected by the organizational change. Some key areas to be considered are listed below:
•
Business process documentation
•
Policies, procedures, work instructions, test methods (if applicable)
•
Training materials
•
User manuals
Project Status:
Company Acquisition
Company Merger
Supplier Insolvency
Not Started
Put on hold pending
management review
Put on hold pending
management review
Cancelled
In Progress
Early in Life Cycle
Put on hold pending
management review
Put on hold pending
management review
Cancelled
In Progress
Late in Life Cycle
Put on hold pending
management review
Continued
Put on hold pending
management review
Approaching Go-Live
(Decisions on these
projects will be a priority)
Put on hold pending
management review
Continued
Put on hold pending
management review

--- PAGE 383 ---
Page 381
Appendix S6
•
Batch records (if applicable)
•
Archived records/data
•
Contracts (if applicable)
•
System interfaces
•
Validation/qualification
•
Record retention schedules
Another important task for stakeholders is to ensure that training requirements are evaluated. This should be
performed against any changes made to the QMS, ways of working or documentation, and should be considered at
both an organizational and a system level.

