--- PAGE 109 ---
Page 107
Appendix M3
Appendix M3
11	 Appendix M3 – Science-Based Quality
Risk Management
11.1
Introduction
This appendix provides further detail on the QRM process introduced in Chapter 5.
QRM is a systematic process for the assessment, control, communication, and review of risks to patient safety,
product quality, and data integrity, based on a framework consistent with ICH Q9 [14]. It is used:
•
To identify risks and to remove or reduce them to an acceptable level
•
As part of a scalable approach that enables regulated companies to select the appropriate life cycle activities for
a specific system
Organizations should already have established risk assessment methods and tools (see Section 11.5). While this
Guide describes one suggested approach to risk management, it does not intend or imply that existing processes and
techniques should be discarded. They should continue to be used as appropriate as part of an overall QRM process.
The methods described in this appendix should be applied in conjunction with the use of critical-thinking skills
(see Appendix M12) to ensure that all risks to product quality, patient safety, and data integrity have been fully and
properly assessed, and as needed, mitigated.
11.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
While the approach for risk management is essentially unchanged, several considerations have been evolving since
this Guide was first published, and are addressed here. Principle among these is the use of cloud platforms and
applications, which move some of the risk-management activities outside the regulated company.
11.2
Scope
This appendix is applicable to all types of computerized systems used in regulated activities, including those
supporting clinical trials, toxicological studies, Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API) production, formulated product
production, warehousing, distribution, medical devices, and pharmacovigilance.
Separate and existing risk assessment processes may be relevant to some systems, e.g., in relation to analytical
methods, chemical processes, HSE, and PAT. These should be taken into consideration and leveraged. Similarly, this
approach may be used to assess and address risk in other business areas.
11.3
Benefits
Application of QRM enables effort to be focused on critical aspects of a computerized system, in a controlled and
justified manner, leading to specific benefits, such as:
•
Identification and management of risks to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity
•
Scaling of life cycle activities and associated records according to system impact and risks
•
Justification for use of supplier documentation

--- PAGE 110 ---
Page 108
Appendix M3
•
Better understanding of potential risks and proposed controls
•
Highlighting areas where more detailed information is needed
•
Improving business process understanding
•
Supporting regulatory expectations
11.4
Roles and Responsibilities
QRM is part of the overall responsibility of the business process owner, which may be delegated to project team
members. Key roles are shown in the Table 11.1. Note that the roles below will all be more effective if the persons in
that role are skilled in critical thinking,
Table 11.1: Risk-Management Roles and Responsibilities
Role
Responsibilities
Process Owner/System Owner
•
Establish team and provide resources (may be delegated to nominated
project manager)
•
Participate in risk assessments as required
•
Approve documentation
Team consisting of Subject Matter
Experts (SMEs) and key users*
•
Identify, analyze, and evaluate risks to patient safety, product quality,
and data integrity
•
Develop controls
Quality Unit
•
Identify, analyze, and evaluate those risks associated with regulatory
compliance and maintaining company quality standards and policies
•
Participate in risk assessments as required
•
Approve documentation where appropriate and necessary
Supplier
•
Provide information on their product
-
How it was developed
-
How it works
-
How it might fail
•
Provide advice on controls
•
Participate in risk assessments as required
*SMEs may include as necessary Process Owner, System Owner, Quality Unit, Business or IT Application Support,
IT or Engineering Operations Support, Infrastructure specialists, supplier, or any other appropriate specialist.

--- PAGE 111 ---
Page 109
Appendix M3
11.5
Guidance
Section 5.3 describes a five-step process, as shown in Figure 11.1.
Figure 11.1: Quality Risk-Management Process
The Main Body describes each of the steps. This appendix provides further guidance on the following topics:
•
Scalability of the process
•
Applying risk management based on the business process
•
Risk management throughout the system life cycle
•
Risk assessment method
•
The selection and use of controls
•
Residual risk
•
Using risk assessments to scale system life cycle activities
•
Risk communication and documentation
•
Examples of applying the process to different types of systems
11.5.1
Scalability of the Process
The five-step risk management process may be scaled according to risk, complexity, and novelty of individual system,
with each step of the process building upon the previous output.
As an example, Figure 11.2 shows how the process is applied to a typical Category 3 product.

--- PAGE 112 ---
Page 110
Appendix M3
Figure 11.2: Process Applied to a Typical Category 3 Product
Other examples showing the scalable approach of applying the process are given in Section 11.5.7.
The process may also be used during operation, e.g., during change control. In this case Steps 2 to 5 typically should
be used and information from the original Step 1 should still be available and used as appropriate.
11.5.2	 Applying Risk Management Based on the Business Process
To effectively apply a QRM program to computerized systems, it is important to have a thorough understanding of the
business process supported by the computerized systems, including the potential impact on patient safety, product
quality, and data integrity. Aspects to consider include:
•
What are the hazards?
To recognize the hazards to a computerized system requires judgment and understanding of what could
go wrong with the system based on relevant knowledge and experience of the process and its automation.
Consideration should include both system failures and user failures.
•
What is the harm?
Potential harm should be identified based on hazards. Examples of potential harm include:
-
Production of adulterated product caused by the failure of a computerized system
-
Failure of an instrument at a clinical site that leads to inaccurate clinical study conclusions
-
Failure of a computerized system used to assess a toxicology study that leads to incomplete understanding
of a drug’s toxicological profile
-
Failure leads to supply interruption and a potential drug shortage
•
What is the impact?
In order to understand the impact on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity, it is necessary to estimate
the possible consequence of a hazard.
•
What is the probability of a failure?
Understanding the probability of a failure occurring to a computerized system assists with the selection
of appropriate controls to manage the identified risks. For some types of failure such as software failure,

--- PAGE 113 ---
Page 111
Appendix M3
however, it may be very difficult to assign such a value, thus precluding the use of probability in quantitative
risk assessments. To some extent, probability of failure aligns with the GAMP Categories 1-5; as complexity is
introduced, failure likelihood increases.
•
What is the detectability of a failure?
Understanding the detectability of a failure also assists with the selection of appropriate controls to manage
the identified risks. Failures may be detected automatically by the system or by manual methods. Detection is
useful only if it occurs before the consequences of the failure cause harm to patient safety, product quality, or
data integrity. Similar to the above, the categories are paralleled; as the complexity of failure detection processes
increase, the likelihood of undetected failure increases. This applies to both manual and (generally more reliable)
automated processes.
•
How will the risk be managed?
Risk can be eliminated or reduced by design, or reduced to an acceptable level, by applying controls that reduce the
probability of occurrence or increase detectability. Controls may be automated, manual, or a combination of both.
The above considerations are context sensitive. For example, risks associated with a solid oral dosage manufacturing
area are very different to those in a sterile facility, even when the same computerized systems are used.
Similarly, the risks associated with an adverse event reporting system are very different to those in a training records
database. The former can have a direct effect of patient safety, whereas the latter system is very unlikely to affect
patient safety.
It is worth noting that zero risk is usually an unattainable goal, and there are diminishing returns as it is approached.
Instead, companies need to think in terms of acceptable risk, sometimes known as risk tolerance. Risk tolerance
is context dependent, taking into account a variety of patient safety, data integrity, business, and regulatory
considerations, and it is not necessarily the same for similar processes in one company, or even for identical
processes in different companies. For example, risk tolerance related to product release is lower for a life-saving
oncology drug than it is for an allergy cream, even though the processes may be identical. There should be greater
care and rigor exercised for the oncology drug.
It is not unusual for risks to have multiple potential impacts. It is highly advisable to recognize what the worst-case
scenario may be. However, when deciding what mitigation steps to apply, that may not always be the best focus.
If the likelihood of a worst-case outcome is vanishingly small it may make more sense to focus on other potential
negative outcomes. This illustrates why a truly effective risk-management process is critical.
11.5.3	 Risk Management Throughout the System Life Cycle
Appropriate risk-management processes should be followed throughout the life cycle to manage identified risks and
to determine the rigor and extent of the activities required at each phase of the life cycle.
While risk-based decision-making should be used throughout the life cycle, different approaches may be appropriate
to different situations, ranging from formal risk assessments to decisions considering pertinent risk factors. For
example, formal risk assessments are usually performed at several stages when developing new software. A formal
risk assessment would normally not be required, however, when determining the need for the rigor of supplier
assessment. This risk-based decision is typically made and documented by the project team also considering novelty
and complexity, the categorization of components, and any intention to leverage supplier documentation.
Figure 11.3 shows the typical use of risk-based decision-making throughout the life cycle.

--- PAGE 114 ---
Page 112
Appendix M3
Figure 11.3: Typical Use of Risk-Based Decision-Making
11.5.3.1	 Initial Risk Assessment
An initial risk assessment should be performed at (or before) the beginning of the project phase. This is Step 1 of
the process described in this section. The earlier this can be done the better, as this is the step in which a system
is defined as in or out of scope for GxP. Systems that are in GxP scope may have user requirements that affect the
design or selection of an application, e.g., definition of data audit trails.
This assessment therefore should precede, or at worst be in parallel with, development of the RS.
The assessment should be based on an understanding of business processes and business risk assessments,
regulatory requirements, and known functional areas. Any relevant previous assessments may provide useful input,
and these should not be repeated unnecessarily.
Risks introduced by computerization of the business process (e.g., electronic record integrity) should be included in
the assessment.
This risk assessment focuses on important risks related to the business process, rather than detailed functions and
technical aspects. One of those business risks is whether or not the system falls within the scope of GxP regulations.
The process owner and the quality unit, typically, are involved at this stage in addition to the input of appropriate SMEs.
Important prerequisites for this assessment are:
•
A clear understanding of the business process
•
A defined boundary around the business process
•
The role of the computerized system in supporting the business process including interfaces with other computer
systems and other business processes. In the latter case it is important to recognize the risk and criticality of the
secondary business process
•
Sufficiently defined requirements (development of requirements may be iterative and influenced by the risk
assessment)

--- PAGE 115 ---
Page 113
Appendix M3
Benefits of the initial risk assessment include:
•
Early identification of key areas that require focus in subsequent stages, including CQAs and CPPs where
appropriate
•
Information for requirements development, system specification, and system descriptions
•
Information to assist with developing the strategy for achieving compliance and fitness for intended use
GxP Determination
The initial risk assessment should include a decision on whether the system is GxP regulated (i.e., a GxP
assessment). If so, the specific regulations should be listed and to which parts of the system they are applicable. If a
system is only partially in scope of GxP, understanding this may simplify validation substantially.
For similar systems, and to avoid unnecessary work, it may be appropriate to base the GxP assessment on the
results of a previous assessment, provided the regulated company has an appropriate established procedure.
It is worth noting that while the methodology described in this appendix is geared to GxP compliance, and hence
focuses on risk to patients, it can effectively be applied to business risk as well.
System Impact
The initial risk assessment should determine the overall impact that the computerized system may have on patient
safety, product quality, and data integrity due to its role within the business processes. This should take into account
both the complexity of the process, and the complexity, novelty, and use of the system. Categorization assists in
assessing system complexity and novelty (see Appendix M4).
In general, high-impact systems typically include those that support processes that:
•
Generate, manipulate, or control data supporting regulatory safety and efficacy submissions
•
Control, manage, or maintain critical parameters or data used at any stage, including pre-clinical, clinical,
development, and manufacture
•
Control, manage, or store or provide data for product release
•
Control, manage, or store data required in case of product recall
•
Control, manage, or store data for adverse event or complaint recording or reporting, or generally support
pharmacovigilance
Process knowledge assists with determining system impact (see Section 11.7.2 for an example).
Systems that are of lower overall impact can be documented and tested less rigorously (see Section 11.5.7).
Need for Further Assessments
The amount of information available when performing the initial risk assessment depends on both the business
process and on the GAMP category (see Appendix M4). For Category 3 products the amount of information available
at the time of the initial risk assessment may be sufficient for all relevant risks to be identified, assessed, and controlled
without the need for further risk assessments5. This would not be the case for a custom application (Category 5), where
more detailed assessments would be required as the system is developed, as shown on Figure 11.4.
5	 Bear in mind, however, that if interfaces exist to other systems, a deeper assessment is advisable even for a Category 3 system.

--- PAGE 116 ---
Page 114
Appendix M3
Figure 11.4: Deciding on the Need for Further Assessment
The need for further risk assessments, therefore, varies widely. See Section 11.7.1 for examples of typical
approaches for different categories of systems.
11.5.3.2	 Risk-Based Decisions during Planning
Risk management is an integral element of good project management practice and the approach for achieving
compliance should be integrated within the overall approach.
The outcome of the initial risk assessment described in Section 11.5.3.1 should contribute to the planning process.
Key risk-based decisions taken during planning include:
•
Need for, and rigor of, supplier assessment
•
Using the results of supplier assessments to assist in the planning to achieve compliance and fitness for intended
use, including determining the involvement of the supplier
•
Determining activities, deliverables, and responsibilities for achieving compliance and fitness for intended use,
including extent of specification and verification
•
Need for further risk assessments, when they are required in the life cycle, and the method to be used. A
risk assessment method is provided in Section 11.5.4. When deciding on the level of further assessment
required. information already gathered should be considered (e.g., results of supplier assessment, degree of
standardization).
These decisions should be documented.

--- PAGE 117 ---
Page 115
Appendix M3
Employing risk-based decisions for achieving and maintaining compliance allows improved efficiencies at two levels:
•
Scalability: At the system level, systems that are of lower overall impact can be documented and tested less
rigorously; see Section 11.5.7 for further details
•
Focusing: At the functional level, greater rigor can be applied to the testing and control of functions that are of
the highest risk, with less rigor applied to low-risk functionality
11.5.3.3	 Functional Risk Assessment
Where these are required, functional risk assessments should be used to identify and manage risks to patient safety,
product quality, and data integrity that arise from failure of the function under consideration. It should be noted that
there is significant value to extending this approach to the consideration of business risk. It is hugely important to
keep dangerous products off the market, but if risk-based controls can prevent financial or reputational harm to the
company, it is also a worthy application of the process. This is covered by Steps 2 and 3 of the process.
Functions with impact on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity are identified by referring to the RS6 and
the output of the initial risk assessment.
A method for performing functional risk assessments is provided in Section 11.5.4. The assessments should be
performed by SMEs.
Computerization may introduce particular risks (e.g., electronic record integrity, system availability, security,
infrastructure) not otherwise associated with the manual business processes. The design of computerized systems
may provide controls for identified risks, but may introduce other risks that require controlling. This should be included
in the assessment. EU Annex 11 [32] states:
“Where a computerised system replaces a manual operation, there should be no resultant decrease in product
quality, process control or quality assurance. There should be no increase in the overall risk of the process.”
[Emphasis added]
Note that this sometimes includes the removal of incidental quality controls by removing a human from the loop who
would notice a problem. SME review should catch this if it occurs.
More information on the use of risk assessments for particular system types and for infrastructure is given in the
relevant ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guides [15].
11.5.3.4	 Risk-Based Decisions during Test Planning
Testing is often performed at several levels depending on the risk, complexity, and novelty of the system.
Significant savings may be realized if the need for additional controls for the business process or the computerized
system is recognized early in the development process. Measures identified to manage risk should be implemented
and verified. Verification of controls, typically, is covered during testing of the system and should cover any additional
controls required to address deficiencies found during testing.
The results of functional risk assessments should influence the extent and rigor of verification. Testing should be
focused on the high-risk functionality, minimizing effort on low-risk areas (see Appendix D5).
If controls have been added after the functional risk assessment, it may be appropriate to reassess the conclusion of
that assessment, since the new controls may allow the adoption of simpler test cases.
6	 For Category 5 systems, this identification extends to the functional specification. This may occur via a traceability matrix or tool.

--- PAGE 118 ---
Page 116
Appendix M3
Other information also may affect test planning, such as the results of supplier assessments. These decisions should
be documented.
11.5.3.5	 Risk-Based Decisions during Planning of Operational Activities
Operational activities should be selected and scaled according to the nature, risk, and complexity of the system in
question. Opportunities for risk-based decisions when planning operation include:
•
System availability
•
Frequency and level of backup and recovery
•
Disaster planning
•
System security
•
Change control (see Section 11.5.3.6)
•
Periodic reviews
Any critical business processes should be identified and the risks to each assessed. Plans should be established and
exercised to ensure the timely and effective resumption of these critical business processes in case of failure. The
output from this risk-management approach can provide a valuable base from which to build DR and BCPs.
11.5.3.6	 Functional Risk Assessments in Change Control
Change management should provide a dependable mechanism for prompt implementation of technically sound
improvements following the approach to specification, design, and verification described in this Guide. The rigor of
the approach, including extent of documentation and verification, should be based on the risk and complexity of the
change.
If an implemented change either raises or lowers the risk profile of a function (or the system as a whole) it should be
captured and documented. The verification strategy may be affected by such a change.
11.5.3.7	 Risk-Based Decisions when Planning System Retirement
Risk-based decisions are required when planning system retirement, for example:
•
Approach to data and record retention, destruction, or migration
•
Approach to verification
11.5.4	 Risk Assessment Method
Risk management aims to establish controls such that the combination of severity, probability of occurrence, and
detectability of failures is reduced to an acceptable level. Severity refers to the possible consequence of a hazard.
The method presented in this section provides a simplified functional risk assessment tool. It is not mandatory – other
detailed risk assessment methods may be used. It is used, if necessary and appropriate, during Step 3 of the 5-step
process.

--- PAGE 119 ---
Page 117
Appendix M3
Each of the hazards identified for a function is assessed in two stages, as shown in Figure 11.5:
1.
Severity of impact on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity is plotted against the likelihood that a fault
will occur, giving a Risk Class.
2.
Risk Class is then plotted against the likelihood that the fault will be detected before harm occurs giving a Risk
Priority.
Figure 11.5: Risk Assessment Method
The Risk Priority obtained helps to focus attention on areas where the regulated company is most exposed to
hazards. These should be considered in relation to the risk tolerance, which varies from company to company based
on a variety of safety, business, and regulatory drivers.
Successful application of this method depends on the ability to agree on the meaning of High, Medium, and Low
for each segment of the assessment. These should be considered specifically in the context of the system in each
project. An example form for documenting the functional risk assessment is provided separately.
11.5.4.1	 Scaling the Method
To use resources most effectively, the decision of where to apply the most rigorous functional risk assessment should
be focused on functions with highest impact. Other aspects, such as probability of occurrence and detectability
should be investigated when performing the functional risk assessment. An example approach to scaling functional
risk assessments based on impact is provided in Section 11.7.3.
Function impact is context sensitive. For example, failure of an instrument in an in-process Quality Control (QC)
laboratory for chemical intermediates is far less likely to affect patient safety than the same instrument in a QC
laboratory that releases drug product to market. This is because there are many additional controls between the
intermediate and the patient in the former case, where there may be none in the latter.
11.5.5	 The Selection and Use of Controls
Controls are measures that are put in place to reduce risk to an acceptable level. They may be part of a computerized
system function, parallel manual procedures, or they may be downstream, intended to trap fault conditions after they
have occurred, e.g., QC release testing.

--- PAGE 120 ---
Page 118
Appendix M3
Controls typically are aimed at:
•
Eliminating risk through process or system redesign
•
Reducing risk by reducing the probability of a failure occurring
•
Reducing risk by increasing the in-process detectability of a failure
•
Reducing risk by establishing downstream checks or error traps (e.g., fail-safe or controlled fail state)
In some cases, it may not be possible to reduce risk through downstream controls (e.g., for an adverse event
reporting system for which there is no downstream), so controls in such cases generally are integral to the system or
process and are aimed at preventing the failure from occurring or making it more detectable if it does. In other cases,
the identified risk may be sufficiently low or easily detectable such that specific controls are not required.
Controls for a given process may be automated within the system, such as alarms, restrictions to data fields, required
data fields, dialog box prompts for verification. Alternatively, they may be entirely independent external processes,
such as subsequent chemical or physical analyses, or operator checks. Examples of controls that could be used to
reduce risk are shown in Table 11.2.
Table 11.2: Examples of Controls to Reduce Risk
Control Strategy
Introduction of automated checks of data quality in downstream
computerized systems
Introduction of procedures to the business process to counter possible
failures, such as QC testing of products
Introduction of automated controls within the computerized system being
assessed, e.g.:
•
Data verification checks within the system design to reduce the
likelihood of data entry errors (such as acceptable input ranges)
•
User prompts to verify inputs to increase the detectability of a user error
Use is made of proven methods, tools, and components; fault-tolerance
may be built into the computerized system (e.g., using replicated parts,
system mirroring); the operating environment may be controlled
Increased rigor of verification testing to demonstrate that the computerized
system performs as expected and can handle error conditions
Enhanced training of users
If the selected controls are still not adequate to bring risk to an acceptable level, wider risk control strategies should
be considered, such as those shown in Table 11.3.

--- PAGE 121 ---
Page 119
Appendix M3
Table 11.3: Wider Risk Control Approaches
Modify Project Strategies
•
Project structure and makeup: The experience and qualifications of
staff; the type of project organization; the level of education and training
provided
•
Level of documentation and review: Alter the amount of
documentation that is approved and controlled; introduce or remove
formal review points to reflect identified risk
Modify the Business Process
•
How the computerized system is used in the business process:
If the computerized system introduces or increases risk, consider
alternative approaches to how the system is used.
•
Redesign of the business process: Change the business process to
lessen or eliminate key points of risk.
Risk Avoidance
The risks are so high that the new way of working should not be
implemented.
11.5.6	 Residual Risk
Residual risks after implementing control measures should be considered. For example, reviewing control measures
after testing or after implementing supporting procedural controls to determine whether selected control strategies for
the system should be adjusted.
If the residual risk is above the threshold of acceptable risk, then appropriate further controls should be implemented
and verified, and the impact on previously implemented risk control measures should also be considered. If this is
required, analysis of residual risk should be repeated. This sequence continues until residual risk is acceptable.
11.5.7	 Scaling Life Cycle Activities
Activities aimed at ensuring GxP compliance and fitness for intended use throughout the life of the system should be
scaled according to:
•
System impact on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity (risk assessment)
•
System complexity and novelty (architecture and categorization of system components)
•
Outcome of supplier assessment (supplier capability)
Specific activities that may be scaled include:
•
Levels of specification
•
Need for and extent of design reviews
•
Need for and extent of code reviews
•
Extent and rigor of verification activities
Examples showing the levels of specification and verification for different categories of system, and how the five-step
process is applied, are given in Section 11.7.

--- PAGE 122 ---
Page 120
Appendix M3
The strategy for supplier assessment also can be scaled based on system impact, GAMP category, and the maturity
of the product. Likewise, suppliers may contribute substantially to the risk assessment process as SMEs.
11.5.8	 Risk Communication and Documentation
As defined in ICH Q9 [14], Risk Communication is the sharing of information about risk and risk management
between the decision makers and others. The output of the risk-management process, including the assessments of
impact and risk and the evaluated effectiveness of monitored controls, should be shared by the decision makers with
other involved parties, such as the quality unit (where necessary and appropriate), the business process owner, and
as appropriate the supplier.
This communication should take place throughout the risk-management process and does not necessarily take the
form of a report. Although it is not necessary to communicate the acceptance of every risk, special emphasis should
be given to communication to the appropriate individuals when a risk or impact has changed, so that any necessary
adjustments can be made. Where necessary, the process should enable escalation of risks to senior management in
a timely fashion. Regulated companies should be able to explain risk-based decisions if questioned by a regulator.
This information can also be used to improve the efficiency of the change management process. Every change to
be applied can use the risk assessment information to identify the areas of the system or process impacted by the
change and the risks involved in doing so. To facilitate this, risk assessments should be documented such that the
results can be easily accessed during the life cycle. This is often achieved using a risk register. A risk register is a
listing of recognized risks wherein risks can be prioritized and measures taken to mitigate them are recorded. This is
often managed in a database or spreadsheet.
The risk-based approach will be effective only if the risk control strategies that are put in place are monitored during
the life of the computerized system to ensure they remain in place and are effective. Hence, as part of the periodic
review, the risk register should be reviewed to ensure that all the control strategies remain appropriate.
11.5.9	 Risk Management for Outsourced Activities
The use of cloud-computing services means that direct control of risk-management processes must be delegated to
a supplier in some cases. This does not absolve the regulated company of accountability for the actions of a supplier
on the regulated company’s behalf. Supplier assessment and management processes become a critical part of the
regulated company’s QRM approach. If a supplier’s practices cannot be reconciled with the regulated company’s
QRM needs, this should be determined during the assessment and they must be prepared to not engage the supplier
if the objectionable issues cannot be satisfactorily resolved.
Continuous monitoring of engaged suppliers of IT services to ensure that quality gaps do not arise should be an
integral, contractually obligated aspect of the supplier relationship.
See Appendix M11 and ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service
Management, Chapter 4 [20], for further information on this topic.
11.6
Other Risk Assessment Methods and Tools
The following are commonly used methods and tools for risk assessment. They could be used to supplement or in
some cases, replace the GAMP tool described in the previous section.
•
Hazard and Operability Analysis (HAZOP)
•
Computer Hazards and Operability Analysis (CHAZOP)
•
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA)

--- PAGE 123 ---
Page 121
Appendix M3
•
Failure Mode, Effects, and Criticality Analysis (FMECA)
•
Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)
•
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP)
•
Basic Risk-Management Facilitation Methods
•
Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA)
•
Risk Ranking and Filtering
For further details see ICH Q9 Annex I: Risk Management Methods and Tools [14].
11.7
Examples
This section includes examples of the application of risk management. They are indicative and not intended to be
definitive. Other approaches can be equally applicable.
11.7.1
Example 1 – Approaches for Different Categories of Systems
The examples provided in this section show the risk-management process applied to three categories of system.
11.7.1.1
Example Category 3 Standard Product
For a typical Category 3 product it may be possible to cover all relevant risks in a single assessment as shown in
Figure 11.6. For a specific system it may be decided that further assessments are required, and these should be
planned as appropriate.
Figure 11.6: Risk-Based Approach for Standard Product (Category 3)
11.7.1.2
Example Category 4 Configured Product
For a typical Category 4 product it may be necessary to carry out an initial risk assessment to determine whether
the system is GxP regulated and to understand the overall system impact, followed by one or more detailed risk
assessments as the system specification is developed. However, for some systems it may be possible to cover all
risks in the initial assessment; see Figure 11.7.

--- PAGE 124 ---
Page 122
Appendix M3
Figure 11.7: Risk-Based Approach for Configured Product (Category 4)
11.7.1.3
Example Category 5 Custom Application
For a typical Category 5 custom application it is necessary to carry out an initial risk assessment to determine
whether the system is GxP regulated and to understand the overall system impact, followed by one or more detailed
risk assessments as the system specification and design are developed; see Figure 11.8.
Figure 11.8: Risk-Based Approach for Custom Application (Category 5)

--- PAGE 125 ---
Page 123
Appendix M3
11.7.2	 Example 2 – Determining System and Functional Impact
This example presents a method of determining system impact and provides information that can be used later as
part of functional risk assessments.
Figure 11.9 shows how process knowledge helps determine system impact, and how the understanding of the
importance of the process steps assists with the determination of functional risk in Step 2 of the five-step process.
System impact is chosen to be the impact for the highest assessed process step. System impact can be used to
scale compliance activities.
Figure 11.9: Analyzing the Business Process for Steps 1, 2, and 3 in the Five-Step Process
11.7.3	 Example 3 – Functional Risk Assessment Based on Impact
Figure 11.10 shows the five-step process with Step 3 expanded to provide an approach to the functional risk
assessment based on impact. This example classes functions as one of High, Medium, or Low impact. The level of
rigor applied to the assessment will be dependent upon the impact.
For High-impact functions it may be necessary to carry out a detailed assessment of hazards based upon the
probability of occurrence and detectability.
For Low impact, it is reasonable to forego formal risk assessment, applying good practice to provide adequate
control. For Medium impact, hazard scenarios should be considered but hazards can be grouped generally, whereas
for High-impact functions more detailed and specific hazards should be considered.
In this appendix, Section 11.7.2 provides an example of how the impact of individual functions can be established.
Section 11.7.4 provides examples of Medium and High-impact functions. The risk assessment method described in
Section 11.5.4 may be used to carry out the assessment, such as for the High-impact functions shown in Figure 11.10.

--- PAGE 126 ---
Page 124
Appendix M3
Figure 11.10: Risk Assessment Based on Impact

--- PAGE 127 ---
Page 125
Appendix M3
11.7.4	 Example 4 – Example of Medium and High-Impact Functions
Table 11.4 shows five examples of system functions, and compares the generic assessments appropriate for
Medium-impact functions to the greater level of detail appropriate for High-impact functions. In both cases,
consequences related to corresponding risk scenarios should be assessed for Risk Priority.
Table 11.4: Example Risk Assessments for Medium and High-Impact Functions
System
Function
Risk Scenarios for
Medium-Impact* Functions
Risk Scenarios for
High-Impact* Functions
Generic Hazard
Consequence
Specific Hazard
Consequence
Packaging line
Thermal seal
Control failure
Package or
product damage
Control
failure – high
temperature
Package
damage
Product damage
Control failure –
low temperature
Package not
sealed
Liquid filling line
Filling
Power problem
Inaccurate vial
fill
Voltage spike
Damage to
electronics
Brief voltage
drop due to
initiation of
co-located
equipment
No impact
Prolonged
voltage
drop (e.g.,
brownouts)
No impact
as long as
Uninterruptable
Power Supply
(UPS) maintains
backup;
inaccurate
vial fill if UPS
battery runs out
Power loss < 30
min
No impact (UPS
assumes load)
Power loss > 30
min
If controlled
shutdown not
initiated, line
crashes
IT change-
control
database
Change status
of request
Move change
status to
“Approved” fails
Change
status stays
“Submitted”
Move change
status to
“Approved” fails
Change not
executed
No documented
approval for
executed
change

--- PAGE 128 ---
Page 126
Appendix M3
Table 11.4: Example Risk Assessments for Medium and High-Impact Functions (continued)
For further guidance on applying this QRM approach to designing test strategies see Appendix D5.
System
Function
Risk Scenarios for
Medium-Impact* Functions
Risk Scenarios for
High-Impact* Functions
Generic Hazard
Consequence
Specific Hazard
Consequence
Toxicology
database
Audit trail
Audit trail fails
Inadequate
change
documentation
Audit trail fails
Data changes
inadequately
attributed
Old versions of
data lost
Antivirus
software
Automated virus
definition update
Updates not
downloaded
Exposure to
potential virus
attack
Updates not
downloaded
Virus causes
temporary loss
of system
Viruses cause
loss of data
HPLC control
system
Solvent pump
control
Control failure
Incorrect assay
Control failure –
high flow
Incorrect assay
result due to
loss of peak
resolution or
misidentification
of peaks
Control failure –
low flow
Incorrect assay
result due
to incorrect
component
peaks assigned
to reference
standard or
expected
component
peak windows
*Note that there is no implication that these functions should always be defined as high or medium impact; such
an assignment must be made within the context of the business process. They are simply used as examples to
illustrate the concept of generic versus specific hazard analysis and risk assessment.

--- PAGE 129 ---
Page 127
Appendix M4
Appendix M4
12	 Appendix M4 – Categories of Software
and Hardware
12.1
Introduction
This appendix describes how software and hardware components of a system may be analyzed and categorized in
terms of increasing complexity, novelty, and inherent likelihood of residual defects, as a very high-level preliminary
risk assessment. These software and hardware categories may then feed into the risk assessment and supplier-
assessment approaches.
It should be noted that Categories 3 to 5 are effectively a continuum with no absolute boundaries, and that most
systems will contain components of multiple categories. For example, core functionality within a computerized system
may be Category 3, with Category 4 workflow configuration and bespoke interfaces to other systems being Category
5. The software categories can assist in understanding the system; however, the life cycle activities should be scaled
based on risk, complexity, and novelty, and supported by critical thinking.
12.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
This appendix has been revised to emphasize that:
•
Computerized systems are generally made up of a combination of components from different categories; the
categories should be viewed as a continuum
•
The software category is just one factor in a risk-based approach; the life cycle activities should be scaled based
on the overall GxP impact, complexity, and novelty of the system (derived from the criticality of the business
process supported by the system)
•
Software categories still bring benefit in deciding the rigor of supplier assessment and also when judging the
probability of a failure or defect occurring in a system
12.2
Using the GAMP Categories
When coupled with critical thinking, risk assessment, and supplier assessment, categorization can be part of an
effective quality risk-management approach. Categorization is not intended to provide a checklist approach to
validation. Life cycle activities need to be added, removed, and scaled based on the nature of the components and
identified risks.
There are two main ways to use the categories:
•
Whole-system assessment: On a whole-system level, the category of the main component may be used to
help define the approach to supplier assessment. Combining categorization with an assessment of system GxP
impact can help to decide the extent of supplier assessment required.
•
Functional risk assessment: In a functional risk assessment, categorization can help increase objectivity in
the assessment process. The increased risk derives from a combination of greater complexity and less user
experience. An understanding of the software and hardware category can contribute to assessing risk as follows:
-
There is generally an increasing risk of failure or defects with the progression from standard software and
hardware to custom software and hardware – the “Probability” in Appendix M3.

--- PAGE 130 ---
Page 128
Appendix M4
-
Where the Detectability of a fault is reliant on a system function (e.g., such as an alarm or error message),
the category can also influence the assessment of Detectability. A bespoke alarm may be more likely to fail
compared to standard functionality and may require testing in its own right to ensure correct functionality.
-
The Severity is, however, independent of the category, and is instead derived from the business process that
the system supports.
Most systems have components of varying complexity, such as an operating system, standard components,
and configured or custom components, and therefore the category may be different for different functions under
assessment. Figure 12.1 shows an example CAPA system with a combination of categories.
Figure 12.1: Example of a Multi-Category System
It should be noted that some companies may refer to a system as “Category X” as shorthand for “This system is
mainly based on a central Category X component, which will drive much of the life cycle and validation strategy
decisions, even though there are some other components of different categories involved, which will need some other
arrangements.”
Referring to systems as a single category can be further misleading given that even within a category there can be
dramatic differences in GxP impact and complexity and that risk is a continuum. For example:
•
A balance with a configurable serial output may be simplistically labeled as a “Category 4” system based on the
presence of the configuration component. A Chromatography Data System (CDS) is also often classed as a
“Category 4” system. However, there is an enormous difference in complexity between the balance and a CDS,
and therefore the life cycle approaches should be scaled to reflect this.
•
Within complex systems, there are still significant differences. A CDS may be similar in complexity and
configurability to a Learning Management System (LMS) but if the CDS is used for product quality data and
decisions, then it has significantly more GxP impact than the LMS and again, the life cycle approaches will not be
the same.
Regulated companies are responsible for the fitness for purpose of the computerized system used in support of a
business process in a GxP environment. The life cycle approach should address the layers of software involved
and their respective categories. It should reflect the assessment of the supplier and any audit observations, GxP
risk, size, and complexity. It should define strategies for the mitigation of any weaknesses identified in the supplier’s
development process or during functional risk assessment.

--- PAGE 131 ---
Page 129
Appendix M4
12.3
Categories of Software
12.3.1	 Category 1 – Infrastructure Software, Tools, and IT Services
Infrastructure elements link together to form an integrated environment for running and supporting applications and
services.
Software in this category includes:
•
Established or publicly available7 layered software: Applications are developed to run under the control
of this kind of software. This includes operating systems, database managers, programming languages,
middleware, ladder logic interpreters, statistical programming tools, and spreadsheet packages (but not business
applications developed using these packages: See Appendix S3).
•
Infrastructure software tools: This includes such tools as network monitoring software, batch job scheduling
tools, security software, antivirus, and configuration management tools. Risk assessments should, however, be
carried out on tools with potential high impact, such as for password management or security management, to
determine whether additional controls are appropriate.
•
Software, systems, and tools supporting computerized system life cycle activities and IT and infrastructure
processes (as opposed to supporting business and pharmaceutical and medical device life cycle processes)
Layered software is not subject to specific functional verification although their features are functionally tested and
challenged indirectly during testing of the application as part of the environment. The identity and version numbers of
layered software and operating system should be recorded and verified during installation.
Infrastructure software tools are generally highly reliable, and significantly removed from any aspect of patient
risk. All infrastructure software should be controlled and managed. See the ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide:
IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance (Second Edition) [49] and ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling
Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service Management, Chapter 4 [20] for further guidance.
12.3.2	 Category 2 – Not Used
12.3.3	 Category 3 – Standard System Components
This category includes off-the-shelf components used for business purposes. It includes both those that cannot be
configured to conform to business processes and those that offer limited configurations using factory-provided values
or ranges (also called parameterization, as may be found in process control systems and simple laboratory devices).
In both cases, configuration to run in the user’s environment is possible and likely (e.g., for printer setup).
A simplified life cycle approach may be applied to systems that predominantly consist of Category 3 components and
have limited or moderate GxP impact. The need for, and extent of supplier assessment should be based on risk and
any intended leveraging of supplier specifications and verification activities. User requirements are necessary and
should focus on key aspects of intended use in the regulated environment.
All changes to software should be controlled, including supplier-provided patches. SOPs should be established for
system use and management, and training plans implemented.
Configuration or parameterization choices should be managed, recorded, and verified. Where software and hardware
are interdependent, calibration may be a critical quality activity as well.
7	 Publicly available software includes Free or Open-Source software. Considerations for the use of Open-Source Software are contained in Appendix D4.

--- PAGE 132 ---
Page 130
Appendix M4
12.3.4	 Category 4 – Configured Components
Configurable software components enable configuration of user-specific business processes into one or more
workflows, specific to methods, or products, or processes etc. This typically involves configuring predefined software
modules, and correspondingly there is an increase in the importance of capturing and managing the configuration
choices.
Often the risks associated with the components are dependent upon how well the system is configured to meet the
needs of user-business processes. There may be some increased risk associated with new software and recent
major upgrades and the complexity of the business process being configured. Supplier testing may have used a
default configuration whereas the applied configuration is typically specific to the individual company’s intended use.
This could result in less opportunity to leverage supplier verification and more need for regulated company activities
to verify the functionality of their applied configuration.
The life cycle approach should address the layers of software involved and their respective categories. The approach
should reflect the outcome of the supplier assessment, GxP risk, size, and complexity. It should define strategies for
the mitigation of any supplier quality or product design weaknesses identified during the assessment.
Since each application is configured specific to the user process, support of such systems must be carefully
managed. For example, when new versions of software products are introduced, serious problems can arise from the
dependency of custom code on features of the software product that may have changed.
Custom software components such as macros developed with internal scripting language, written or modified to
satisfy specific user-business requirements, should be treated as Category 5.
12.3.5	 Category 5 – Custom Applications and Components
These applications, subsystems, or components are developed to meet the specific requirements of the regulated
company. The risk inherent with custom software is high because there is no user experience or system reliability
information available, and this may be reflected in the functional risk assessment ratings for the probability of failures
or defects. In addition, calculation or logic errors can be difficult to detect and may persist for months or years before
detection. There is a very wide range of size and complexity of custom applications, from small end-user applications
based on spreadsheets to large, complex, custom process control systems.
12.3.6	 Typical Examples and Approaches
Table 12.1 provides examples of systems that contain components of each category and typical approaches to follow
for each software category. The actual approach (e.g., extent of supplier assessment and depth of life cycle activities)
should be scaled based on how much of the system functionality is based on the different system components,
e.g., predominantly Category 3 or Category 4 etc., and the GxP impact of the system. The life cycle deliverables
will depend on where users are on the continuum between Standard, through Configurable, to Custom. The rigor
of controls around specific functional areas and the extent of testing in those areas should be scaled based on the
functional risk assessment as described in Appendix M3.

--- PAGE 133 ---
Page 131
Appendix M4
Table 12.1: Software Categories, Examples, and Typical Life Cycle Approaches
Category
Description
Typical Examples
Typical Approaches and
Considerations
1.	 Infrastructure
Software and
Tools
•	 Layered software
(i.e., upon which
applications are built)
•	 Software used to
manage the operating
environment and
infrastructure
•	 Software, systems
and tools supporting
computerized system
life cycle activities
•	 Operating systems
•	 Database engines
•	 Middleware
•	 Programming
languages
•	 Network and
performance
monitoring tools
•	 Scheduling tools
•	 Software, systems,
and tools supporting IT
processes
•	 Requirements
management, test
management, test
automation tools, etc.
•	 Record version number, verify
correct installation by following
approved installation procedures
•	 Assess and record the tool’s
adequacy for use
•	 See the ISPE GAMP Good
Practice Guide: IT Infrastructure
Control and Compliance
(Second Edition) [49]
•	 See also ISPE GAMP Good
Practice Guide: Enabling
Innovation – Critical Thinking,
Agile, IT Service Management,
Chapter 4 [20]
3.	 Standard
System
Components
Run-time parameters
may be entered and
stored, but the software
cannot be configured
to suit the business
process
•	 Firmware-based
applications
•	 COTS software
•	 Some instruments
(See the ISPE
GAMP® Good Practice
Guide: A Risk-Based
Approach to GxP
Compliant Laboratory
Computerized Systems
[50] for further
guidance)
Note: Most computerized
systems contain some
components in this
category; even a fully
customized development
will leverage standard
software modules and
libraries.
•	 Requirements definition for key
functionality and intended use
•	 Life cycle approach scaled
based on system complexity
•	 Risk-based approach to
supplier assessment (scaled
on component categories, GxP
impact, and intent to leverage
supplier activities; focus is on the
supplier development life cycle
as applied to the component
or system under consideration,
and the robustness of the
supplier’s product and change
management processes
ongoing)
•	 Demonstrate supplier has
adequate QMS
•	 Record version number, verify
correct installation
•	 Risk-based testing and
leveraging of supplier testing
to demonstrate application
works as designed in a test
environment (for simple systems
regular calibration may substitute
for testing)
•	 Procedures in place for
managing data
•	 Procedures in place for
maintaining compliance and
fitness for intended use

--- PAGE 134 ---
Page 132
Appendix M4
Table 12.1: Software Categories, Examples, and Typical Life Cycle Approaches (continued)
Category
Description
Typical Examples
Typical Approaches and
Considerations
4. Configured
Components
•	 Software, often very
complex, that can
be configured by
the user to meet the
specific needs of
the user’s business
process. (e.g., via
workflows, process
flows)
•	 Software code is not
altered
•	 LIMS
•	 Data acquisition
systems
•	 SCADA
•	 ERP
•	 Clinical trial monitoring
•	 DCS
•	 ADR reporting
•	 CDS
•	 EDMS
•	 Building Management
Systems
•	 CRM
•	 Spreadsheets
•	 Simple HMI
Note: Specific examples
of the systems containing
these components may
also contain substantial
custom elements
Per Category 3 components plus:
•	 Business process map and data
flow diagram
•	 Risk-based testing to
demonstrate the applied
configuration delivers an
application meeting the business
needs and workflows
5.	 Custom
Applications
and
Components
Software custom
designed and coded
to suit the business
process
Varies, but includes:
•	 Bespoke interfaces
between systems
•	 Internally and
externally developed IT
applications
•	 Internally and
externally developed
process control
applications
•	 Custom ladder logic
•	 Custom firmware
•	 Spreadsheets (macro)
Note: Even a fully
customized development
will leverage standard
software modules and
libraries.
Same as for configurable, plus:
•	 Supplier-assessment focus on
the supplier’s QMS for new
component development
•	 Design and source-code review
•	 Coding standard
•	 Full life cycle information (design
specifications, unit, module,
integration and functional
testing, etc., where relevant)
ADR: Adverse Drug Reaction
ERP: Enterprise Resource Planning
CDS: Chromatography Data System
HMI: Human Machine Interfaces
COTS: Commercial off the Shelf
LIMS: Laboratory Information Management System
CRM: Customer Relationship Management
QMS: Quality Management System
DCS: Distributed Control System
SCADA: Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
EDMS: Electronic Document Management System

--- PAGE 135 ---
Page 133
Appendix M4
12.4
Categories of Hardware
These hardware categories are provided for information only, and do not explicitly require additional documentation.
12.4.1	 Hardware Category 1 – Standard Hardware Components
The majority of the hardware used by regulated companies fall into this category.
Standard hardware components should be documented including manufacturer or supplier details, and version
numbers. Correct installation and connection of components should be verified. The model, version number and,
where available, serial number, of preassembled hardware should be recorded. Preassembled hardware does not
have to be disassembled. In such cases the hardware details can be taken from the hardware’s data sheet or other
specification material. Configuration management and change control apply.
12.4.2	 Hardware Category 2 – Custom Built Hardware Components
These requirements are in addition to those of standard hardware components. Custom items of hardware should
have a Design Specification (DS) and be subjected to acceptance testing. The approach to supplier assessment
should be risk-based and documented. In most cases a supplier audit should be performed for custom hardware
development. Assembled systems using custom hardware from different sources require verification confirming
compatibility of interconnected hardware components. Any hardware configuration should be defined in the design
documentation and verified. Configuration management and change control apply.

