--- PAGE 283 ---
Page 281
Appendix O
Appendix O
32	Appendix O – Introduction to Operation
Appendices
The Operational Appendices provide guidance on how to maintain GxP computerized systems in a compliant state.
These appendices ensure that GxP computerized systems continue to maintain patient safety, product quality, and
ensure the integrity of GxP data and records.
The Operational Appendices may be used as a foundation for implementing policies, procedures, and/or work
instructions within the QMS. The application of good IT practices such as described by ITIL [54], supported by IT
service management tools and automation is encouraged.
Scalability should be considered, that is, the controls can be implemented at a level of formality and complexity
appropriate to the individual organization and across a wide range of systems. Organizations may have
straightforward controls for simple systems and more sophisticated tools and procedures for systems with increased
impact, size, and complexity.
In view of the diversity of computerized systems and organizations, it is not considered appropriate to be prescriptive
regarding how operational controls are implemented. To ensure compliance with regulatory expectations regulated
companies should be able to demonstrate that they have considered and reviewed the maintenance and support
needs for each system and decided what procedures, processes, and records should be established and maintained.
Figure 32.1 shows the relationships between operational processes.
Figure 32.1: Operational Process Relationships

--- PAGE 285 ---
Page 283
Appendix O1
Appendix O1
33	Appendix O1 – Handover
33.1
Introduction
Handover is the process of moving the computerized system from the project phase to the operational phase.
This includes the transfer of the responsibilities for maintaining the computerized system in a validated state and
maintaining data integrity to the business process owner, data owner, and system owner.
33.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
•
Provide an updated process flow and expanded definition of handover activities
•
Recognize use of support tools
•
Include hypercare and business readiness
33.2
Key Requirements
Regulated companies should be able to demonstrate the formal acceptance of computerized systems following the
completion of validation activities and verification of the controlled transfer the system into operational use.
33.3
Process
Figure 33.1

--- PAGE 286 ---
Page 284
Appendix O1
33.4	 Guidance
33.4.1	 General Approach
The project management approach should include a process for handover of a system from the project phase into the
operational phase.
Handover activities should ensure that the business and support organization are ready to receive the new or
upgraded solution or service following confirmation of successful validation (e.g., approval of the validation report)
and should cover:
Confirmation of the Validated State of the Computerized System or Service: The validated state of the
computerized system or service should be confirmed (e.g., closure of change controls, approval of validation reports).
This should confirm that system specifications are in an “as built” state reflecting the configuration baseline of the
validated system or service. Availability of system use, and support procedures should be confirmed as well as
business readiness (e.g., organizational transformations completed where appropriate, SOPs updated to reflect
changed roles, and training provided in new or modified business processes, data flows, services, etc.). Application
components and configuration should be archived to support disaster recovery. Confirmation of inclusion of
application components, configuration, and data (including metadata) into backup schedules.
Managed Handover of Open Items: There may be open items remaining at the point of handover including
defects, known issues, incomplete training, and documents awaiting final approvals. It is important that such issues
are transferred to the business and/or support organizations in a controlled manner and in accordance with risk.
Incident logs, change records, CAPAs, deviations, or otherwise appropriate records may be raised to ensure that the
open items are appropriately assigned to the new accountable organization. Particular attention should be given to
incomplete issues that could negatively impact GxP or compromise the compliance status of the system.
Completion of Data Migration (as appropriate): Data migration/load has been successfully completed, where
appropriate, in accordance with a documented data migration plan and data migration report.
Update of Configuration Items: Updates to the configuration management database/configuration items list for
the system are complete. Updates to system inventory and/or configuration management database to register new
system, modules, and/or infrastructure components have been completed.
Establishing Support Agreements and Support Controls: Establishment of appropriate SLAs, quality agreements,
operational level agreements, contracts, or otherwise defining the support requirements is in place. Creation and/
or update of operational support procedures in accordance with the O Appendices has been finished. Service
management and other tools used in the provision of support services have been established/updated.
Knowledge Transfer: Knowledge transfer to support organizations to ensure they understand the new or upgraded
solution or service has been conducted. This should include the transfer of any documentation/records to be used
and maintained throughout the support phase (e.g., system life cycle documentation, business process and data
flows, risk assessments). System specifications should be up-to-date and reflect the validated baseline of the system.
Knowledge transfer is not only the transfer of documentation and records; it also includes the transfer of knowledge
and experiences of the project team, including implicit knowledge that cannot be easily articulated in documentation
and records. Lessons learned by the project team should be shared as well with support teams and future project
teams to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of ongoing support and future projects. For further guidance on
knowledge management see ISPE Good Practice Guide: Knowledge Management in the Pharmaceutical Industry [10].

--- PAGE 287 ---
Page 285
Appendix O1
Hypercare and Monitoring of Business Readiness: Depending on the system complexity, a period of hypercare
may be required where there is a phased transition from the project team to the support team following handover.
During hypercare, support activities are transitioned from the project team to the support team in accordance with
defined criteria (e.g., demonstration that post go-live incidents are diminishing in quantity and severity, demonstration
that the support organization has the knowledge to support the system). The period of hypercare should be defined
prior to implementation of the system into operational use. The duration of continued support by the project team
may also be determined by the level of business readiness to operate the solution. For new, complex and/or highly
integrated computerized systems, project team support may continue until business users have demonstrated that
they are able to operate the solution/service successfully. This may include a measure of business process utilization
and levels of business support inquiries during in the early days of operation.
Handover may involve the transfer of the system or service and associated support processes from one QMS to
another. This transfer should be carefully controlled, documented, and communicated.
Handover activities may be included in project plans, handover plans, service transition plans, or similar artifacts. IT
tools are also often used to plan system cutover and handover activities.
Consideration should be given to defining a period for monitoring the system after handover and to defining a rollback
strategy in the event of a significant problem during the monitoring period.
33.4.2	 Responsibilities
Project Manager:
•
Prepares the system for handover
Process Owner, Data Owner, and System Owner:
•
Accepts the system into operational use
The responsibility for completion of any outstanding actions at the point of handover should be agreed between the
parties.

--- PAGE 289 ---
Page 287
Appendix O2
Appendix O2
34	Appendix O2 – Establishing and Managing
Support Services
34.1
Introduction
The process for establishing and managing support services ensures that support services (whether internal or
external) are appropriately specified and managed. This is often governed by Service Level Agreements (SLA).
34.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
•
Expand considerations for SLAs
•
Recognize other aligned agreements such as quality agreements
•
Include considerations for contract exit
34.2	 Key Requirements
When external service providers are used, there should be a formal agreement that clearly states the services to be
provided and the responsibilities of the service provider and the regulated company.
In this context service provider is interpreted as meaning both external third parties and internal support functions.
34.3	 Process
Figure 34.1

--- PAGE 290 ---
Page 288
Appendix O2
34.4	 Guidance
34.4.1	 General Approach
SLAs describe the services to be provided and service level targets, and specifies the responsibilities of the service
provider and the regulated company.
SLAs may be established separately for individual systems or may cover groups of similar systems (e.g., instruments
in a single laboratory).
SLAs are typically created and maintained by the service provider organization. Service providers may have a
standard SLA that is applied to all customers or may need to create a specific SLA to address non-standard services.
Business process owners and system owners should ensure the provisions of the SLA adequately meet business
needs.
Some service providers offer different tiers of support that may be selected by the regulated company depending on
their specific needs.
The SLA should be agreed, understood, and approved by both the regulated company and the service provider.
The capability of the service provider should be assured and monitored using appropriate service provider
assessment processes.
While this appendix focuses on the use of SLAs there may be additional agreements established, which may include
the following:
•
Operating Level Agreement (OLA): An agreement between a service provider and another part of the same
organization. An OLA defines the goods or services to be provided and the responsibilities of both parties. An
example is an agreement between a primary support organization and a storage management group regarding
the time required to restore a file or application.
•
Underpinning Contract (UC): A contract between a service provider and a third party. The third party provides
goods or services that are integral to the delivery of overall support services. An example is a contract between
a regulated company and a telecommunications provider for maintenance and troubleshooting of the company’s
Wide Area Network (WAN).
Contractual and legal implications associated with SLAs, OLAs, and UCs are outside the of scope of this appendix.
Additionally, the regulated company may require the service provider to fulfill the requirements of a quality agreement.
The quality agreement defines the quality expectations of the regulated company to be achieved by the service
provider.
34.4.2	 Responsibilities
System Owner:
•
Works with the service provider to establish an SLA that addresses the required services.
•
Ensures that supplier assessments and periodic monitoring are conducted in accordance with the risk of the
support services provided.
Service Provider:
•
Ensures that the support organization understands, follows, and reports against the requirements of the SLA.

--- PAGE 291 ---
Page 289
Appendix O2
34.4.3	 General Guidelines
The SLA should define the system to be supported and/or the services to be provided. It should define how the
service is to be provided and define responsibilities of the service provider organization and regulated company
organization.
Periodic meetings should be established to monitor the performance of the support services against the SLA
performance criteria.
The service provider should maintain adequate processes to deliver the services in accordance with the SLA. Quality
agreements may also be established to define the regulated company’s quality expectations of the service provider’s
QMS. These should be documented in the service provider’s internal quality system and support tools. The regulated
company assurance processes should ensure that appropriate support-service controls are in place.
34.4.4	Service Level Agreements
SLAs should address:
•
Scope of computerized systems/support services to be provided
•
Service descriptions as appropriate:
-
Software releases patch, maintenance, enhancement releases (maintained versions, available upgrades/
annum)
-
IT infrastructure and platform services
-
IT security
-
Backup and restoration
-
Business continuity and disaster recovery
-
Information security and data privacy controls
-
Data archiving and retention
-
Record and asset disposal
-
System maintenance, administration, repair, housekeeping
-
Expectations for maintaining different environments for development, testing, and operations
-
Routine testing and calibration
-
Training
•
System support tools (e.g., service desk, security monitoring, backup, etc.)
•
Roles and responsibilities of the service provider and regulated company organizations
•
Reporting, prioritization, and processing times for support requests and faults

--- PAGE 292 ---
Page 290
Appendix O2
•
Key contact details (may be maintained in a separate contact list)
•
Escalation processes
34.4.5	 Measurement, Reporting, and Review
The method of monitoring and reporting service performance should be defined in terms of:
•
Key performance metrics (e.g., system and data availability, system downtime, unplanned outages, response
times, system incidents, etc.)
•
Reporting frequency
•
Periodic meetings to review performance
34.4.6	 Managing Contract Exit
Support services may be terminated or transitioned to alternative service providers. Contract exit should be set forth
in advance to minimize support-service disruption. Contractual agreements should consider expectations for:
•
Knowledge transfer
•
Documentation/records transfer
•
Software code transfer
•
Data transfer

--- PAGE 293 ---
Page 291
Appendix O3
Appendix O3
35	Appendix O3 – System Monitoring
35.1
Introduction
System monitoring can be used to monitor and report system failures, availability, performance, configuration
baseline, and information security issues.
Feedback from monitoring processes and tools can be used to anticipate and respond to potential computerized
system incidents and to improve the overall controls environment.
35.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
•
Include the use of modern monitoring technologies
•
Establish link to incident and problem management
35.2
Key Requirements
The need for, and extent of, monitoring activities should be based on business risk and risk to patient safety, product
quality, and data integrity. The extent of monitoring shall also be relative to the type of system and its external
exposure.
35.3
Process
Figure 35.1

--- PAGE 294 ---
Page 292
Appendix O3
35.4	 Guidance
35.4.1	 General Approach
System monitoring may cover a specific system, group of systems, or an IT infrastructure environment. The extent of
monitoring is dependent on the system complexity, business impact, patient safety, product quality, and data integrity
impact, and external threats such as cyber security threats.
35.4.2	 Responsibilities
System Owner:
•
Ensures system monitoring is in place based on risk
•
Works with system administrators, technical functions (e.g., IT) to ensure system monitoring is implemented
•
Participates in the incident and problem management process for detected incidents
Business Process Owner/Data Owner:
•
Agrees on scope of system monitoring
•
Participates in incident and problem management process for detected incidents
35.4.3	 System Monitoring Considerations
System monitoring should consider the following:
•
System and data availability
•
System performance and resources (e.g., CPU utilization, storage capacities)
•
Network routing, load, and failures
•
Configuration status against configuration templates
•
Batch job failures including backups
•
System interface failures
•
Instrumentation communication failures
•
Software, operating system, and hardware failures
•
Printer queue failures
•
System and process alarms and events
•
Response times
•
Security vulnerabilities
•
Intrusion detection
Note: the above are examples of system monitoring tasks.

--- PAGE 295 ---
Page 293
Appendix O3
35.4.4	 System Monitoring Tools
System monitoring should leverage automated tools wherever possible. Such tools can detect and report potential
system incidents and automatically alert support organizations who are able to respond in accordance with SLAs.
Some monitoring tools include self-rectification capabilities. For example, resources such as processing, and storage
capacity can automatically adjust to address performance issues. Monitoring tools can also automatically reset
configuration that does not meet the current configuration template. Such tools can be utilized to minimize the risk of
system failure.
35.4.5	 Manual Monitoring
Manual monitoring activities can be defined in and scheduled from service management tools or defined in system
administration plans or procedures. Monitoring tasks, roles, frequency, and reporting requirements should be clearly
defined.

--- PAGE 297 ---
Page 295
Appendix O4
Appendix O4
36	Appendix O4 – Incident Management and
Problem Management
36.1
Introduction
An incident relates to the effect of an unplanned interruption to a service, or reduction in service quality, typically
linked to a breach of the SLA, user observation, or feedback from automated monitoring tools.
A problem relates to the root cause of one or more incidents. Problems can be raised in response to a single
significant incident or multiple related incidents.
Problems are the cause and incidents are the effect.
36.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
•
Further clarification on the approach to incident management
•
Describe the relationship between incident management and problem management
•
Describe the relationship between incident management and deviation management
•
Highlight the use of IT service management tools in incident and problem management
36.2	 Key Requirements
Unplanned computerized system interruptions or reductions in service quality should be reported, investigated, and
resolved by support teams in order to ensure incidents are effectively managed.

--- PAGE 298 ---
Page 296
Appendix O4
36.3	 Process
Figure 36.1
36.4	 Guidance
36.4.1	 Incident Management
Incidents are reported in a variety of ways including telephone, email, service desk, and automated reporting through
monitoring and service management tools.
Reported incidents are categorized and prioritized to determine the response times for investigation and resolution in
accordance with defined SLAs. Incidents are captured in an incident management tool. (See Section 36.4.4).
Level 1 support is usually provided by IT SMEs, often those staffing the help desk. Level 1 support teams gather
information describing the incident. Level 1 support conducts basic investigations and troubleshooting, and solves
common problems such as access issues, solution understanding, setup issues, service restoration, etc.
Level 2 support conducts a more in-depth assessment of the incident and identifies available solutions to address
the issue. Level 2 support is generally provided by IT SMEs outside of the help desk staff. If there are no available
solutions, a problem is raised and handed to Level 3 support for further investigation and technical resolution.
Level 3 support is provided by SMEs such as developers, Development/Operations (DevOps), architects, engineers,
or an external software or IT service supplier. Level 3 support investigates potential design and implementation
issues. Technical solutions may be required to resolve the issue.
Major incidents relate to serious disruption to business operations and should be resolved with greater urgency. A
major incident team may be assembled comprising appropriate business, technical, and quality expertise to manage
the incident. Business continuity and disaster recovery plans may need to be invoked.

--- PAGE 299 ---
Page 297
Appendix O4
36.4.2	 Problem Management
Problem management is the process by which the root cause of one or more incidents is determined and solutions
are implemented to minimize the risk of similar incidents occurring in the future.
Problem management processes are integrated with other processes such as change management, configuration
management, training, disaster recovery, etc., to resolve the problem and minimize the risk of recurrence. Resolution
of a problem may also involve GxP CAPA activities (see Section 36.4.3).
Communication is an essential part of the incident and problem management process to ensure that business users
and the quality unit are aware of any disruptions or restrictions of service.
36.4.3	 Determining GxP Impact
Incidents are generally reported directly to technical functions who are not necessarily SMEs with respect to the
impact of incidents and problems on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity.
Configuration Management Databases (CMDB) or other tools/mechanisms should identify configuration items
(hardware components, application modules, business processes, records, etc.) that impact GxP. Processes for GxP
determination should be agreed by business process owners, data owners, and the quality unit.
The quality unit should be informed of incidents and problems potentially impacting product quality and patient safety.
They may raise a quality deviation and initiate a CAPA process to address quality -related actions. IT, system owners,
process owners, and the quality unit should cooperate in ensuring effective resolution
36.4.4	 Incident and Problem Records
Incident and problem records are typically managed in IT tools and capture information relating to the incident/problem,
impact assessments, root cause analyses, and definition of actions taken to resolve the problem, including any
workarounds. Such tools may be single purpose or are commonly part of a suite of tools used by the IT help desk.
If changes are required to system life cycle documentation or configuration records, they should be updated and
tested in line with any changes implemented to address the problem. Such changes should be implemented in
accordance with approved change management procedures.

--- PAGE 301 ---
Page 299
Appendix O5
Appendix O5
37	Appendix O5 – Corrective and Preventive
Action
37.1
Introduction
CAPA is a process for investigating, understanding, and correcting deviations and nonconformities to address the
immediate impact of the issue and to minimize the risk of recurrence.
The scope and depth of CAPA plans should be developed relative to the risk of the associated deviation or
nonconformity to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity.
37.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
Minor changes were made to improve process flow and understanding.
37.2
Key Requirements
The CAPA process covers:
•
Assessment of the impact of the identified deviation or problem
•
Corrective action planning to address the impact of the deviation or problem
•
Root cause analysis to determine the cause of the deviation or problem
•
Preventive action to minimize the risk of recurrence
•
Monitoring of action completion
•
Effectiveness checks and trending analysis
Computerized system failures and issues are typically reported through the IT incident and problem management
process. Incidents related to GxP configuration items should be reported as a deviation and investigated for any
impact to patient safety, product quality, or data integrity. CAPAs are created in response to the investigation.

--- PAGE 302 ---
Page 300
Appendix O5
37.3
Process
Figure 37.1
37.4
Guidance
37.4.1	 General Approach
The CAPA process is part of the quality system and is used to manage corrective and preventive actions associated
with GxP deviations and nonconformities. CAPAs are typically managed within an electronic QMS but may be
managed as paper records in the absence of such a system.
Actions arising from CAPAs should be assigned to appropriate SMEs, including technical functions such as IT and
engineering.
Planned actions should be proportionate to the identified risk.
37.4.2	 Responsibilities
Quality Unit:
•
Establishes the CAPA process within the quality system
•
Provides oversight of the CAPA process

--- PAGE 303 ---
Page 301
Appendix O5
Business Process Owners and System Owners:
•
Review and approve CAPAs to ensure suitability
•
Monitor the status of CAPAs relating to computerized systems and services within their remit
Subject Matter Experts:
•
Support CAPA planning
•
Implement assigned actions in accordance with planned completion dates
37.4.3	 CAPA Process
An effective CAPA process investigates and solves problems, identifies causes, takes corrective action, and prevents
recurrence of the root causes. The key steps in the CAPA process include:
•
Investigation: determines the impact from the deviation, nonconformance, or problem. The investigation should
determine the impact on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity.
•
Corrective Action Planning: defines the actions to address the impact. This could include invoking disaster
recovery or restoration processes, resolving data issues, reinstating services, etc. Corrective action planning
shall also consider actions to isolate the issue and prevent further impact.
•
Root Cause Analysis: determines why the problem occurred. Root cause analysis is conducted by relevant
SMEs.
•
Preventive Action: defines the actions to minimize the risk of recurrence. Such actions may involve solution
enhancements, bug fixes, training, SOP updates, improved system security, improved system monitoring, etc.
•
Monitoring: ensures CAPAs are addressed within defined targets. Automated or manual monitoring of CAPA
target dates ensures reminders and escalations are issued to make certain progress is made against plans.
CAPA target date extensions should be reviewed and approved by the business process owner and system
owner as appropriate following an assessment of the impact of the extension. Quality Unit oversight should
ensure CAPA extensions are being appropriately managed. A review of CAPA status should be included in
periodic reviews and relevant audits.
•
Effectiveness Checks: ensure that the implemented actions are effective in addressing the root cause of the
problem being addressed.
•
Trending: ensures that recurring CAPA themes are investigated and further consideration is given to the CAPAs
to minimize the risk of recurrence. Trends may be identified at an organizational, process, or system level.
Learning from deviation, nonconformity, and CAPA trends may be used to inform updates to computerized
system risk assessments.
CAPA action planning should be risk based and proportionate to the impact on patient safety, product quality, and
data integrity. CAPA plans should be reviewed and approved by the business process owners, systems owners, and
action owners as appropriate.

--- PAGE 305 ---
Page 303
Appendix O6
Appendix O6
38	Appendix O6 – Operational Change and
Configuration Management
38.1
Introduction
Change management is the process by which changes to configuration items (e.g., business processes, application
software, application configuration, data, IT infrastructure, services, etc.), are managed from their inception to
completion. The primary objective of change management is to enable beneficial changes to be made without
compromising regulated business processes or records and with minimum disruption to services.
Configuration management comprises the activities necessary to define a computerized system or service at any
point during its life cycle, from the initial steps of development through to retirement.
Configuration management and change management are closely related. When changes are proposed, both
activities need to be considered in parallel, particularly when evaluating the impact of changes.
Change processes are often supported by electronic systems such as electronic QMS and IT service management
tools. Such systems support change workflows, review and approval, record capture, and support integration with
other processes such as IT incident and problem management (see Appendix O4), deviation management and CAPA
(see Appendix O5).
This appendix covers operational change and configuration management. Project change and configuration
management during project development phases is covered by Appendix M8.
The point of transfer from project to operational change and configuration management should be clearly defined
before handover to operational use (see Appendix O1).
38.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
•
Enhanced process description
•
Introduce concept of low-risk standard/routine changes
•
Enhance description of relationship between regulated company, IT, and external service provider’s change
processes
•
Describe change relating to cloud services
38.2
Key Requirements
Operational change management should start following system handover to operations and continue until system
retirement. Change management should be applied to GxP records following system retirement when such records
are still with their defined retention period.
Changes should be specified, authorized, impact and risk assessed, implemented, tested, and approved before
release to operations. Impacted documentation and/or records should be updated as appropriate to maintain the
configuration baseline of the system.
Configuration records should be maintained to enable the system to be effectively and efficiently restored to service
following a disaster scenario.

--- PAGE 306 ---
Page 304
Appendix O6
Note: Configuration records may be maintained electronically, including within the system itself, provided backup and
restoration provision is in place.
Risk assessments should be maintained in line with changes.
Testing of changes should be relative to the risk to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity. Testing should
demonstrate that:
•
The change functions as specified
•
The change does not introduce unforeseen impacts, i.e., regression testing
Original system risk assessments provide a good basis for assessing the impact of the change and determining the
scope of testing. Risk assessments may require updates as a result of the change.
Training needs should be assessed based on the change impact. System use procedures may require revisions
when business processes are impacted.
38.3
Process
Figure 38.1

