--- PAGE 385 ---
Page 383
Appendix G1
Appendix G1
52	Appendix G1 – References
1.
ISO 9000 Quality Management series, International Organization for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org.
2.
ISO 14971:2019 Medical devices -- Application of risk management to medical devices, International
Organization for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org.
3.
ISACA® Capability Maturity Model Integration® (CMMI), https://cmmiinstitute.com.
4.
ISO 12207:2017 Systems and software engineering — Software life cycle processes, International Organization
for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org.
5.
ITIL® Foundation, ITIL 4 Edition, London, UK: Axelos, 2019, www.axelos.com.
6.
International Council for Harmonisation (ICH), www.ich.org.
7.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org.
8.
ASTM Standard E2500-20, “Standard Guide for Specification, Design, and Verification of Pharmaceutical and
Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing Systems and Equipment,” ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA,
www.astm.org.
9.
US FDA Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), Case for Quality, Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), www.fda.gov.
10. ISPE Good Practice Guide: Knowledge Management in the Pharmaceutical Industry, International Society for
Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), First Edition, May 2021, www.ispe.org.
11. ISPE Initiative Advancing Pharmaceutical Quality (APQ), International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering
(ISPE), www.ispe.org/initiatives/quality-metrics.
12. ISPE iSpeak Blog, “ISPE Accelerating Digital Transformation with Pharma 4.0 Initiative,” International Society for
Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), 21 October 2021, www.ispe.org/pharmaceutical-engineering/ispeak/ispe-
accelerating-digital-transformation-pharma-40-initiative.
13. ISPE Initiative Pharma 4.0™, International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), accessed 3 June
2022, https://ispe.org/initiatives/pharma-4.0.
14. International Council for Harmonisation (ICH), ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline, Quality Risk Management –
Q9, Step 4, 9 November 2005, www.ich.org.
15. ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide Series, International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE),
www.ispe.org.
16. ISO 13485:2016 Medical devices — Quality management systems — Requirements for regulatory purposes,
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org.
17. ISO 14971:2019 Medical devices — Application of risk management to medical devices, International
Organization for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org.
18. IEC 62304, Medical Device Software – Software Life Cycle Processes, Edition 1.1, 2015, International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), www.iec.ch.

--- PAGE 386 ---
Page 384
Appendix G1
19.	 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), www.sec.gov/about/laws/
soa2002.pdf.
20.	 ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service Management,
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), First Edition, September 2021, www.ispe.org.
21.	 International Council for Harmonisation (ICH), ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline, Pharmaceutical Quality
System – Q10, Step 4, 4 June 2008, www.ich.org.
22. PIC/S Guidance: PI 011-3 Good Practices for Computerised Systems in Regulated “GXP” Environments, 25
September 2007, Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S), www.picscheme.org.
23. Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), www.fda.gov.
24. Public Health Service Act, Title 42 of the United States Code (The Public Health and Welfare), Chapter 6A
(Public Health Service), www.ecfr.gov.
25. United States Food & Drug Administration (FDA), www.fda.gov.
26.	 European Medicines Agency (EMA), www.ema.europa.eu/en.
27. United Kingdom Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), www.gov.uk/government/
organisations/medicines-and-healthcare-products-regulatory-agency.
28. Japan Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency (PMDA), www.pmda.go.jp/english.
29. Prescription Drug Marketing Act of 1987; Prescription Drug Amendments of 1992; Policies, Requirements, and
Administrative Procedures, A Rule by the Health and Human Services Department, and the Food and Drug
Administration, Publication date: 3 December 1999, Effective date: 4 December 2000, www.ecfr.gov.
30.	 ISPE Baseline® Pharmaceutical Engineering Guide, Volume 5 – Commissioning and Qualification, International
Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), Second Edition, June 2019, www.ispe.org.
31. PIC/S Guidance: PI 041-1 Good Practices for Data Management and Integrity in Regulated GMP/GDP
Environments, 1 July 2021, Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S), www.picscheme.org.
32. EudraLex Volume 4 – Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practices for Medicinal Products for Human and
Veterinary Use, Annex 11: Computerized Systems, June 2011, http://ec.europa.eu/health/documents/eudralex/
vol-4/index_en.htm.
33. General Principles of Software Validation; Final Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff, US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), 11 January 2002, www.fda.gov.
34.	 ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based Approach to Operation of GxP Computerized Systems,
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), First Edition, January 2010, www.ispe.org.
35.	 ISPE GAMP® Guide: Records and Data Integrity, International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE),
First Edition, March 2017, www.ispe.org.
36.	 ISPE GAMP® RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design, International Society for Pharmaceutical
Engineering (ISPE), First Edition, October 2020, www.ispe.org.
37. MHRA Guidance: ‘GXP’ Data Integrity Guidance and Definitions, Revision 1, March 2018, Medicines &
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), www.gov.uk/government/organisations/medicines-and-
healthcare-products-regulatory-agency.

--- PAGE 387 ---
Page 385
Appendix G1
38. ISPE GAMP® Series, International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), www.ispe.org.
39. ISO 9001:2015 Quality management systems — Requirements, International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), www.iso.org.
40. American Institute of CPAs (AICPA), www.aicpa.org.
41. International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), www.ispe.org.
42. Perez, A.D., Canterbury, J., Hansen, E., Samardelis, J.S., Longden, H., Rambo, R.L., “Application of the SOC 2+
Process to Assessment of GxP Suppliers of IT Services,” Pharmaceutical Engineering, July/August 2019, Vol. 39,
No. 4, pp. 14-20, www.ispe.org.
43. ISO 19011:2018 Guidelines for auditing management systems, International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), www.iso.org.
44. ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Information technology — Security techniques — Information security management
systems — Requirements, International Organization for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org, and International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), www.iec.ch.
45. ISO/IEC DIS 27002, Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection — Information security controls,
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org.
46. ISO/IEC 27017:2015, Information technology — Security techniques — Code of practice for information security
controls based on ISO/IEC 27002 for cloud services, International Organization for Standardization (ISO),
www.iso.org, and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), www.iec.ch.
47. ISO/IEC 20000-1:2018 Information technology — Service management — Part 1: Service management system
requirements, ISO/IEC JTC1, International Organization for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org, and International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), www.iec.ch.
48. Simmon, E., NIST, Special Publication 500-322, “Evaluation of Cloud Computing Services Based on NIST SP
800-145,” NIST Cloud Computing Cloud Services Working Group, NIST Cloud Computing Program, Information
Technology Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), February 2018, https://csrc.nist.gov.
49. ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: IT Infrastructure Control and Compliance, International Society for
Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), Second Edition, August 2017, www.ispe.org.
50. ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based Approach to GxP Compliant Laboratory Computerized Systems,
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), Second Edition, October 2012, www.ispe.org.
51. ISPE Project Management Community of Practice, International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE),
www.ispe.org.
52. Reid, C. and Wyn, S., “IT Services: Applying Good IT Practice & Automation,” Pharmaceutical Engineering,
May/June 2021, Vol. 41, No. 3, pp. 14-17, www.ispe.org.
53. Title 21-Food and Drugs, Chapter I, Food and Drug Administration Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare, Subchapter C-Drugs: General [Docket No. 75n-0339] Human and Veterinary Drugs, Current Good
Manufacturing Practice in Manufacture, Processing, Packing, or Holding, Preamble, VII. Definitions, paragraph
78, September 1978, www.fda.gov/files/drugs/published/Federal-Register-43-FR-45077.pdf.
54. “IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL),” Ibm.com, 22 May 2019, www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/it-infrastructure-library.

--- PAGE 388 ---
Page 386
Appendix G1
55. AICPA, “2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy,”
American Institute of CPAs (AICPA), March 2020, www.aicpa.org.
56. HITRUST®, https://hitrustalliance.net/certifications/corporate-certifications.
57.	 ISPE GAMP® RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity – Key Concepts, International Society for Pharmaceutical
Engineering (ISPE), First Edition, October 2018, www.ispe.org.
58. “Definition of WHISTLEBLOWER,” www.merriam-webster.com, 28 June 2022, www.merriam-webster.com/
dictionary.
59. EudraLex Volume 4 – Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practices for Medicinal Products for Human and
Veterinary Use, Chapter 7 – Outsourced Activities, January 2013, http://ec.europa.eu/health/documents/eudralex/
vol-4/index_en.htm.
60. EMA, “Q&A: Good clinical practice (GCP),” European Medicines Agency (EMA), Accessed 28 June 2022, www.
ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory/research-development/compliance/good-clinical-practice/qa-good-clinical-
practice-gcp.
61.	 ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based Approach to GxP Process Control Systems, International
Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), Second Edition, February 2011, www.ispe.org.
62. G.J. Myers, C. Sandler, T. Badgett, The Art of Software Testing, Third Edition, ISBN: 978-1-119-20248-6, Wiley,
September 2015.
63.	 “Types of Static Analysis Methods,” GeeksforGeeks, 22 April 2020, accessed 01 July 2022, www.geeksforgeeks.
org/types-of-static-analysis-methods.
64.	 ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide Series, International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE),
www.ispe.org.
65.	 ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based Approach to Calibration Management, International Society for
Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), Second Edition, November 2010, www.ispe.org.
66.	 ISO/IEC/IEEE 90003:2018 Software engineering — Guidelines for the application of ISO 9001:2015 to computer
software, International Organization for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org, and International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC), www.iec.ch.
67.	 IEEE Standards Association, https://standards.ieee.org.
68.	 ISTQB® (International Software Testing Qualifications Board), www.istqb.org.
69. FDA’s Technology Modernization Action Plan (TMAP), September 2019, Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
www.fda.gov.
70. “Manifesto for Agile Software Development,” 2001, https://agilemanifesto.org.
71. The Scrum Framework Poster, Scrum.org, accessed 20 August 2021, www.scrum.org.
72. A. McDonagh, S. Dubovik, M. R. Cherry, D. O’Brien, S. Jones, “Agile Software Development in GxP Regulated
Environments GAMP® Special Interest Group,” iSpeak Blog, 3 August 2020, International Society for
Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), www.ispe.org.
73. 21 CFR Part 11 – Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures, Code of Federal Regulations, US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), www.fda.gov.

--- PAGE 389 ---
Page 387
Appendix G1
74. Wake, B., “INVEST in Good Stories, and SMART Tasks,” XP 123 Exploring Extreme Programming, 17 August
2003, https://xp123.com/articles/invest-in-good-stories-and-smart-tasks.
75. Modernization in Action 2022, Technology Modernization Action Plan (TMAP) and Data Modernization Action
Plan (DMAP) Anniversary Report, Food and Drug Administration (FDA), www.fda.gov.
76. Speer, J., “FDA Case for Quality: 2018 Comprehensive Review,” FDA Regulations and True Quality and
Regulatory Affairs and Quality Management System (QMS) and Manufacturing and Computer System Validation,
1 January 2019, www.greenlight.guru/blog/fda-case-for-quality-2018-comprehensive-review.
77. ISPE GAMP® Community of Practice, International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), www.ispe.org.
78. Good Machine Learning Practice for Medical Device Development: Guiding Principles, October 2021, US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA), www.fda.gov, Health Canada, www.canada.ca/en/health-canada.html, United
Kingdom Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), www.gov.uk/government/organisations/
medicines-and-healthcare-products-regulatory-agency.
79. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation), GDPR Regulation (EU) 2016/679, (General
Data Protection Regulation), https://gdpr-info.eu.
80. ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: Global Information Systems Control and Compliance, International Society
for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), Second Edition, February 2017, www.ispe.org.
81. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), www.nist.gov.
82. ISO/IEC 27701:2019 Security techniques — Extension to ISO/IEC 27001 and ISO/IEC 27002 for privacy
information management — Requirements and guidelines, International Organization for Standardization (ISO),
www.iso.org, and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), www.iec.ch.
83. ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA, www.astm.org.
84. International Council for Harmonisation (ICH), ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline, Pharmaceutical
Development – Q8(R2), Step 5, August 2009, www.ich.org.
85. ANSI/ISA-88.00.01-2010 Batch Control Part 1: Models and Terminology, American National Standards Institute
(ANSI), www.ansi.org.
86. International Society of Automation (ISA), www.isa.org.
87. 21 CFR Part 211.188 – Current Good Manufacturing Practice for Finished Pharmaceuticals, Batch production
and control records, Code of Federal Regulations, US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), www.fda.gov.
88. EudraLex Volume 4 – Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and
Veterinary Use, Chapter 4: Documentation, January 2011, http://ec.europa.eu/health/documents/eudralex/vol-4/
index_en.htm.
89. 21 CFR Part 211.186 – Current Good Manufacturing Practice for Finished Pharmaceuticals, Master production
and control records, Code of Federal Regulations, US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), www.fda.gov.
90. ISPE GAMP® Good Practice Guide: Manufacturing Execution Systems – A Strategic and Program Management
Approach, International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), First Edition, February 2010, www.ispe.org.

--- PAGE 390 ---
Page 388
Appendix G1
91. WHO Technical Report Series No. 996, WHO Expert Committee on Specifications for Pharmaceutical
Preparations, Annex 5: Guidance on good data and record management practices, World Health Organisation
(WHO), 2016, https://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/documents/s22402en/s22402en.pdf.
92. PIC/S Guide: PE 009-16 (Annexes), Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products Annexes,
February 2022, Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S), www.picscheme.org.
93. ISPE GAMP® RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity – Manufacturing Records, International Society for
Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE), First Edition, May 2019, www.ispe.org.
94. FDA Guidance for Industry: Data Integrity and Compliance with CGMP, Questions and Answers, December 2018,
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), www.fda.gov.
95. EudraLex Volume 4 – Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practices for Medicinal Products for Human and
Veterinary Use, Annex 16: Certification by a Qualified Person and Batch Release, October 2015,
http://ec.europa.eu/health/documents/eudralex/vol-4/index_en.htm.
96. IEEE Standards Collection, Software Engineering, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 1994.
97. ISO/IEC TR 13066-3:2012 Information technology — Interoperability with assistive technology (AT) — Part 3:
IAccessible2 accessibility application programming interface (API), International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), www.iso.org, and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), www.iec.ch.
98. “Definition of BLOCKCHAIN,” www.merriam-webster.com, 15 July 2022, www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary.
99. ISO/IEC 27031:2011 Information technology — Security techniques — Guidelines for information and
communication technology readiness for business continuity, International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), www.iso.org, and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), www.iec.ch.
100.	International Council for Harmonisation (ICH), ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline, Good Manufacturing
Practice Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients – Q7/Q7A, Step 4, 10 November 2000, www.ich.org.
101. Office of Regulatory Affairs, “Glossary of Computer System Software Development Terminology (8/95),” FDA,
November 2014, www.fda.gov/inspections-compliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/inspection-
guides/glossary-computer-system-software-development-terminology-895.
102. ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765:2017 Systems and software engineering — Vocabulary, International Organization for
Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org.
103. EMA, Guideline on good pharmacovigilance practices (GVP), Annex I - Definitions (Rev 4), European Medicines
Agency (EMA), EMA/876333/2011 Rev 4, www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory/post-authorisation/
pharmacovigilance/good-pharmacovigilance-practices#final-gvp-annex-i---definitions-section.
104. FDA Guide for Industry: Process Validation: General Principles and Practices, January 2011, Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), www.fda.gov.
105.	ISO 22966:2009 Execution of concrete structures, International Organization for Standardization (ISO),
www.iso.org.
106. ISO/IEC TR 25051:2015 Software engineering — Systems and software Quality Requirements and Evaluation
(SQuaRE) — Requirements for quality of Ready to Use Software Product (RUSP) and instructions for testing,
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), www.iso.org, and International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC), www.iec.ch.

--- PAGE 391 ---
Page 389
Appendix G2
Appendix G2
53	Appendix G2 – Glossary
53.1
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AI
Artificial Intelligence
ALCOA+
Attributable, Legible, Contemporaneous, Original, Accurate, Complete, Consistent, Enduring, Available
BaaS
Blockchain as a Service
BC
Business Continuity
BCP
Business Continuity Planning
BYOD
Bring Your Own Device
CAPA
Corrective and Preventive Action
CD
Continuous Deployment
CDRH
Center for Devices and Radiological Health
CDS
Chromatography Data System
CI
Continuous Integration
CMDB
Configuration Management Database
COTS
Commercial off the Shelf
CPP
Critical Process Parameter
CPU
Central Processing Unit
CQA
Critical Quality Attribute
CRO
Clinical Research Organization
CS
Configuration Specification
CSA
Computer Software Assurance
DAP
Data Archiving Plan
DIP
Dual In-line Package
DMS
Document Management System
DoD
Definition of Done
DoR
Definition of Ready
DQ
Design Qualification
DR
Disaster Recovery
DS
Design Specification
EDA
Electronic Data Archive

--- PAGE 392 ---
Page 390
Appendix G2
EDMS
Electronic Document Management System
EMA
European Medicines Agency (EU)
EPR
Electronic Production Record
ERP
Enterprise Resource Planning
ETL
Tool that extracts, transforms, and loads data
EU
European Union
FAT
Factory Acceptance Test
FDA
Food and Drug Administration (US)
FMEA
Failure Mode Effects Analysis
FS
Functional Specification
GDPR
General Data Protection Regulation (EU)
GEP
Good Engineering Practice
GLP
Good Laboratory Practice
GMP
Good Manufacturing Practice
GxP
Good “x” Practice
HSE
Health, Safety, and Environment
HVAC
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
IaaS
Infrastructure as a Service
IaC
Infrastructure as Code
ICH
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
INVEST
Independent, Negotiable, Valuable, Estimable, Small, Testable
IP
Intellectual Property
ISA
International Society of Automation
ISMS
Information Security Management System
IT
Information Technology
ITQ
IT Quality
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
LDAP
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
LIMS
Laboratory Information Management System
LMS
Learning Management System
MES
Manufacturing Execution System

--- PAGE 393 ---
Page 391
Appendix G2
MHRA
Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
ML
Machine Learning
MSA
Master Service Agreement
MVP
Minimum Viable Product
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
OLA
Operating Level Agreement
OQ
Operational Qualification
OSS
Open-Source Software
P&ID
Process and Instrumentation Diagram
PaaS
Platform as a Service
PAT
Process Analytical Technology
PI
Personal Information
PII
Personally Identifiable Information
PLC
Programmable Logic Controller
PPQ
Process Performance Qualification
PQ
Performance Qualification
QA
Quality Assurance
QbD
Quality by Design
QC
Quality Control
QMS
Quality Management System
QRM
Quality Risk Management
QTPP
Quality Target Product Profile
R&D
Research and Development
RAID
Risks, Actions, Issues, Decisions
RFP
Request for Proposal
RPO
Recovery Point Objective
RS
Requirements Specification
RTM
Requirements Trace Matrix
RTO
Recovery Time Objectives
SaaS
Software as a Service
SaMD
Software as a Medical Device

--- PAGE 394 ---
Page 392
Appendix G2
SBOM
Software Bill of Materials
SLA
Service Level Agreement
SME
Subject Matter Expert
SOP
Standard Operating Procedure
SOW
Statement Of Work
SOX
Sarbanes-Oxley
TMF
Trial Master File
UAT
User Acceptance Testing
UC
Underpinning Contract
UPS
Uninterruptable Power Supply
URS
User Requirement Specification
US
United States
UV
Ultraviolet
VBA
Visual Basic® for Applications
VM
Virtual Machine
VMP
Validation Master Plan
WAN
Wide Area Network
XaaS
Infrastructure/Platform/Software as a Service
53.2
Definitions
Acceptance Criteria (ASTM [8])
The criteria that a system, component21 must satisfy in order to be accepted by a user, customer or other authorized
entity.
Acceptance Test (IEEE [96])
Testing conducted to determine whether or not a system satisfies its acceptance criteria and to enable the customer
to determine whether or not to accept the system.
Application Software (ISO/IEC 13066 [97])
Software or a program that is specific to the solution of an application problem.
Audit (ISO 9000 [1])
Systematic, independent, and documented process for obtaining audit evidence and evaluating it objectively to
determine the extent to which agreed criteria are fulfilled.
21 In this Guide acceptance criteria may also be defined for functions, i.e., at a lower level than component or system.

--- PAGE 395 ---
Page 393
Appendix G2
Batch Record
The set of records of all relevant process information in any physical or electronic format.
Blockchain (Merriam-Webster [98])
A digital database containing information (such as records of financial transactions) that can be simultaneously used
and shared within a large decentralized, publicly accessible network.
Business Continuity Planning (ISO/IEC 27031:2011 [99])
Documented procedures that guide organizations to respond, recover, resume, and restore to a pre-defined level of
operation following disruption.
Calibration (ICH Q7 [100])
The demonstration that a particular instrument or device produces results within specified limits by comparison with
those produced by a reference or traceable standard over an appropriate range of measurements.
Change Management (ICH Q10 [21])
A systematic approach to proposing, evaluating, approving, implementing and reviewing changes.
Coding Standards (FDA [101])
Written procedures describing coding [programming] style conventions specifying rules governing the use
of individual constructs provided by the programming language, and naming, formatting, and documentation
requirements which prevent programming errors, control complexity and promote understandability of the source
code. Syn: development standards, programming standards.
Commercial Off-the-Shelf Software (IEEE [96])
Software defined by a market-driven need, commercially available, and whose fitness for use has been demonstrated
by a broad spectrum of commercial users. Also known as COTS.
Computer System (IEEE [96])
A system containing one or more computers and associated software.
Computerized System
A broad range of systems including, but not limited to, automated manufacturing equipment, automated laboratory
equipment, process control and process analytical, manufacturing execution, laboratory information management,
manufacturing resource planning, clinical trials data management, vigilance and document management systems.
The computerized system consists of the hardware, software, and network components, together with the controlled
functions and associated documentation.
Computerized System Validation
Achieving and maintaining compliance with applicable GxP regulations and fitness for intended use by:
•
The adoption of principles, approaches, and life cycle activities within the framework of validation plans and reports
•
The application of appropriate operational controls throughout the life of the system

--- PAGE 396 ---
Page 394
Appendix G2
Critical Process Parameter (ICH Q8 [84])
A process parameter whose variability has an impact on a critical quality attribute and therefore should be monitored
or controlled to ensure the process produces the desired quality.
Critical Quality Attribute (ICH Q8 [84])
A physical, chemical, biological or microbiological property or characteristic that should be within an appropriate limit,
range, or distribution to ensure the desired product quality.
Design (IEEE [96])
The process of defining the architecture, components, interfaces, and other characteristics of a system or component.
Design Review ((ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765 [102]))
(1) Formal, documented, comprehensive, and systematic examination of a design to determine if the design meets
the applicable requirements, to identify problems, and to propose solutions. (2) A process or meeting during which
a system, hardware, or software design is presented to project personnel, managers, users, customers, or other
interested parties for comment or approval.
Detectability (ICH Q9 [14])
The ability to discover or determine the existence, presence, or fact of a hazard.
Dynamic Machine Learning Sub-System
Online learning may be deployed to continually update the model parameters during operation as additional data is
acquired
Electronic Batch Record
A type of an EPR that is a store of data and information for a batch or continuous processes.
Electronic Production Record
A record that is a store of data and information from production-related activities created by, and/or manually entered
into systems, typically during execution of control recipes. The EPR may be located in one or more systems or
databases.
Factory Acceptance Test (FAT) (IEEE [96])
An Acceptance Test in the Supplier’s factory, usually involving the Customer. See also Acceptance Test. Contrast to
Site Acceptance Test.
GxP Compliance
Meeting all applicable pharmaceutical and associated life-science regulatory requirements.
GxP Regulated Computerized System
Computerized systems that are subject to GxP regulations. The regulated company must ensure that such systems
comply with the appropriate regulations.

--- PAGE 397 ---
Page 395
Appendix G2
GxP Regulation
The underlying international pharmaceutical requirements, such as those set forth in the US FD&C Act, US PHS Act,
FDA regulations, EU Directives, Japanese regulations, or other applicable national legislation or regulations under
which a company operates. These include but are not limited to:
•
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) (pharmaceutical, including Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API),
veterinary, and blood)
•
Good Clinical Practice (GCP)
•
Good Laboratory Practice (GLP)
•
Good Distribution Practice (GDP)
•
Good Quality Practice (GQP)
•
Good Pharmacovigilance Practice (GVP)
•
Medical Device Regulations
•
Prescription Drug Marketing Act (PDMA)
Harm (ICH Q9 [14])
Damage to health, including the damage that can occur from loss of product quality or availability.
Hazard (ICH Q9 [14])
The potential source of harm (ISO/IEC Guide 51).
Incident
Operational event which is not part of standard operation.
Middleware
Software that provides common services such as communication and data management to software applications
beyond those available from the operating system,
Network (FDA [101])
A system [transmission channels and supporting hardware and software] that connects several remotely located
computers via telecommunications.
Periodic Review
A documented assessment of the documentation, procedures, records, and performance of a computer system to
determine whether it is still in a validated state and what actions, if any, are necessary to restore its validated state.
The frequency of review is dependent upon the systems complexity, criticality, and rate of change.

--- PAGE 398 ---
Page 396
Appendix G2
Pharmacovigilance (EMA [103])
Science and activities relating to the detection, assessment, understanding and prevention of adverse effects or any
other medicine-related problem.
Process (ISO 9000 [1])
Set of interrelated or interacting activities that use inputs to deliver an intended result.
Process Analytical Technology (ICH Q8 [84])
A system for designing, analyzing, and controlling manufacturing through timely measurements (i.e., during
processing) of critical quality and performance attributes of raw and in-process materials and processes with the goal
of ensuring final product quality.
Process Validation (FDA [104])
The collection and evaluation of data, from the process design stage through commercial production, which
establishes scientific evidence that a process is capable of consistently delivering quality products.
Process Owner
This is the owner of the business process or processes being managed. The process owner is ultimately responsible
for ensuring that the computerized system and its operation is in compliance and fit for intended use in accordance
with applicable company Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). The process owner may also be the system
owner. The process owner may be the de facto owner of the data residing on the system (data owner) and therefore,
ultimately responsible for the integrity of the data. Process owners are typically the head of the functional unit using
the system.
(cf. System Owner)
Product Lifecycle (ICH Q9 [14])
All phases in the life of the product from the initial development through marketing until the product’s discontinuation.
Production Report
Information in human readable form, presented via electronic, paper or hybrid format for activities such as review,
disposition, investigation, audit and analysis.
Quality (ICH Q9 [14])
The degree to which a set of inherent properties of a product, system or process fulfills requirements (see ICH Q6A
definition specifically for “quality” of drug substance and drug (medicinal) products.)
Quality [product] (ICH Q8 [84])
The suitability of either a drug substance or drug product for its intended use. This term includes such attributes as
the identity, strength, and purity (from ICH Q6A Specifications: Test Procedures and Acceptance Criteria for New
Drug Substances and New Drug Products: Chemical Substances).

--- PAGE 399 ---
Page 397
Appendix G2
Quality by Design (ICH Q8 [84])
A systematic approach to development that begins with predefined objectives and emphasizes product and process
understanding and process control, based on sound science and quality risk management.
Quality Management System (ISO 9000 [1])
Part of a management system with regard to quality. (A management system is a set of interrelated or interacting
elements of an organization to establish policies and objectives, and processes to achieve those objectives.)
(This is equivalent to Quality System as defined in ICH Q9 [14])
Quality Plan (ISO 22966 [105])
Document specifying which procedures and associated resources shall be applied by whom and when to meet the
requirements of the specific project
Quality Risk Management (ICH Q9 [14])
A systematic process for the assessment, control, communication and review of risks to the quality of the drug
(medicinal) product across the product lifecycle.
Quality System (ICH Q9 [14])
The sum of all aspects of a system that implements quality policy and ensures that quality objectives are met.
Recursive Hierarchy
Grouping together similar requirements relating to a specific area of functionality. This hierarchical approach, which
may have multiple levels depending on the complexity of the process or system, may help simplify requirements
management and risk assessment.
Requirement (ISO 9000 [1])
Need or expectation that is stated, generally implied or obligatory.
Risk (ICH Q9 [14])
The combination of the probability of occurrence of harm and the severity of that harm (ISO/IEC Guide 51).
Risk Analysis (ICH Q9 [14])
The estimation of the risk associated with the identified hazards.
Risk Assessment (ICH Q9 [14])
A systematic process of organizing information to support a risk decision to be made within a risk management
process. It consists of the identification of hazards and the analysis and evaluation of risks associated with exposure
to those hazards.
Risk Communication (ICH Q9 [14])
The sharing of information about risk and risk management between the decision maker and other stakeholders.

--- PAGE 400 ---
Page 398
Appendix G2
Risk Control (ICH Q9 [14])
Actions implementing risk management decisions (ISO Guide 73).
Risk Evaluation (ICH Q9 [14])
The comparison of the estimated risk to given risk criteria using a quantitative or qualitative scale to determine the
significance of the risk.
Risk Identification (ICH Q9 [14])
The systematic use of information to identify potential sources of harm (hazards) referring to the risk question or
problem description.
Risk Management (ICH Q9 [14])
The systematic application of quality management policies, procedures, and practices to the tasks of assessing,
controlling, communicating and reviewing risk.
Risk Reduction (ICH Q9 [14])
Actions taken to lessen the probability of occurrence of harm and the severity of that harm.
Risk Review (ICH Q9 [14])
Review or monitoring of output/results of the risk management process considering (if appropriate) new knowledge
and experience about the risk.
Severity (ICH Q9 [14])
A measure of the possible consequences of a hazard.
Site Acceptance Test (SAT) (IEEE [96])
An Acceptance Test at the Customer’s site, usually involving the Customer. See also Acceptance Test, contrast to
Factory Acceptance Test.
Source Code (FDA [101])
(1) (IEEE) Computer instructions and data definitions expressed in a form suitable for input to an assembler, compiler
or other translator. (2) The human readable version of the list of instructions [program] that cause a computer to
perform a task.
Software Life Cycle (NIST [81])
Period of time beginning when a software product is conceived and ending when the product is no longer available
for use. The software life cycle is typically broken into phases denoting activities such as requirements, design,
programming, testing, installation, and operation and maintenance.
Specification (IEEE [96])
A document that specifies, in a complete, precise, verifiable manner, the requirements, design, behavior, or other
characteristics of a system or component, and often, the procedures for determining whether these provisions have
been satisfied.

--- PAGE 401 ---
Page 399
Appendix G2
Static Machine Learning Sub-System
Offline where there are controlled and identifiable changes to the case data and algorithm.
Subject Matter Expert (ASTM E2500 [8])
Those individuals with specific expertise in a particular area or field. Subject Matter Experts should take the lead
role in the verification of computerized systems. Subject Matter Expert responsibilities include planning and defining
verification strategies, defining acceptance criteria, selection of appropriate test methods, execution of verification
tests, and reviewing results.
Supplier
An organization or individual internal or external to the user associated with the supply and/or support of products or
services at any phase throughout a systems life cycle.
System Owner
The system owner is responsible for the availability, and support and maintenance, of a system, and for the security
of the data residing on that system. The system owner is responsible for ensuring that the computerized system is
supported and maintained in accordance with applicable company SOPs. The system owner also may be the process
owner (e.g., for IT infrastructure systems or systems not directly supporting GxP). For systems supporting regulated
processes and maintaining regulated data and records, the ownership of the data resides with the GxP-process
owner, not the system owner.
The system owner acts on behalf of the users. The system owner for larger systems will typically be from IT or
engineering functions. Global IT systems may have a global system owner and a local system owner to manage local
implementation.
(cf. Process Owner)
Testing, Functional (IEEE [96])
(1) Testing that ignores the internal mechanism or structure of a system or component and focuses on the outputs
generated in response to selected inputs and execution conditions. (2) Testing conducted to evaluate the compliance
of a system or component with specified functional requirements and corresponding predicted results. Syn: black-box
testing, input/output driven testing. Contrast with testing, structural.
Testing, Structural (IEEE [96])
(1) Testing that takes into account the internal mechanism [structure] of a system or component. Types include
branch testing, path testing, statement testing. (2) Testing to ensure each program statement is made to execute
during testing and that each program statement performs its intended function. Contrast with functional testing. Syn:
white-box testing, glass-box testing, logic driven testing.
Test Case (ISO/IEC 25051 [106])
A set of test inputs, execution conditions, and expected results developed for a particular objective, such as to
exercise a particular program path or to verify compliance with a specific requirement.
Test Plan (ISO/IEC 25051 [106])
A document describing the scope, approach, resources, and schedule of intended test activities.

--- PAGE 402 ---
Page 400
Appendix G2
Test Procedure (ISO/IEC 25051 [106])
Detailed instructions for the set-up, execution, and evaluation of results for a given test case.
Verification (1: ISO 9000 [1], 2: ASTM E2500 [8])
(1) Confirmation, through the provision of objective evidence that specified requirements have been fulfilled. (2) A
systematic approach to verify that manufacturing systems, acting singly or in combination, are fit for intended use,
have been properly installed, and are operating correctly. This is an umbrella term that encompasses all types of
approaches to assuring systems are fit for use such as qualification, commissioning and qualification, verification,
system validation, or other.
User
The pharmaceutical customer or user organization contracting a supplier to provide a product. In the context of this
document it is, therefore, not intended to apply only to individuals who use the system, and is synonymous with
customer.

--- PAGE 404 ---
600 N. Westshore Blvd., Suite 900, Tampa, Florida 33609 USA
Tel: +1-813-960-2105, Fax: +1-813-264-2816
www.ISPE.org
