--- PAGE 165 ---
Page 163
Appendix M11
Appendix M11
19	 Appendix M11 – IT Infrastructure
19.1
Introduction
EU Annex 11 [32] states: “The application should be validated; IT infrastructure should be qualified.” However, due to
the dynamic nature of infrastructure, it is best to think of achieving and maintaining a qualified state as an exercise of
managing to compliance. This state of control is the cornerstone of qualification as expected in EU Annex 11.
A controlled IT infrastructure is a prerequisite for ensuring that GxP applications are managed in a state of control.
Infrastructure plays a significant role in ensuring applications are on a stable platform with reliable required
communications. The IT infrastructure supports application performance and availability as well as the integrity,
availability, security, and confidentiality of data. Many of the processes required to ensure this rely on some aspects
of infrastructure management, such as cybersecurity, load balancing, backup and restore, disaster recovery, etc.
19.1.1
Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
This appendix was originally identified as Appendix S5. It dealt only with managing quality in an outsourced
environment. While this is certainly still an important aspect, infrastructure management is a process that inevitably
involves both internal and external processes. This significantly revised appendix applies current risk-based thinking
on good practice for managing infrastructure that resides within a regulated company’s own facilities as well as
ensuring those of external suppliers, for example, for cloud-based suppliers of Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS),
Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS) [20].
As a result, Appendix S5 has been withdrawn and the revised material renamed as Appendix M11.
19.1.2	 Further Reading
Managing IT infrastructure is discussed in more depth in the ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: IT Infrastructure
Control and Compliance (Second Edition) [49], and additional background for managing outsourced services can be
found in Appendix M6 in this Guide. Infrastructure management processes have become more automated, reducing
the incidence of human error by substituting verified automated processes for manual ones. This topic is still evolving,
as IT infrastructure management embraces increased automation and de-emphasizes reliance on paper records only.
19.2
Principles and Assumptions
19.2.1	 Scope of Infrastructure Qualification
Figure 19.1 illustrates the scope of infrastructure considerations and how some of the business processes within IT
need to be considered as part of a qualified infrastructure.

--- PAGE 166 ---
Page 164
Appendix M11
Figure 19.1: Relationship of IT Infrastructure and Processes with Business Systems and Processes
Adapted from ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service
Management [20].
19.2.2	 Infrastructure Qualification versus Application Validation
A regulated company approaches implementing an application to meet their business needs by developing
requirements, configuring the application as necessary, performing risk-based verification as needed, establishing
appropriate operational controls, and managing it to a controlled state (these combined efforts comprise validation).
This is far simpler for most, but not all infrastructure elements. The company has no input into the design and
manufacture of components such as servers, network switches, etc., which are effectively off-the-shelf purchases.
After the initial component build has been verified to perform acceptably, new components are simply configured
to the standard, and testing of each build may be extremely limited (e.g., verifying that a network node can reach
another node) or absent (e.g., by using a review-by-exception approach – see Section 19.2.4). Some components
are initially verified but may also require additional configuration and subsequent verification of that configuration.
Infrastructure, which is continually evolving to meet business needs, must be managed to a controlled state. Both
confirmation of components’ fitness for purpose and management to a controlled state are likely to involve automated
processes.
The greater dynamism of the infrastructure, combined with the widespread use of standardized components that
use the “one qualification, many implementations” model is the primary difference highlighted as noted above in EU
Annex 11 [32].
Note also that infrastructure software is GAMP Category 1, and as such is qualified, not validated.

--- PAGE 167 ---
Page 165
Appendix M11
19.2.3	 Component-Based Nature of Infrastructure
Infrastructure is generally comprised of many instances of certain standard components. For example, companies
have many network switches, servers, and storage devices. These components are generally deployed in standard
basic configurations. If these standard configurations have been demonstrated to perform acceptably, it is a
reasonable assumption that additional components deployed in those configurations also will. This indicates that IT
infrastructure presents lower risk than applications.
19.2.4	 Infrastructure Automation
Infrastructure as Code (IaC) is a means of provisioning and deploying infrastructure using DevOps processes. IaC
enables organizations to automate the provisioning of infrastructure, reducing the risk of human errors. Infrastructure
code is subject to configuration management ensuring that all code changes are traceable. Infrastructure code
development is subject to risk-based software development practices that ensure code is developed in accordance
with a life cycle approach including verification prior to deployment. Configuration management and deployment tools
allow for review and authorization prior to deployment of new/updated configurations, use of templates to ensure
maintenance of consistent configurations across the infrastructure landscape, and monitoring of the configuration
baseline to detect unauthorized changes. A further benefit to this being that a “one qualification, many deployments”
approach can be taken, particularly with standard virtualized environments.
The configuration of standard infrastructure components is part of the creation of basic building blocks that are the
foundational platforms for applications. Such configuration processes are readily automated. For example, an out-
of-the-box server can have the operating system, middleware, layered software, and security policies loaded via an
automated process. There may be multiple similar automated build scripts, for example, to build servers with different
database engines. These automated builds can produce various log files or even perform simple automated tests that
demonstrate a successful build, and a review-by-exception process similar in principle to that used for pharmaceutical
manufacturing obviates the need for further verification. Critical thinking must be applied when deploying such
“standard” environments, however. In some cases, greater control may be warranted; for example, cybersecurity
risks may differ from one example to the next, which might merit hardening of the security for an otherwise standard
component.
19.2.5	 Tools
There are many automated tools that help IT to operate in an effective and controlled manner, for example, a
Configuration Management Database (CMDB), or scheduling tools that initiate routine processes like backup, data
transfers, or ETL11. There are also service management tools that ensure adherence to IT quality processes and
standardization of information supporting these processes, such as IT service management tools that process and
catalog customer service requests, incidents, changes, problems, and other services. Such tools do not require
validation, although proper installation, use, and a state of control for them is required. (See Appendix D9.)
19.3
Risk Management and Infrastructure
Given that IT departments service the entire enterprise and not just GxP areas, cases may occasionally arise where a
risk to the enterprise as a whole requires a change that cannot go through a time-consuming change control process
that includes sequential evaluation, approval, testing, and release. For example, if a zero-day security vulnerability12
is recognized that threatens serious harm to the regulated company if it is exploited, remediation will be done as
rapidly as possible. It is usually the case that risk from cybersecurity threats directly correlate to the data integrity
considerations of GxP risk. See Section 19.4 for further discussion of QA roles.
11	ETL is a tool that extracts, transforms, and loads data.
12	A zero-day vulnerability means there are known exploits of the security flaw.

--- PAGE 168 ---
Page 166
Appendix M11
IT risk priorities therefore tend to focus on risks to system availability, performance, and information security. These
priorities, however actually do address GxP concerns: applications are available when needed, they work well, and
there is data integrity.
As Reid and Wyn [52] observed:
“Threats to the IT Infrastructure environment largely come from cyberattacks, unauthorized access, system and
component failure, or inadequate re-source provisioning (storage capacity, processing capacity). These risks
are continuous, and it is therefore imperative that the currency of IT infrastructure controls is maintained (e.g.,
through security patching) and monitoring is in place to provide early detection of any threat. IT infrastructure
design incorporates a high degree of resilience that mitigates both single-point and complete failure.”
Another risk may come from authorized but uninformed decisions to alter system-wide parameters that may affect
GxP systems or data. This highlights the need for training and SME oversight of the infrastructure staff.
Because of the high degree of resilience noted above, the GxP risk for properly managed infrastructure is relatively
low; however, with many organizations adopting cloud-first strategies, the evaluation of “as a Service” vendors
can influence risk both at the system and enterprise levels. This can be a starting point for risk management
considerations for applications, although it is possible that non-standard implementations where a hostile environment
or a single point of failure could raise infrastructure risk.
19.4
The Role of Quality
The quality unit can play an effective role in the development and manufacture of medicinal products and medical
devices largely because staff are familiar with the operation of those areas. While they may not be SMEs, they
typically understand the processes. This is not the case for IT. Add to this that infrastructure groups manage many
non-impact changes and that the risk to patients for IT infrastructure decisions is typically extremely low, and heavy
quality unit involvement in infrastructure is unwarranted and potentially extremely inefficient. There may be exceptions
where greater involvement could be warranted: for example, SaMD may have greater potential direct-patient impact if
there is a failure of underlying infrastructure.
The preamble to the US FDA 21 CFR Parts 210/211 [53] states:
“Functions that are properly those of the engineering department or other specialized units because of their
unique training and experience should not be duplicated or usurped by the quality control unit. Where expertise
is in other units, the responsibility of the quality control unit is to assure that such expertise has been utilized.”
This is not to say that there should be no quality oversight. There should be an agreement between QA and IT
system owners on an IT quality framework. This should define what fitness for purpose means for infrastructure.
It is advisable that IT organizations establish an internal IT Quality (ITQ) function. This function should oversee IT
processes to ensure that they support a state of control, and they should be familiar enough with GxP expectations to
know when the quality unit should be involved in a decision. For example, it may make sense for them to be involved
in a change of database engines used in multiple GxP applications, or when a major operating system upgrade is
undertaken. The quality unit should not need to worry about less impactful changes like microcode updates or the
installation of new virus definitions. If the quality unit is involved, their overall aim should be to ensure that quality
processes are followed and that there is adequate evaluation of risk and controls. They should not be involved in the
technical solution or decisions because they most likely lack the expertise.
There should be cooperative interaction between ITQ and the quality unit.
Figure 19.2 shows the relationship between the product life cycle quality processes and ITQ processes.

--- PAGE 169 ---
Page 167
Appendix M11
Figure 19.2: Interaction of ITQ and the Quality Unit [20]
There will be many changes and other activities that only merit verification by an SME; allocating additional storage
space is a good example where the risk is negligible and process efficiency should be the prime consideration. In
general, far more routine IT changes fall into this category as opposed to those meriting formal quality unit review. IT
procedures should clearly define circumstances where quality unit involvement is warranted. These should be limited
to situations where significant risk to applications or data is possible, for example, for significant functional application
upgrades or overhaul of the core database engine.
Responsibility for any quality decision should be procedurally defined.
19.5
IT Processes in Scope for Infrastructure Qualification
Several processes managed by IT are key to ensuring a controlled state of applications. There are excellent
resources available for management of these IT business processes, such as ITIL13. Some of these processes will
require input from the business users of applications. For example, business input is needed to define expected
service levels: help desk hours, response times, etc. In some cases, costs may need to be negotiated.
19.5.1	 Security Management
Critical to data integrity within the GxP scope are several security-related processes:
•
Access control and password management – ensuring that only authorized people have access to applications
and data, including a process such as periodic review to ensure that individuals no longer needing access have
their privileges revoked
•
Management of administrative access – to minimize elevated privileges
•
Cybersecurity – including data segregation, firewalls, intrusion detection and prevention, antivirus, and expediting
management of vulnerabilities
•
Management of encryption key(s)
13	For an overview of ITIL see www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/it-infrastructure-library [54].

--- PAGE 170 ---
Page 168
Appendix M11
It should be noted that IT will approach data integrity with a generic enterprise-wide solution unless they are informed
that additional protections are needed. It is the responsibility of the business process owner and/or the data owner,
possibly with assistance from the quality unit, to assess the supporting infrastructure processes and request
modification if necessary.
19.5.2	 Backup and Recovery
Processes need to include analysis of the required frequency of backup (both of applications and of the data) to meet
business needs; the process for executing backup; and the process for recovering a backup copy, including who is
authorized to request a recovery. It is vital for GxP applications that both Recovery Point Objectives (RPO, which
dictates the frequency of backups) and Recovery Time Objectives (RTO, which dictates the interval between system
failure and recovery), are defined and testable at a frequency commensurate to the system risk and agreed by the
business owner. All backup processes should be periodically verified to demonstrate that they are recoverable and
meet the current business need. Problems or failures should be reported back to the data owner. It is an obvious, yet
often overlooked point, that the importance of periodic testing is to ensure that problems are found proactively, and
not when the integrity of GxP data is compromised by a failure.
19.5.3	 Archive and Restore
Processes should include how and when data (including metadata) is moved to an archive, how archived data can be
accessed and by whom, and how to destroy data no longer needed, including authorization to do so. Data needs to
be readable throughout the retention period. This can require attention from both the business area and infrastructure
support, including for issues like data migration or support for older versions of a database engine.
19.5.4	 Change Management
Change management within the IT infrastructure requires a controlled and defined process; however, it cannot be a
direct parallel to change-control processes for GxP applications. Infrastructure changes should be managed at the IT
process layer and not at the product life cycle management process layer. For most infrastructure changes, GxP risk
is extremely low. There are also a relatively large number of changes within infrastructure, some of which will be done
on a routine schedule, and are best managed through other processes (see below). The role of the quality unit versus
ITQ as noted in Section 19.4 should be defined for change approval.
There should be differentiation between actual changes and activities such as repair (including like-for-like
replacement), maintenance, and system administration, which will be managed under their own processes. Further,
the ITIL [5] concept of standard changes can be extended into GxP infrastructure management. A list of pre-agreed
changes that IT can make without the need for additional oversight can maintain the infrastructure’s compliant state
while ensuring operation efficiency. Provisions for emergency changes should also be made. For example, when a
database administrator notices that an application needs more table space, allocation of that does not constitute a
change.
19.5.5	 Configuration Management
Configuration management is both a regulatory expectation and necessary for running an effective IT operation.
Configuration management encompasses both the configuration of applications running on infrastructure as well
as the hardware and infrastructure software itself. In a modern IT environment, it is impractical to try to achieve this
without a CMDB.
19.5.6	 Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity Planning
Clearly a shared responsibility with business process owners, the IT infrastructure team needs to ensure that their
disaster response is adequately planned, resourced (both facilities and staff), and tested. This may include leveraging
cloud resources.

--- PAGE 171 ---
Page 169
Appendix M11
The roles and responsibilities of business and IT groups should be defined, and the business process owners of the
GxP application should understand the benefits, constraints, and limitations of the agreed IT service delivery. This is a
regulatory expectation, e.g., in EU Annex 11 Section 3.1 [32].
GxP process owners and system owners need to understand that this is another case where enterprise risk priorities
may supersede GxP priorities. While it may seem counterintuitive to prioritize restoring manufacturing after finance
systems, if the business may fail without the latter, they must be handled first. There should be an enterprise-level
prioritization for this, and it should be shared with all involved parties. If there is a potential public health impact, for
example, a drug shortage, that should be part of the consideration for prioritization.
DR and BCP processes should be defined, documented, and practiced. See Appendix O10 for further discussion.
19.5.7	 Other IT Processes
There are other processes that are often managed by IT infrastructure groups that are not limited in scope to
infrastructure but do bear some relevance. Examples include:
•
IT service desk
•
Incident and problem management (including CAPA where relevant)
•
Service level management
•
Asset management
19.6
Cloud Infrastructure
Any use of cloud resources brings infrastructure qualification considerations into scope. Figure 19.3 shows the
various levels of delegation of control to the supplier for IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS deployments. In all cases, however,
the infrastructure management and control expectations are constant, and are represented by the blue background.
In both PaaS and SaaS, all infrastructure activities are delegated to the supplier, while it is shared in IaaS, and of
course resides solely with the regulated firm, for a traditional deployment in their own data center.
Figure 19.3: Customer and Supplier Responsibilities for Cloud Implementations (infrastructure within blue
background) [20]

--- PAGE 172 ---
Page 170
Appendix M11
The difficulty with cloud suppliers lies in the fact that, with very few exceptions, they are not GxP regulated. This
does not mean that they are universally unsuited to host GxP applications. The core question is whether they have
an adequate state of control over their infrastructure. This can be determined via an effective supplier evaluation
process (see Appendix M2), a robust set of contractual agreements on service levels, quality, and monitoring. Such
agreements should have agreed escalation procedures for incidents and problems.
When outsourcing a GxP system to a third party it is vital to understand where the data is resident and to ensure
that the service provider has taken adequate steps to ensure their delivery is robust. A SaaS or PaaS provider, as
an example, can only offer as much uptime and performance as their own infrastructure provider can accommodate.
The higher the risk of a cloud-delivered GxP application, it is expected that its associated infrastructure is more robust
(regional mirroring versus tape backups as an example).
Data integrity should be a factor in any decision to manage GxP data in the cloud. Considerations involving
infrastructure include:
•
Access management: What are the implications (if any) if supplier staff sees data?
•
Encryption: If data (in motion and/or at rest) is encrypted, who manages the key?
•
DR: What happens if the cloud supplier has a major incident? RTO and RPO must be agreed.
•
Certifications: Which (if any) certifications does the “as a Service” provider hold? e.g., ISO 27001 [44], SOC 1,
SOC 2 Type 1 or Type 2 [55], HITRUST® [56], etc.
•
Frequency of vulnerability scans and third-party penetration tests
•
Local, regional, and global redundancies and segregation
•
Deployment model and service model compatibility with the level of GxP risk
Cloud service suppliers are not GxP regulated, and it is the accountability of the regulated organization using such
services to ensure that quality processes provide an equivalent level of assurance that patient safety, product quality,
and data integrity are protected.
19.7
Continual Improvement
For all IT infrastructure, but especially for cloud implementations, there should always be the question: “What could
we be doing better?”
Key processes should be monitored by the service provider and adherence to SLAs agreed by the regulated
customer, along with dialog between the parties as to the areas that need improvement, are performing adequately,
or are working very well. Including specific Key Process Indicators (KPIs) in the monitoring is recommended.

--- PAGE 173 ---
Page 171
Appendix M12
Appendix M12
20	Appendix M12 – Critical Thinking
20.1
Introduction
This appendix discusses the concept of critical thinking to proactively optimize the approach taken to ensure quality
and compliance of computerized systems (i.e., better development, testing, operation, and maintenance) within the
context of the business processes they support. Further detailed discussion about critical thinking can be found in the
ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service Management [20] and
ISPE GAMP Guide: Records and Data Integrity [35].
While GAMP 5 promotes a risk-based approach to ensuring fitness for intended use, some practitioners do not apply
sufficient thought to ensure the approach they are taking is customized and proportionate to the needs of different
systems. The use of rigid tables, overly prescriptive templates, and tick-in-the box methods impedes critical thinking
and could inhibit innovation and the adoption of new technologies. Wasting time and effort on non-value-added
activities can lead to insufficient or excessive work with potential budget overspend and delays, and may reduce
focus on more valuable and essential quality activities.
20.1.1	 Changes from GAMP 5 First Edition
This is a new appendix.
20.2	 Scope
Critical thinking should be applied in a holistic manner to the entirety of the business process that the computerized
system supports. The role of ancillary equipment and interfaces should be included in the scope of implementation,
validation, and operational activities to avoid missing potential risks to patient safety, product quality, and data
integrity.
The interplay between system and data life cycles should also be subject to critical thinking and QRM. Multiple
systems may be involved in supporting a single data life cycle. For example, data may be created and processed in
one system, reported and used to make GxP decisions in an ERP system, and then archived for the retention period
in another.
Operational compliance and data integrity is highly dependent upon personal behaviors. Critical thinking will play a
key role in addressing human factors through effective behavioral, procedural, and technical controls, recognizing
that the strength of quality culture varies across different locations driven in large part by geographic values and local
historical context.
Interdependencies with suppliers and service providers, including in-house suppliers, are a further consideration
within the scope of critical thinking. The supplier’s application of their own QMS to the development and release of
their software/service can influence business process risks and whether or not the software/service functionality is fit
for the regulated company’s intended use.

--- PAGE 174 ---
Page 172
Appendix M12
20.3	 Guidance
20.3.1	 Facilitating Critical Thinking
For critical thinking to be used successfully, the QMS and validation policy must permit and encourage its application.
Examples of this are:
•
Where templates are provided, they are used as an aide memoire to ensure the relevant areas for the particular
system are covered rather than as a form to be completed.
•
An addition or alternative to templates can be provided to cover essential elements that must be captured or
defined as part of the activity, leaving the format and structure open to optimization for the particular system or
tool used.
Sections 20.3.2 – 20.3.12 provide examples of how critical thinking can be applied to improve efficiency for the
activities within the system life cycle.
20.3.2	 Planning
A business process maybe supported by multiple computerized systems. Planning may involve adding a new system,
updating an existing system, or consolidating multiple systems into a single enterprise system. When planning
implementation, a full understanding of the regulated aspects of the process to be supported, including the intended
use of data within the process, is fundamental.
Critical thinking should be applied to understand the implementation risks as well as functional risks to patient safety,
product quality, and data integrity. Business process flowcharts illustrate the business activities, decision points, and
subprocesses, while the data flow diagrams identify the creation, processing, review, use, and archiving of data. The
data flow diagram should identify the primary record for regulated data if the data resides in more than one system
or location. Together these diagrams help in the understanding of the business process to identify risks to patient
safety, product quality, and data integrity associated with the process. Data integrity cannot be achieved without a
complete understanding of the data flow. Developing business process maps and data flow diagrams is described in
ISPE GAMP Guide: Records and Data Integrity [35] and the ISPE GAMP RDI Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by
Design [36]. Planning for individual systems is discussed in Section 4.2.1 of this Guide.
Examples of planning using critical thinking include [20]:
•
Utilizing business process mapping and data flow diagrams to understand where the computerized system will
fit in the process, what regulated data will pass through it, and what part of the regulated data’s life cycle the
system will support. The process maps and data flows do not need to be contained within a particular document
but should be current and accessible and referenced by the system and life cycle information when needed. The
use of process mapping and diagramming tools is encouraged.
•
Defining consistent nomenclature for use in the process to facilitate data transfer, trending, and analytics.
•
Selecting a solution that best fits the business requirements minimizing configuration and customization,
recognizing that it may be more pragmatic to adjust the business process to fit a standard application.
•
Understanding the interfaces needed to other systems, and what standard interfaces are available versus
developing new interfaces (with their additional test and management burden).
•
Planning for how the system should respond in an error or failure situation and how it can recover from such a
situation, as well as how it should behave during normal operation.

--- PAGE 175 ---
Page 173
Appendix M12
20.3.3	 Quality Risk Management
Critical thinking should be applied to ensure that [14]:
•
“The evaluation of the risk to quality should be based on scientific knowledge and ultimately link to the
protection of the patient; and
•
The level of effort, formality and documentation of the quality risk management process should be
commensurate with the level of risk.”
In the context of computerized systems, scientific knowledge is based upon the system specifications and the
business process being supported.
Critical thinking should be applied to ensure risk assessments are as effective as possible and reflect the system
requirements and the business process. When assigning a rating for severity of harm to a potential failure, it is
important to consider the overall risk of the system to patient safety, product quality, and data integrity. A complete
failure to meet a requirement may render part of the system non-functional, but if the overall system remains fit for its
intended use with no impact on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity then this might be acceptable. There
could, however, be good reason for classifying such scenarios as high risk if they adversely impact the organization’s
other operating imperatives (e.g., productivity targets).
Similar functions relating to a specific area of functionality may be grouped together in a recursive hierarchy
consisting of major and subsidiary functions and controls. This hierarchical approach, which may have multiple levels
depending on the complexity of the process or system, may help simplify risk assessment.
Critical thinking should determine whether some or all of the more detailed subsidiary functions need to be
individually assessed within the hierarchy of functionality and controls. A subsidiary function cannot have a higher risk
than that of the overarching function, so there may be little or no benefit to assessing subsidiary functions of a low-
risk overarching function.
Assessing the risk at the major and/or subsidiary level as needed ensures the selection of optimal control measures,
testing rigor, and documentation commensurate with the assessed risk. Risk mitigation may involve behavioral,
procedural, or technical controls to reduce risk to an acceptable level. These controls may be part of a computerized
system function, or in parallel manual procedures, and may be upstream or downstream of the system. Controls are
typically aimed at:
•
Eliminating risk through process or system redesign
•
Reducing risk by reducing the probability of a failure occurring
•
Reducing risk by increasing the in-process detectability of a failure
•
Reducing risk by establishing downstream checks or error traps (e.g., fail-safe or controlled fail state)
The rigor and extent of controls should be based on the level of risk. For example, application timeout and password
complexity are both controls to reduce the risk of unauthorized access to a system. Neither the password complexity
nor the system timeout functions will have greater impact than preventing unauthorized access, which is above them
in the hierarchy. The duration of the timeout and the extent of password complexity may nevertheless be influenced
by the assessed risk, with shorter timeouts and greater complexity where the risk his high.
Testing should verify that controls are appropriate and sufficient. Identifying subsidiary functions with lower risk
prevents the need to automatically test all subsidiary functions to the same level of detail. Combining this approach
with a testing strategy based on increasing test rigor and documentation with increasing risk ultimately results in
efficiency gains.

--- PAGE 176 ---
Page 174
Appendix M12
20.3.4	 Requirements
The key to the implementation of a computerized system fit for intended use is to thoroughly understand the business
process and data requirements to enable the definition of requirements. Not all requirements need to be finalized
before proceeding (for further information on Agile approaches see Appendix D8).
Critical thinking should ensure that requirements specifically relating to regulatory compliance are tailored to the
system’s intended use rather than indiscriminately applying every potentially applicable regulatory reference when
some are not appropriate or necessary. SMEs should be consulted on when and where particular regulations are
applicable. For example, critical thinking should be applied to identify GxP regulated records that need an audit trail
rather than defaulting to all data requiring audit trails regardless of context. Critical thinking can then be applied again
to evaluate what is needed in terms of a data audit trail taking into account whether users are expected to create,
modify, or delete regulated records during normal operation.
If an audit trail is required, critical thinking should be used to develop requirements (including Agile user stories)
for an audit trail that is contextual, searchable, filterable, and reportable. In this way, critical thinking enables the
development of more efficient and effective controls. The same considered approach should be taken to assess
individual subsidiary requirements of an overarching requirement to better scale the controls and the testing effort.
Requirements Management and Traceability Tools
Requirements management and traceability tools can make development, implementation, and maintenance of
systems more efficient and less error prone. Such tools provide a collaborative workspace that enables the definition
of requirements and the development of test cases in tandem with requirements coding, and tracks issues and
defects. Relational databases within these tools can be leveraged to manage the traceability of the requirements to
validation activities throughout the life cycle.
Critical thinking should be applied to determine and document the adequacy of these tools. Where sufficient detail
and approvals are contained and available within the tool, there is no benefit to patient safety, product quality, and
data integrity for manually creating separate documentation as audit evidence. Some tools allow reports to be
generated in common portable formats (e.g., requirements, test outcomes, and traceability matrices) on request.
Good IT practice should ensure that the data/records held are controlled, secure, and available. Further advice on the
application of tools can be found in Appendix D9.
20.3.5	 Supplier Assessment and Selection
Critical thinking should be applied to the assessment and selection of suppliers, whether it be for the provision of
software, a system or service to affirm is it fit for the regulated company’s intended use. The assessment should
cover both software functionality and its development. It is important to understand the origin of the supplier’s
software modules and libraries, which is why it is becoming increasingly common to request a Software Bill of
Materials to confirm the use of OSS. In the case of “as a Service” offerings, supplier assessments should include
assurance of the long-term provision and stability of that offering. The potential need for an audit of the supplier (initial
and ongoing) should be based on risk.
Knowledge of the processes followed by the supplier can enable the regulated company to reduce their validation
effort by leveraging supplier activities, as described in Section 8.3 in the body, and in ISPE GAMP® RDI Good
Practice Guide: Data Integrity – Key Concepts [57]. Supplier activities should focus on ensuring their product meets
their specifications, recognizing there will be a minimum level of detailed information and evidence of effective testing
expected by a regulated company. For example, critical thinking would identify that ineffective testing approaches
instead of robust and/or automated testing may reduce the opportunity for the regulated company to leverage the
supplier’s activities. Where the supplier has used a risk-based approach, the regulated company should determine
if their assessment of risk is different to that of the supplier and adjust accordingly. The supplier’s assessment may
have been based on generic risks, for example, if function “x” fails it will negatively impact data integrity; the regulated

--- PAGE 177 ---
Page 175
Appendix M12
company may need to consider the specifics of their use of the system based on their own business processes,
for example, considering the criticality of the data or function impacted by the failure on patient safety and product
quality. Appendix D5 provides further discussion on how regulated organizations can leverage supplier testing.
Critical thinking should also ensure that supplier selection criteria contain performance measures such as system
reliability, service continuity, and reputation for customer responsiveness. For certain types of system architecture,
such as SaaS, reliance on the supplier may not be limited to the system life cycle and can include the data life cycle,
which should be assessed during service provider selection. Where there are frequent changes, there may be little
to no opportunity for the regulated company to reject the change, which reinforces the need for adequate supplier
change control. Further discussion of how critical thinking can be applied to reduce user validation of COTS products
has been published elsewhere; see ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile,
IT Service Management [20].
By effectively leveraging supplier and IT/IS service provider effort, the regulated company maximizes value and
avoids duplication of effort by ensuring activities are undertaken by organizations with the prerequisite skills and
experience.
Critical thinking should be applied to ensure that:
•
The supplier appreciates how their product is used in the life sciences industry and the implications this may
have on their development and support practices.
•
Regulated companies are accountable for ensuring the system is fit for intended use and should evaluate the
supplier’s approach against the regulated company’s intended use. Access to supporting information around
supplier activities should be defined in the purchase contract or SLA.
•
Leveraging is enabled through a risk-based approach to IT/IS service provider assurance that ensures service
providers adopt the necessary controls and records within their QMS. This demonstrates that services and
solutions are fit for intended use and data integrity is maintained. This does not imply that service providers must
provide the regulated company with documentation and records maintained as part of the regulated company’s
QMS. The value of service provider documentation and records is within the service provider’s QMS where
they support and demonstrate the effectiveness of a service provider’s processes and controls. This does not
preclude service providers from providing copies of documentation and records where this facilitates an effective
and efficient approach to assurance.
•
Supplier deliverables specifically produced for regulated companies should be assessed for suitability, accuracy,
and completeness. There should be flexibility regarding acceptable format, structure, and documentation
practices as there is no value in recreating documentation in a different template.
•
Information and test evidence in the form of artifacts within requirements management tools and automated test
tools have the same status as formal documentation.
•
If the supplier’s system is to be interfaced to other systems within the regulated company, for example LDAP14
authentication or single sign-on, the interfaces need to be defined, implemented, validated, managed, and
maintained.
•
Where feasible, the supplier should aim to develop customer-requested new functionality into their mainstream
product offering where this is beneficial to the wider user base rather than creating special versions for individual
customers. This reduces the supplier’s product management effort and simplifies future updates for all parties.
If the functionality is provided as a configurable option, there is no obligation on other customers to implement
it. Critical thinking should ensure there are no unintended consequences such as reduced system performance
when such changes are made to the mainstream product.
14	Lightweight Directory Access Protocol

--- PAGE 178 ---
Page 176
Appendix M12
•
Where a regulated company requests the development of a new or amended feature, keeping it within the
supplier’s development life cycle ensures it is done once and tested once rather than developed and tested
repeatedly by regulated companies.
•
Reuse of standard modules of code or custom-developed forms, by the supplier or regulated company, should
be based on a master template to ensure changes are automatically replicated across all instances. This reduces
the possibilities of errors (e.g., introduced by copying and pasting for reuse), condenses the need for testing to
just the master template, and eliminates the possibility of one or more instances not being updated.
•
Ongoing management and implementation of change is done in a controlled way by:
-
Leveraging supplier activities and knowledge (i.e., in the same way as that for the original development).
Care should be taken to recognize instances where the supplier support transitions between project teams
and service teams as this may impact the standards being applied and the supplier assessments conducted
by the regulated company.
-
Ensuring changes to the product can be communicated to the regulated company so they can assess
the risks of taking or not taking the change. Note that in some offerings the change is not optional for the
regulated company, e.g., multitenant SaaS.
-
Having a pre-verified method for installing the change. The regulated company should apply critical thinking
around the risks of taking the change versus not taking the change, assessing likely risks to their intended
use as a result of the change, and leveraging what has been done by the supplier in order to install the
change with the minimum of repeated effort.
•
Where a supplier is involved within the regulated company’s life cycle (e.g., a systems integrator), the supplier
and regulated company should jointly agree on the overall rigor of documentation and testing required and who
will be responsible for which elements in order to avoid unnecessary duplication.
•
Completing arrangements needed to support ongoing regulated company compliance, including ongoing supplier
assessments/audits where these are envisaged, and ensuring that information on supplier assessment and
management processes and conclusions is available for review.
20.3.6	 Testing
Effective testing is crucial when determining that a computerized system is fit for its intended use (see Appendix D5
for guidance on testing). Critical thinking should facilitate the testing of functions and features with appropriate risk
priorities that reflect:
•
The potential impact on patient safety, product quality, and data integrity (higher-risk functions may require
greater test rigor and level of documentation).
•
Prior testing of the function or feature either in the supplier’s development life cycle or as part of the regulated
company’s life cycle. Automated tools within the supplier’s development life cycle may have enabled and
included full regression testing of daily builds.
•
The degree of confidence in that prior testing based on supplier assessment.
Using critical thinking, assessment of risk can then be used as input to determine the appropriate test approaches.
The aim of testing is to identify and allow the removal of defects and confirm fitness for intended use rather than
producing documentation for documentation’s sake. Critical thinking can optimize test approaches for the regulated
company such as [20]:
•
Planning and organizing tests to run as efficiently as possible, for example, by combining tests to minimize
repeated test setup activities, and/or by grouping related functionality testing.

--- PAGE 179 ---
Page 177
Appendix M12
•
Ensuring sufficient test coverage during the system life cycle, with the rigor of testing commensurate with risk,
and avoiding repeating tests that are similar or identical to those carried out by others.
•
Ensuring that the test cases demonstrate that functions operate correctly.
•
Differentiating between proving steps and non-proving steps to limit the amount of test-execution evidence
created and retained. Proving steps demonstrate a requirement has been fulfilled, while non-proving steps are
used to set up the proving step. This ensures test evidence is only captured for proving steps that demonstrate a
higher-risk GxP or business requirement has been fulfilled.
•
Ensuring the testers and reviewers have the skills and expertise to execute the tests, operate the system, and
evaluate the results in the context of the intended use and/or the business process. This then obviates the need
for overly prescriptive and detailed test instructions and in turn reduces test incidents arising from poorly written
test scripts.
•
Minimizing pressure on testers, e.g., to meet a deadline for moving to the operational phase, which can bias
testing outcomes.
•
Enabling a proportionate review of completed tests based on the risk of the function under test.
•
Leveraging automated test tools and test-management tools in place of extensive manual effort and referring to
the test artifacts within the tools in place of documentation.
•
Managing incidents and their corrective actions to ensure any changes are fully verified once completed,
including an appropriate amount of regression testing to ensure that the change has not adversely affected other
functionality.
The level of detail for test cases and test evidence can vary depending on the test strategy and the risk posed by the
function or feature being tested. Critical thinking should be employed to ensure excessive hard-copy test evidence is
not requested. In most cases, screen shots and excessive commentary do not add value and are unnecessary.
Test strategies should ensure sufficient system testing to detect defects, and that test-management processes are
robust enough to maintain control of the system during the testing activities. The scheduling of testing should take
account of new and revised risks, design changes, and other factors that could impact the timing of this activity.
Unusual patterns of test failures associated with particular authors and/or individual testers should be investigated
to determine whether there are any wider testing implications on the rigor of completed testing. The critical-thinking
rationale behind the test strategy must be documented.
20.3.7	 Managing Build and Configuration
The traditional “static snapshot” approach of installation qualification and configuration management has proven
difficult to apply, and is ineffective when using modern virtual environments and cloud computing. If the build is
maintained in an automatically controlled environment with regular checks to verify the system remains within its
specified setup condition, then the need to independently confirm the installation is reduced to a review by exception.
Most automated build installers provide reporting tools for any configuration and setup anomalies and failures with a
dashboard to help operational staff quickly respond and resolve any issues. Such configuration management of the
build script ensures that the continuous verification is synchronized to compare the current system against the correct
setup conditions. Critical thinking can be applied to identify effective modern processes such as this, since technology
has superseded the need for traditional aspects of qualification. Section 4.3 discusses IT service management in
more detail.

--- PAGE 180 ---
Page 178
Appendix M12
20.3.8	 Operation and Maintenance
20.3.8.1	 System Evolution
Computerized systems will be subject to ongoing changes and evolution during their operational life. Critical thinking
allows change to be embraced in support of improved operation rather than avoided as long as possible because
of the perceived validation and documentation burden associated with change. The regulatory expectation is that
application updates that offer improvements to patient safety, product quality, or data integrity should be applied when
available and, for instance, that GxP systems do not run on obsolete or unsupported operating systems. See ISPE
GAMP Good Practice Guide: Enabling Innovation – Critical Thinking, Agile, IT Service Management [20].
Influences such as the increased adoption of Agile software development methods, SaaS application offerings and
the associated software-release cadence, and the need to update systems more frequently as part of cybersecurity
efforts, mean there will increasingly be more changes during the operational phase of the life cycle. Indeed, the
increasing number and frequency of cyberattacks have forced the industry to routinely adopt patches and hotfixes
immediately after release to address potential security vulnerabilities.
Automated tools can facilitate efficient change management and regression testing, verifying critical functionality
and ensuring that regulated data is not adversely impacted after an application upgrade. Appropriate performance
metrics can confirm solutions continue to be fit for intended use while safeguarding patient safety, product quality, and
data integrity throughout the changes. Appendix M11 discusses the advantages of moving from a fixed point-in-time
qualification approach for infrastructure to a continuous control and monitoring approach, which has the flexibility to
accommodate and manage more frequent changes.
When a defect is discovered during operational use and the incident management process triggered, it is important
to apply critical thinking during the root-cause analysis to assess whether the original risk-based testing approach
is still valid. An excessive response may be to initiate a “test all” approach to find other escaped defects. Instead,
test metrics should be used to confirm that the actual escape rate of defects is in line with the assumptions made
when determining the type of testing to be carried out for functions and features with different risk priorities. An
unacceptable number of escaped defects in high-risk functions requires a re-evaluation of the functional risks and the
corresponding test strategies.
20.3.8.2	Ways of Working
The operational compliance of a computerized system is also highly dependent on the working practices of its users
with respect to safeguarding patient safety, product quality, and data integrity. These practices should be defined in
a framework of easily understood and intuitive practical instructions (e.g., SOPs, video how-to guides, built-in online
help) for routine use and data review, system support, incident management, system administration, etc. Changes
to system configuration are typically captured in system logs that may be reviewed, but management of system
configuration changes should be primarily ensured by effective ongoing security, access control, and change and
configuration management processes rather than a retrospective review of logs.
The holistic perspective prompted by critical thinking should ensure the work environment uses effective ways of
working. Critical thinking should be applied to ensure supervisory measures are proportionate to risk, such as, where
is it appropriate to have a contemporaneous second-person verification versus a later check of completed data
activity. Special consideration is needed for hybrid situations where records are compiled from manual and automatic
processes to ensure controls are complete and complementary without being overly bureaucratic.
Cultural dynamics may challenge the acceptability of openly reporting problems. Codes of conduct should specifically
state behavioral expectations to ensure the reliability and completeness of data, explaining the benefits this brings
to patients and the personal consequences for employees who breach controls. It may be beneficial to institute
confidential reporting lines for whistleblowers15 where these do not already exist.
15	A whistleblower is “one who reveals something covert or who informs against another; especially: an employee who brings wrongdoing by an
employer or by other employees to the attention of a government or law enforcement agency.” [58]

--- PAGE 181 ---
Page 179
Appendix M12
20.3.8.3	Training
When introducing a new or updated computerized system, critical thinking can be used to help identify and target
appropriate levels of training for different audiences. Examples of training that should be considered for relevant
personnel include:
•
Human factors for design and use of computerized systems – for the implementation and validation SMEs
•
Reporting data integrity issues – for all system users
•
Transparent investigation of incidents and issues to understand true root causes beyond the initial reasons so
that robust computerized systems are created and maintained – for the users, support personnel, and quality
SMEs
The content of training needs to be scaled to the detail and reinforcement of principles needed. Training is not
necessarily effective if it just repeats earlier content already delivered to the same audience. Neither is training
necessarily effective if it relies on attendees documenting they have read and understood the material as they may
not be qualified to make such a judgment. Trainers should consider fresh and innovative approaches to make training
interesting and informative so that its effectiveness is maintained and enhances organizational capability.
Operational compliance is discussed further within Chapter 4 and ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based
Approach to Operation of GxP Computerized Systems [34].
20.3.9	 Periodic Review
During periodic review the system is assessed for the cumulative impact of changes, defects, or regulatory updates.
The frequency of periodic review should be based on the GxP impact of the system, with high-risk systems reviewed
more frequently. Critical thinking should be used to determine whether the review frequency should be increased
or decreased based on the outcome of the previous review and/or performance trends. For example, if issues and
failures were found during the last periodic review, the review period can be shortened to make sure the CAPAs were
completed and have resolved those issues.
Effective system and process performance monitoring and metrics allows decreased periodic review frequency,
extent, and formality. Critical thinking should also be used in conjunction with system performance metrics and
trending data to identify areas for improvement within the system’s use, maintenance, and ongoing operation. This
includes considering whether incremental changes to the system’s functionality have extended the system beyond its
intended use.
Critical thinking can also be applied to ensure that the appropriate rigor is applied to change management to
minimize the frequency of periodic reviews and ensure the validated state is maintained, thus eliminating the need
for revalidation. Periodic review is discussed in more detail in the ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based
Approach to Operation of GxP Computerized Systems [34].
20.3.10	Retirement
Retirement is the last of the system life cycle phases and consists of withdrawal, decommissioning, and disposal.
Data may be retained for a period in its original system for reading, migrated to a new replacement system, or
migrated to another system for archive. Critical thinking and risk management are needed to effectively evaluate what
data needs to be retained, for what period of time, and how, such as:
•
Identifying what data needs to be archived and how to transfer that data if the archival solution is not the original
system. Data originally created in this system that has completed its retention period may be deleted from the
system so long as there are no legal holds associated with it.

--- PAGE 182 ---
Page 180
Appendix M12
•
Balancing the risk of data migration against the complexity of maintaining a legacy copy of the system.
•
Retaining legacy systems as a long-term solution to record readability because systems and software become
obsolete over time.
•
Understanding the diminishing value of data as it moves through the retention period and how that impacts
the controls required. Data recently created in the system may need to stay dynamic for a period. Data that is
inactive at this stage (i.e., only likely to be needed in an investigation or audit) may be retained in a static, easily
readable, and portable format rather than keep it available on the system in which it was created.
Planning the means to meaningfully view archived data if the original system that created the data is decommissioned
since data formats used between the original and archive system may differ.
Data migration is discussed in Appendix D7 and ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based Approach to
Operation of GxP Computerized Systems [34]. Automated migration tools provided as standard items by system
suppliers are often either assessed in detail or are used without considering the different types of problems that
might occur within the end-user’s system. The regulated company needs to consider the maturity of the supplier, the
robustness of the tool, and how well the tool meets their migration needs. Assurance of the tool should be focused on
actual use cases to test potential problems and confirm that it migrates correctly.
Automated test tools may be also leveraged to test the migrated data. Critical thinking is needed for planning how to
cleanse and verify that the data is ready for migration, how to assess the quality of the migrated data, how much data
needs to be checked, and how any errors created during the migration process may be detected.
Detailed guidance on system retirement is available in the ISPE GAMP Good Practice Guide: A Risk-Based Approach
to Operation of GxP Computerized Systems [34]. Further advice on handling mergers, acquisitions, and divestments
that can change data ownership and disrupt the data life cycle can be found in Section 3.7 of the ISPE GAMP RDI
Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity by Design [36].
20.3.11	 Inspection Readiness
Critical thinking should be applied to support ongoing regulated company compliance and inspection readiness.
Policies and procedures within the QMS can position where critical thinking should be applied, and plans,
specifications, and flexible templates can prompt specific considerations. The practical application of critical thinking
should be apparent in the rigor of the system activities and ongoing maintenance of the validated state. For example,
rationales should be available to explain how high-risk areas were assessed and identified. These rationales in turn
justify the level of effort, formality and documentation. A regulator will view the computerized system with a fresh pair
of eyes, and obvious viewpoints and decisions may not be self-evident to someone not involved in the initial activity.
During an inspection, a regulated company may need to provide evidence of the assessment and qualification of
their supplier (e.g., to satisfy EU GMP Chapter 7 [59] and EU GMP Annex 11 (3.1) [32]). Where supplier activities
and information are leveraged as part of the regulated company’s validation for intended use, information on supplier
assessment and management processes should be available for review.
Holding duplicate copies of supplier information that rightly belong in the supplier QMS is unnecessary, and brings the
risk of inconsistency and increased complexity for no quality benefit.
The regulated company may consider contractual agreements allowing access to critical supplier information under
specified extreme circumstances. It is prudent for regulated companies to consider checking such arrangements to
make sure they are practical and work before they are needed. For clinical trial specific systems, the EMA Q&A: Good
clinical practice (GCP) [60] states that the sponsor or Clinical Research Organization (CRO) must have “detailed
knowledge about the qualification documentation and can navigate in it and explain the activities as if they had
performed the activities themselves.” In such cases there should be a clear understanding of the relationship between
the supplier’s validation environment and the sponsor’s production environment, and established and effective
configuration management procedures.

--- PAGE 183 ---
Page 181
Appendix M12
20.3.12	Organizational Capability
The successful application of the preceding guidance on critical thinking is highly dependent on the ability of the
organization to build and maintain the necessary supportive mindset and culture within its workforce. Open and
constructive discussion between stakeholders is vital to evaluate and challenge the situation, the information,
assumptions, and organizational precedents in order to make better decisions based on agreed rationales.
The capability of an organization needs to be developed to become more efficient and effective in its application
of critical thinking. This capability build can be measured and consequently steered through a series of levels of
increasing maturity, for example, applying the maturity levels discussed in and ISPE GAMP Guide: Records and Data
Integrity [35] to the organizational critical-thinking capability [20] results in Table 20.1.
Table 20.1: Critical-Thinking Capability Maturity
Much of the benefit offered by critical thinking will come from the experience and knowledge of the SMEs planning,
specifying, implementing, testing, managing, and maintaining computerized systems. The SMEs can identify how
best to realize the opportunities offered by critical thinking within the regulated company. The key objective is that
computerized systems are fit for their intended use and efficiently maintained in a state of control.
Maturity Level
Capability
1
No application of critical thinking evident in decision-making either by practitioners or by
management
2
Some awareness of critical thinking within the organization but highly variable across
individuals and departments
3
Critical thinking is described in policies and procedures but is inconsistently applied
4
Critical thinking principles are fully incorporated and routinely applied in working practices
5
Critical thinking is respected as a core competency with organizational capability continually
improved

