1
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
1.0  Introduction and Scope
Data integrity is the cornerstone of establishing and maintaining confidence in the reliability of the 
data that assures product quality and patient safety. The reliability of manufacturing production 
and control data depends on the procedures, systems, processes, and controls in place to ensure data 
integrity. In production, these controls start at the point of data creation and continue through the 
entire data lifecycle, including the storage of data and the ability to retrieve it later to support the 
quality of the products manufactured. 
The term “data integrity” has evolved to denote the degree to which data are complete, consistent, 
enduring, and available (ALCOA+) as well as the degree to which the characteristics of the data are 
maintained for all operations throughout the data lifecycle. Pharmaceutical manufacturers need to 
ensure that relevant data are available to document and provide traceability to what occurred, that 
the data are attributable to the person who performed the activity and entered the data, and that the 
data cannot be deleted, omitted, or in any way modified to misrepresent what occurred. All breaches 
of data integrity, whether intentional or unintentional, must be investigated.
Advances in information technology and in-process monitoring sensors, coupled with lower costs of 
computer memory and better processors, has resulted in explosive growth in electronic data generation, 
acquisition, and storage. Applying a one-size-fits-all approach to data integrity controls established on 
principles developed decades ago may be neither valuable nor, in certain instances, feasible. Therefore, 
the use of a risk-based approach is essential to developing a robust data integrity program, considering 
the requirements from a data-lifecycle perspective. Risk-based concepts apply even as industry transitions 
from manual documentation systems to fully electronic or hybrid (manual and electronic) systems. 
This technical report addresses data integrity from the perspective of manufacturing operations. It 
discusses regulatory trends, risk management concepts, and recommendations for implementing ap-
propriate data integrity controls in manufacturing operations applicable to paper-based, electronic-
based and hybrid systems. The case studies included in this technical report provide examples of how 
to assess current data integrity risks and implement the concepts presented here.
1.1	
Purpose
The continuous and rapid advances in automation and information technology, availability of 
economical data storage, and superiority of electronic audit trail capabilities over paper records have 
compelled the pharmaceutical industry to rethink good manufacturing practices (GMP) controls. 
Among the consequences is a heightened awareness of the need to establish and maintain effec-
tive data integrity controls at every stage of the manufacturing process for drug products. While 
the requirement to maintain accurate and complete data is well recognized by industry, what is not 
universally understood is the level of data integrity control needed at each step to comply with GMP 
regulations. Many companies continue to struggle when deciding what controls are appropriate for 
each manufacturing operation and what levels of review and verification are necessary to ensure reli-
able manufacturing control data. This technical report describes an approach using quality risk man-
agement (QRM) for establishing and assessing the appropriateness of data integrity controls for each 
manufacturing operation based on the criticality and vulnerability of the data for its intended use.
Developed by subject matter experts from global industry and regulatory agencies, this technical 
report summarizes manufacturing data integrity risks and identifies best practices that can be used to 
develop and sustain robust documentation as well as data integrity management procedures, systems, 
processes, and controls. Employing these practices will help users achieve compliance with applicable 
laws, regulations, and directives for pharmaceutical products such as active pharmaceutical ingredi-
ents (APIs), solid oral dosage forms, sterile injectables, biologics, and vaccines. 
Assuring data integrity is an organizational responsibility. Employees at any facility that manufac-
tures, processes, packages, or holds a finished pharmaceutical, intermediate ingredient, or API are 
responsible for ensuring that data collected throughout the manufacturing process are accurate and 
reliable. Managers, quality assurance personnel, operators, technicians, and support staff alike must 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

2
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
remain aware of the significance of maintaining and documenting data integrity for the quality and 
safety of their products.
1.2	
Scope
The information in this technical report applies to the management of data at pharmaceutical facili-
ties that manufacture, process, package, or hold a finished pharmaceutical, API, or intermediate. 
Specifically, it addresses data pertaining to manufacturing operations, materials, facilities and equip-
ment, production, and packaging and labeling, including in-process controls and process analytical 
testing. It also applies to the procedures, systems, processes, and controls used at a drug facility to 
ensure that the drugs conform to applicable laws, regulations, and directives and that the data sup-
port the drug’s identity, strength, quality, and purity.
The methods and processes described here can be applied to facilities that manufacture drugs intend-
ed for use both in clinical trials and for commercial distribution. The principles may be extended to 
facilities engaged in other activities (such as distribution of finished products to customers) or prod-
ucts (such as components, raw materials, medical devices, and combination products), though these 
were not a principal consideration. This technical report is not intended to apply to data integrity 
management in clinical practice and the implementation of clinical trials. Data integrity manage-
ment in laboratory systems is discussed in PDA Technical Report No. 80: Data Integrity Management 
System for Pharmaceutical Laboratories (1), and data integrity management in quality management 
systems will be discussed in a future technical report.
2.0  Glossary and Abbreviations
Audit Trail
FDA
A secure, computer-generated, time-
stamped electronic record that allows for 
reconstruction of the course of events relating 
to the creation, modification, or deletion of 
an electronic record (2).
MHRA
Metadata containing information associated 
with actions that relate to the creation, 
modification or deletion of GXP records. An 
audit trail provides for secure recording of 
life-cycle details such as creation, additions, 
deletions or alterations of information in a 
record, either paper or electronic, without 
obscuring or overwriting the original record. 
An audit trail facilitates the reconstruction 
of the history of such events relating to the 
record regardless of its medium, including the 
“who, what, when and why” of the action (3).
WHO
The audit trail is a form of metadata that 
contains information associated with actions 
that relate to the creation, modification 
or deletion of GXP records. An audit trail 
provides for secure recording of life-cycle 
details such as creation, additions, deletions, 
or alterations of information in a record, 
either paper or electronic, without obscuring 
or overwriting the original record (4).
Audit Trail Review Assessment (ATRA)
A tool that can be used to help determine 
what elements within the audit trail should be 
reviewed, and the frequency at which the review 
should take place for each part of the audit trail 
where a review is required.
ALCOA+
Attributable
It should be possible to identify the individual 
or computerized system that performed the 
recorded task. The need to document who 
performed the task / function is, in part, to 
demonstrate that the function was performed 
by trained and qualified personnel. This 
applies to changes made to records as well: 
corrections, deletions, changes, etc. 
Legible
All records must be legible – the information 
must be readable in order for it to be of any use. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

3
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
This applies to all information that would be 
required to be considered Complete, including 
all Original records or entries. Where the 
‘dynamic’ nature of electronic data (the ability 
to search, query, trend, etc.) is important to the 
content and meaning of the record, the ability to 
interact with the data using a suitable application 
is important to the ‘availability’ of the record. 
Contemporaneous
The evidence of actions, events or decisions 
should be recorded as they take place. This 
documentation should serve as an accurate 
attestation of what was done, or what was 
decided and why, i.e., what influenced the 
decision at that time. 
Original
The original record can be described as the 
first-capture of information, whether recorded 
on paper (static) or electronically (usually 
dynamic, depending on the complexity of 
the system). Information that is originally 
captured in a dynamic state should remain 
available in that state. 
Accurate
Ensuring results and records are accurate is 
achieved through many elements of a robust 
pharmaceutical quality system. This can be 
composed of: 
–	
equipment-related factors such as quali-
fication, calibration, maintenance and 
computer validation. 
–	
policies and procedures to control actions 
and behaviors, including data review pro-
cedures to verify adherence to procedural 
requirements 
–	
deviation management including root 
cause analysis, impact assessments and 
CAPA 
–	
trained and qualified personnel who 
understand the importance of following 
established procedures and documenting 
their actions and decisions. 
Together, these elements aim to ensure the 
accuracy of information, including scientific 
data that is used to make critical decisions 
about the quality of products. 
Complete
All information that would be critical to 
recreating an event is important when 
trying to understand the event. The level of 
detail required for an information set to be 
considered complete would depend on the 
criticality of the information. A complete 
record of data generated electronically 
includes relevant metadata. 
Consistent
Good Documentation Practices should be 
applied throughout any process, without 
exception, including deviations that may 
occur during the process. This includes 
capturing all changes made to data. 
Enduring
Records must be kept in a manner such that 
they exist for the entire period during which 
they might be needed. This means they need 
to remain intact and accessible as an indelible/
durable record throughout the record 
retention period. 
Available
Records must be available for review at any 
time during the required retention period, 
accessible in a readable format to all applicable 
personnel who are responsible for their 
review whether for routine release decisions, 
investigations, trending, annual reports, audits 
or inspections (5). 
Critical Process (CP)
A process that impacts a critical quality at-
tribute of the intermediate, drug substance or 
drug product being manufactured and therefore 
should have established critical process param-
eters that can be monitored or controlled to 
ensure that the process produces the desired 
quality.
Critical Process Parameter (CPP)
A process parameter whose variability has 
an impact on a critical quality attribute and 
therefore should be monitored or controlled to 
ensure the process produces the desired quality.
Critical Quality Attribute (CQA)
A physical, chemical, biological or microbio-
logical property or characteristic that should be 
within an appropriate limit, range, or distribu-
tion to ensure the desired product quality.
Data Integrity
FDA
Refers to the completeness, consistency, and 
accuracy of data. Complete, consistent, and 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

4
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
accurate data should be attributable, legible, 
contemporaneously recorded, original or a 
true copy, and accurate (ALCOA) (2).
MHRA
The degree to which data are complete, 
consistent, accurate, trustworthy, reliable 
and that these characteristics of the data are 
maintained throughout the data life cycle. The 
data should be collected and maintained in a 
secure manner, so that they are attributable, 
legible, contemporaneously recorded, original 
(or a true copy) and accurate. Assuring data 
integrity requires appropriate quality and risk 
management systems, including adherence 
to sound scientific principles and good 
documentation practices (3).
WHO
The degree to which data are complete, 
consistent, accurate, trustworthy and reliable 
and that these characteristics of the data are 
maintained throughout the data life cycle. The 
data should be collected and maintained in a 
secure manner, such that they are attributable, 
legible, contemporaneously recorded, original 
or a true copy and accurate. Assuring data 
integrity requires appropriate quality and risk 
management systems, including adherence 
to sound scientific principles and good 
documentation practices (4).
Data Integrity Controls
Controls put in place to either minimize the po-
tential for a data integrity issue to occur or, if an 
issue does occur, the controls applied to increase 
the probability of detection.
Data Lake
A storage repository that holds, in a structured 
way, a vast amount of raw data, including meta-
data, in its native format until it is needed.
Data Lifecycle
MHRA
All phases in the life of the data (including raw 
data) from initial generation and recording 
through processing (including transformation 
or migration), use, data retention, archive/re-
trieval and destruction (3).
WHO
All phases of the process by which data is cre-
ated, processed, reviewed, analyzed and re-
ported, transferred, stored and retrieved and 
monitored until retirement or disposal. There 
should be a planned approach to assessing, 
monitoring and managing the data and the 
risks to those data in a manner commensurate 
with potential impact on patient safety, prod-
uct quality and/or the reliability of the deci-
sions made throughout all phases of the data 
life cycle (4).
Data Process Flow Map
A flow map that uses a baseline process flow 
map and overlays the data flow.
Data Vulnerability 
An indicator of data’s level of exposure to data 
integrity failures due to intrinsic weaknesses in 
manufacturing processes, data-capture tech-
nology, and human factors or a combination 
thereof. 
Detectability
The ability to discover or determine the exis-
tence, presence, or fact of a hazard (6). For pur-
poses of this technical report, a hazard typically 
would be a data integrity breach.
Gemba Walk
A method of walking through and personally 
observing processes.
Historian
A database/software program that archives auto-
mation and process data.
Looped Memory
An electronic system with limited storage capac-
ity that overwrites older data when it reaches 
that capacity.
Mitigation
Systematic steps taken or in place to reduce or 
limit the identified risk.
Peer Review
A review of data by a colleague who has a simi-
lar level of responsibilities as the person per-
forming the activity or capturing the data.
Quality Unit
An independent quality unit/structure with au-
thority to fulfill certain pharmaceutical quality 
system responsibilities (7).
Risk Control
Actions implementing risk management deci-
sions (8). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

5
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
True Copy
FDA
21 CFR 211.180(d) requires records to be 
retained “either as original records or true 
copies such as photocopies, microfilm, micro-
fiche, or other accurate reproductions of the 
original records” (9). Electronic copies can 
be used as true copies of paper or electronic 
records, provided the copies preserve the 
content and meaning of the original or raw 
data, which includes metadata required to 
reconstruct the CGMP activity and the static 
or dynamic nature of the original records (2). 
MHRA
A copy (irrespective of the type of media used) 
of the original record that has been verified (i.e., 
by a dated signature or by generation through 
a validated process) to have the same informa-
tion, including data that describe the context, 
content, and structure, as the original (3).
WHO
A copy of an original recording of data that 
has been verified and certified to confirm it is 
an exact and complete copy that preserves the 
entire content and meaning of the original re-
cord including, in the case of electronic data, 
all essential metadata and the original record 
format as appropriate (4). 
2.1	
Abbreviations
AHU/HVAC  Air Handling Unit/Heating, 
Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
ALCOA	 Attributable, Legible, Contemporaneous, 
Original, and Accurate
API	
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient 
APIC	 Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients 
Committee
APR	
Annual Product Review
BMS	
Building Management System
BPR	
Batch Processing Record
CAPA	 Corrective Action, Preventive Action
CFR	
Code of Federal Regulations
CP	
Critical Process
EBR	
Electronic Batch Recording
FDA	
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
GAMP	Good Automated Manufacturing Practice
GMP	 Good Manufacturing Practices
GxP	
Good practice quality guidelines for 
various fields
HMI	
Human machine interface
ICH	
International Conference on Harmonization
IS/IT	
Information Security/Information 
Technology
ISPE	
International Society for 
Pharmaceutical Engineering
MES	
Manufacturing Execution System
MHRA	Medicines and Healthcare products 
Regulatory Agency
NCR	
Noncompliance Report
NMPA	National Medical Products Administra-
tion (China)
OOS	
Out of specification
PIC/S	 Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention 
and Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-
operation Scheme
PLC	
Programmable Logic Controller
QMS	 Quality Management Systems
QRM	 Quality Risk Management
SID&GP	 Russian State Institute of Drugs and 
Good Practices
SOP	
Standard Operating Procedure
TGA	
Australian Therapeutic Goods 
Administration
WHO	 World Health Organization
WL	
Warning Letter
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

6
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
3.0  Data Integrity Trends at International Drug Manufacturers
3.1	
Historical Perspective
In 1963, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued its current good manufacturing 
practices (GMP) regulations for processing, packing, or holding drugs and its major revision in 1978 
under 21 CFR Part 211 (10-11). Since that time, the FDA has acted upon data integrity violations 
detected during its GMP inspections of pharmaceutical manufacturers. Unique skill sets are required 
to detect data integrity problems and collect evidence to establish GMP violations. These skill sets 
can be acquired through focused training on prevailing good documentation practices, including 
the technology, or lack thereof, used for documenting GMP activities and the associated data and 
human behavior.
The assessment of data integrity procedures, processes, systems, and controls using a consistent, 
structured approach and forensic techniques was not always a primary focus during FDA inspec-
tions. Periodically, the detection of egregious and unethical events causes FDA to redouble its 
efforts and refocus its attention on lapses in data integrity. For example, during the late 1980s and 
early 1990s, FDA uncovered data integrity violations at a large number of U.S.-based generic drug 
manufacturers (and some innovator companies) in what was later dubbed the “generic drug scandal.” 
The FDA discovered widespread falsification of production and control records and found that many 
abbreviated new drug applications contained falsified data and other serious data integrity violations. 
Several individuals from the industry and the FDA were criminally prosecuted, and the scandal 
prompted FDA to establish in 1990 a pre-approval inspection program (12) that remains in effect 
today. That program requires successful FDA pre-approval inspections as a condition of approval for 
drugs and biologics; subsequently, other major health authorities established similar pre-approval 
inspection programs. Then, in 1997, the FDA promulgated a regulation related to computer system 
electronic records and signatures for digital data in 21 CFR Part 11 (13). 
These developments impacted industry practices, too. Data integrity became a focus of companies, 
industry conferences, and industry best practice documents such as the International Society for 
Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE) good automated manufacturing practice (GAMP) guides and 
PDA technical reports. Data integrity awareness and expertise increased among pharmaceutical 
professionals, and the incidence of data integrity problems reported by FDA during its GMP inspec-
tions of domestic and international pharmaceutical manufacturers declined. Egregious data integrity 
violations, however, still resulted in sanctions. 
Starting in the late 1990s, the advent of the internet and growth in information technology fueled 
increased globalization of pharmaceutical supply chains. This rapid expansion roused regulators’ 
concerns about data integrity. In 2007, FDA reported that it had found objectionable data integrity 
issues at 3 of the 10 companies it had recently inspected on this topic (14). In the years immedi-
ately following, FDA again refocused its attention on data integrity practices. Since then, FDA has 
included data integrity citations in more than 200 warning letters sent to companies in more than 20 
countries. 
Since 2012, inspections by the FDA, European Medicines Agency (EMA), Medicines and Health-
care products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), World Health Organization (WHO), and other health 
authorities have revealed a notable increase in the incidence of data integrity issues at international 
manufacturers of APIs and finished pharmaceuticals worldwide. The prevalence and significance of 
the data integrity lapses discovered in recent years has led regulators to make data integrity a primary 
focus during inspections, and regulators are detecting data integrity lapses with increasing frequency. 
Pharmaceutical regulators continue to find conditions and practices that compromise data integrity, 
among them human errors, inadequate management oversight, insufficient employee training, sys-
tem failures, inappropriate qualification or configuration of systems, poor procedures or not follow-
ing procedures, and intentional acts of falsification.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

