29
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.3.3.2-1	 Data Integrity Control Grid for Data Accuracy when Transcribing Manually Recorded Data into an 
Electronic System
Transcription of Manually Recorded 
Data into an Electronic System
High Data  
Criticality
Medium Data 
Criticality
Low Data  
Criticality
Prevention Control
Second review required for data 
transcription – Who?
Supervisor or Quality 
Unit
Peer
None
5.3.3.3	 True Copy (Paper to Electronic)
Table 5.3.3.3-1 illustrates the controls needed for creation of a true copy, going from a paper record 
to an electronic record. True copies must be maintained using the same controls that applied to the 
original paper record.
For High-criticality records, such as paper batch records that may be needed for downstream use by 
a sister site or another department, a trained user can make the true copy, but a second person from 
the quality unit must perform a documented review. The review must ensure the scan is legible, ac-
curate, and complete (all pages, all entries) and confirm that all entries on the true copy provide all 
information and data that are contained on the original record. For example, if data is color-coded 
or highlighted, the true copy must reflect the same color-coding or highlighting, with the intent of 
capturing the context and meaning. In addition, the original record may be discarded with quality 
unit oversight, unless the original document has a seal, watermark, or similar identifying mark that 
cannot be accurately reproduced electronically, in which case it cannot be discarded. The quality unit 
should determine the level of oversight required for destruction, which may range from quality unit 
presence during destruction to periodic confirmation of compliance with procedures. 
For Medium-criticality records, like a validation protocol, a trained user can make the true copy. A 
documented second-person review is required, though the second person need not be from the qual-
ity unit. The original record may be discarded by the operating unit unless the original document has 
a seal, watermark, or identifying mark. While the quality unit does not need to be directly involved 
in the destruction process, it must retain a suitable level of oversight to ensure the procedures are 
followed.
For Low-criticality records, such as completed user access authorization forms where evidence of 
training exists in another system, the person making the true copy must document that they re-
viewed the scan for legibility, accuracy, and completeness. The original may be discarded by the 
individual, with quality unit oversight to ensure that procedures are followed.
As with all controls relating to data integrity, processes relating to true copies, regardless of critical-
ity, must be documented in SOPs. A record must be maintained to reflect when each document was 
destroyed and who destroyed it.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

30
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
Table 5.2.3.3-1	 Data Integrity Control Grid for True Copy (Paper to Electronic)
True Copy (Paper to 
Electronic)
High Data Criticality
Medium Data 
Criticality
Low Data Criticality
Prevention Control
Review requirements
Documented review 
by second person from 
the quality unit for 
legibility, accuracy, and 
completeness
Documented review 
by second person 
(not necessarily from 
the quality unit) for 
legibility, accuracy, and 
completeness
Documented verification 
by person performing 
the scan for legibility, 
accuracy, and 
completeness
Discard of original 
allowed
Yes, as defined by 
quality unit oversight, 
unless there is a seal, 
watermark, or other 
identifier that can’t be 
accurately reproduced 
electronically. 
Yes, performed by 
the operating unit, 
unless there is a seal, 
watermark, or other 
identifier that can’t be 
accurately reproduced 
electronically.
Quality unit oversight 
required
Yes, individual can 
discard original
Quality unit oversight 
required
5.3.4	 Access Controls for Electronic Systems
Access controls to electronic systems are required to prevent potential data integrity issues from oc-
curring. Table 5.3.4-1 describes several differentiable controls related to access to electronic systems. 
For systems storing High-criticality data, such as an MES, historian, or filter integrity tester used 
during sterile filling, unique identification and authentication controls should be in place for each 
individual user. Other features also should be available for use, such as mandatory password changes 
every 90 days, lock-out after five failed attempts, password recycling only allowed after 10 cycles, and 
an annual review of user accounts. 
For systems storing Medium-criticality data, like parameter-setting or executed run files for a wash-
ing machine, many of the controls for systems storing Highly critical data likewise should be ap-
plied. Certain measures can be less stringent: mandatory password changes can occur every 180 days 
(instead of 90), passwords can be recycled after 5 cycles (instead of 10), and users locked-out after 10 
incorrect tries (instead of 5). 
For Low-critical systems, for example, an HMI on a secondary packaging line that controls conveyor 
speed but does not store data, the access controls may be far less rigorous. For these types of systems, 
a passcode or group accounts are acceptable. Controls must be in place, however, to ensure segre-
gation of duties between user levels (i.e., administrator vs. engineer vs. operator). The passcode or 
group accounts should be changed annually. These controls may also be used for other Low-critical 
activities that do not require the action to be attributable. For example, a group account may be used 
to press the start/stop button on a packaging line when the system requires a log-in to activate the 
stop/start function.
Automatic log-out is not discussed as a differentiated control but should be considered as an overall 
control factor. The amount of time that should be allowed to pass before an inactive user is automati-
cally logged-out should be commensurate with the risks identified, and documented accordingly
As stated above, the suggested frequencies at which certain activities should take place are illustra-
tive only. Organizations should determine the frequencies that are most applicable to their opera-
tions using a risk-based approach to ensure that the periodicity of activities is commensurate with 
the risks identified. This assessment should consider the overall system architecture, the interfaces 
between systems, criticality of access by unauthorized persons, and the potential for network security 
breaches. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

31
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.3.4-1	
Data Integrity Control Grid for Access Controls for Electronic Systems 
Access Controls for 
Electronic Systems
High Data Criticality
Medium Data 
Criticality
Low Data Criticality
Prevention Control
Access to Electronic 
systems – HOW
Identification and 
authentication (User ID 
+ Password)
Identification and 
authentication (User ID 
+ Password)
Passcode/group 
account based on role & 
information access
Password change 
frequency
Every 90 days
Every 180 days
Annually
Periodic user account 
access review
Annually
Annually
Every 2 years
Account lock-out after 
repeated incorrect 
password entries
5 incorrect password 
entries
10 incorrect password 
entries
Never
Password recycling 
– Reuse of previously 
used passwords
10 cycles
5 cycles
N/A
5.3.5	 Electronic Audit Trail Review
Audit trails are a form of metadata that records details such as the creation, addition, deletion, or 
alteration of data within a system. An audit trail provides controls for secure recording of lifecycle 
details, without overwriting the original record. Where equipment (e.g., instruments, devices) are 
used to capture, create, process, report, store, or archive relevant GMP data electronically, the system 
design must always include the provision and retention of a suitable audit trail. 
Secure, computer-generated, time-stamped audit trails must allow for reconstruction of the history 
of events relating to the record, including the “who, what, and when” of the action. Where techni-
cally possible, comments should be added, in the case of modifications or corrections, so that the 
why of the activity also is recorded as part of the audit trail. Where not technically possible to record 
in the audit trail the reasons for changes or deletions to GMP-relevant data, alternate documentation 
should be used.
The electronic audit trail may comprise multiple sources related to the equipment; that is, the infor-
mation may be held in files called something other than “Audit Trail,” for example, event log, alarm 
log, system log, history file, trends, or reports. Understanding where the information is recorded 
within the system, at both the operating system and application level, is important to help protect 
the data and understand where in the system to look when performing an audit trail review. 
In the following sections, audit trail review is discussed for three different types of data contained 
within the electronic audit trails: 
• 
Data associated with batch setup, for example, the recipe used, and the set-points or times 
planned for specific activities during the batch
• 
Batch run data, which is data from the manufacturing process, for example, temperatures, dura-
tion of activities, who performed the activities
• 
System configuration data, which are not batch-relevant data but the data associated with the 
configuration of the system, for example, user-account information, privileges granted to users, 
where data is stored
Reviewing audit trails enables detection of potential data integrity issues. Some regulations require 
that audit trails be reviewed on a periodic basis (2-3). There is no expectation that every part of the 
audit trail will be reviewed for every batch; rather, it is expected that a risk-based approach will be 
taken to identify the appropriate level of review to conduct. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

32
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
The person performing the audit trail review must be independent and technically capable of under-
standing the audit trail. The person should not have been involved in the creation or verification of 
the data being reviewed. 
5.3.5.1	 Audit Trail Review Assessment 
An audit trail review assessment (ATRA) is a risk-based tool that can help determine which elements 
within the audit trail should be reviewed, and the appropriate frequency. The tool may be used for 
any system that has an electronic audit trail, for example, systems directly used in manufacturing as 
well as supporting systems such as building automation and water for injection. 
The ATRA focuses on the detectability of changes to the data, the criticality of the data (in terms of 
patient safety or product quality), and the probability or capability for changes to the data to occur. 
A cross-functional team should be assembled to conduct the ATRA. The team should comprise 
people who fully understand the technical capabilities and limitations of the system, how the system 
is set up (from a user management perspective), where the data is stored, what type of data is part of 
the audit trail. The team also should include users who are familiar with operating the system. 
The first step in the process is to score each of the three factors—detectability, severity, and prob-
ability—that may require review based on the system controls in place for each element in the audit 
trail. For each factor, a lower score represents lower risk. Examples of scores that may be used are 
provided in this section, although each entity may modify the scoring based on its own analysis and 
risk tolerance. 
• 
Detectability Score is based upon the likelihood that modification or deletion of data will be de-
tected. There are two possible Detectability Scores: 1 or zero.
If it is possible to detect any modifications or deletions to the data contained within the audit 
trail, and this data is already reviewed as part of an existing review as required by SOP, perform-
ing additional review of the audit trail to detect potential data integrity issues is not required. 
For example, if the batch report lists the critical parameters used during manufacturing and 
shows any changes made to these parameters during batch manufacturing, an audit trail review 
of the same information need not be conducted. (This assumes that the batch report is generated 
automatically from the equipment and cannot be manipulated.) Score = 0.
If the data has not already been reviewed or has only been partially reviewed (i.e., not all criti-
cal data is in scope of the batch-wise data review), further assessment of the audit trail may be 
required. Score = 1.
• 
Severity Score is based upon the data criticality; it assesses the potential impact if data is modified 
or deleted. There are three possible Severity Scores: 10, 4, or 1.
If the data is considered Highly critical or has a direct impact on patient safety or product qual-
ity (e.g., changing the temperature to make it appear it was within the validated range, despite 
being outside the range), the potential impact is of high severity. Score = 10.
If the data has an indirect impact on patient safety or product quality, i.e., changes to data that 
result in a compliance risk only, with indirect impact to only product quality or patient safety 
(e.g., changes to time zone where the raw data and batch-related data is not affected), it is of 
medium potential severity. Score = 4.
If the data has negligible or no impact on patient safety or product quality (e.g., the start time of 
an operation, provided that this is not a CPP and does not affect duration), it is of low potential 
severity. Score = 1.
• 
Probability Score is based on the capability of the data to be modified or deleted by system users 
and administrators. There are three possible Probability Scores: 10, 2, or 1.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

33
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
If the data can be modified or deleted by a user, the chance that such changes will happen is 
higher. “User” refers to any person not identified as an independent administrator; “power users” 
are considered users. Score = 10.
If the data cannot be modified or deleted by a user but can be modified or deleted by an inde-
pendent administrator (i.e., an individual with no direct interest in the data), the chance that 
such changes will occur is lower. Score = 2.
If the data cannot be modified or deleted by any user or administrator, it is considered a very low 
probability. Score = 1.
Next, the three scores (Detectability, Severity, and Probability) are multiplied to provide the ATRA 
final score. The lower the score, the lower the risk. 
Table 5.3.5.1-1 illustrates how the final score can be used to determine the needed frequency of 
review. Some examples are provided in Section 5.3.5.2 that highlight how this can be used together 
with different elements of the audit trail to determine the full audit trail review requirements for a 
system. 
Table 5.3.5.1-1	 ATRA Final Score and Frequency Review 
Frequency of 
System Use
Needed Frequency of Audit Trail Review
0–10 Score 
11–20 Score
40 Score
100 Score
Daily / Weekly
Event-based
Twice per year
Weekly
Batch-wise
Monthly
Event-based
Yearly
Monthly
Batch-wise
Less Than Monthly
Event-based
Every 2 years
Quarterly
Batch-wise
The timeframes indicated are illustrative only. Organizations should assess their systems and apply 
critical thinking when considering the criticality of the activity being performed as well as the poten-
tial for impact on product quality and patient safety. Using a risk-based approach, the periodicity of 
reviews should be commensurate with the risks identified. 
If during periodic review a number of data integrity breaches are discovered, the controls that are 
(or should be) in place and/or the frequency of the review should be reevaluated to prevent future 
breaches or to detect breaches sooner.
5.3.5.2	 Practical Examples of ATRA
An audit trail contains data from (1) batch setup data, (2) batch run data, and (3) system configura-
tion data. Each of these parts of the audit trail have a number of elements that could be considered 
for audit trail review. Hence, the ATRA tool should be used for each individual element to deter-
mine the final score.
Elements for the batch setup data and batch run data parts of the audit trail, where data controls 
may be vulnerable and may have an impact on critical batch data, might include:
• 
Were any of the recipe parameters modified outside the validated range during the execution of 
the batch?
• 
Were changes made to CPPs (set points or allowed tolerance ranges) during manufacturing? 
Were these within the validated ranges?
• 
Were the calculation parameters edited or modified?
• 
Were changes to the time made that impact the duration of (time-sensitive) parts of manufactur-
ing, i.e., an operation ran longer or shorter than was expected?
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

34
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
• 
Were segregation of duties in place where required and was the person who performed the activ-
ity authorized to perform it (e.g., different reviewer and approver)?
• 
Were there GMP-relevant incidents, for example, GMP critical alarms?
• 
Was any data relevant to batch quality modified or deleted? 
Similarly, for the system configuration data, a number of elements may be vulnerable and should be 
considered when using the ATRA tool, such as:
• 
Were changes made to the system date or time?
• 
Was the report template or any batch report modified, edited, deleted, or renamed?
• 
What changes have been made to user access accounts or the privileges assigned at the user level? 
Do these changes still ensure segregation of duties?
• 
Were any edits, modifications, or deletions made to the system configuration (e.g., administra-
tion changes, database settings, change of data storage location, system settings or functionality)?
• 
Were there changes, edits, or deletions of audit trails, history logs, or files? Were any renamed?
• 
Was any unusual activity recorded in the user activities log (login, logoff, unauthorized logins)?
Systems with high technical capabilities that are being fully utilized (e.g., strong access control, segre-
gation of duties) are less vulnerable, therefore, a significantly reduced frequency of audit trail review 
is acceptable. On the other hand, if the system has limited technical capabilities (e.g., no difference 
between administrator and operator privileges), the system is more vulnerable, and a more extensive 
review of the audit trail would be appropriate. 
Table 5.3.5.2-1 contains a few examples of how the ATRA tool can be used for a filter integrity 
tester. The example does not represent a full ATRA review for a filter integrity tester but covers a few 
audit trail elements for demonstrative purposes to clarify the use of an ATRA.
The scores in these examples are based on the definitions in Section 5.3.5.1. A brief explanation is 
added to justify the scoring. The scores for detectability, severity, and probability are multiplied, giv-
ing a Final Score. Then, the data in Table 5.3.5.1-1 is used to determine the frequency of audit trail 
review for that element (Outcome).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

35
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
Table 5.3.5.2-1	 Example of How ATRA Tool is Used to Score a Filter Integrity Tester
Audit Trail Element
Detectability 
Score
Severity 
Score
Probability 
Score
Final Score
Comments
Batch Setup Data 
element: Changes to recipes
1
10
2
20
Detectability = 1. Will not be detected by any other review during batch review process.
Severity = 10. If the recipe is modified, it can impact the result obtained, and potentially product 
quality. 
Probability = 2. Operators do not have access to change set-points in recipes.
Outcome – Audit trail review twice per year for changes to recipes is required, as the equipment is 
used daily.
Batch Run Data element: 
Changes to test result
0
10
1
0
Detectability = 0. The pass / fail result is part of the printout.
Severity = 10. If the result is modified this can have a direct impact on product quality. 
Probability = 1. The result is generated automatically and it is not possible for any user to modify 
the result obtained.
Outcome – An audit trail review is not required to check for changes to test results as it is not 
possible to change test results, and the data is part of the batch report.
Batch Run Data element: 
Repeated or aborted tests
1
10
10
100
Detectability = 1. The operator can hide a printout from an aborted or rerun test which will not be 
detected.
Severity = 10. Failure to disclose all test results may have an impact on product quality. 
Probability = 10. This is a manual operation, so a score of 10 is assigned.
Outcome – A batchwise audit trail review is required to check for repeat tests or aborted runs not 
included as part of the batch data package.
System Configuration 
Data element: Changes to 
user access / permissions
1
10
2
20
Detectability = 1. Will not be detected by any other review during batch review process.
Severity = 10. If the user access or privileges are modified, users may have access to perform 
activities that can potentially impact product quality. 
Probability = 2. Operators do not have access to change user privileges or grant new user access, 
only administrators have the required access
Outcome – Audit trail review twice per year for changes to user accounts and privilege levels is 
required, as the equipment is used daily.
System Configuration 
Data element: Changes to 
data storage location
1
4
2
8
Detectability = 1. Will not be detected by any other review during batch review process.
Severity = 4. A potential compliance issue may arise should the change of location not be setup 
correctly. 
Probability = 2. Only administrators have the required access
Outcome – Despite the equipment being used daily, the ATRA indicates that a review of the audit 
trail to check for changes to the data storage location is only required if there is a triggering event, such 
as a deviation.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

36
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
Conclusions that can be drawn from the examples in Table 5.3.5.1-1 are:
• 
An audit trail review should be performed batchwise to check for any aborted or repeat tests or 
aborted runs not included as part of the batch data package.
• 
An audit trail review should be performed every six months to check for changes made by the 
administrator to recipes, user accounts, or privilege levels assigned to users.
• 
A review of the audit trail for changes to pass/fail results is not required.
• 
A review of the audit trail to check the storage location for data is only required should a trigger-
ing event prompt a specific review of this data.
Completing the ATRA for the other elements of the audit trail will allow the user to more fully un-
derstand the parts of the audit trail that require review and the necessary frequency of that review. 
5.3.6	 Backup of Electronic Data
The next category relates to preventive controls associated with the backup of electronic data. Two 
different scenarios have been identified where it is acceptable to differentiate the controls applied 
based on criticality. 
The first scenario relates to the frequency of performing the backup of the manufacturing data stored 
electronically. Companies should consider developing a principle-based backup strategy in order to 
differentiate the frequency of backups. This strategy should take into account the company’s risk 
tolerance, i.e., how manufacturing activities can be recreated in the event of a system failure when 
data has not been backed up. If the only evidence of an activity that impacts the safety and/or quality 
of the product is through the lost electronic data, the company must be prepared to reject the batch, 
and a more frequent backup may be warranted. On the other hand, if the major activities can be 
recreated using other means (e.g., printouts, manually recorded information), that may be used to 
justify a less-frequent backup of electronic data. 
In addition, the volume of data being generated within a given time period and the capability of 
the electronic system to store that volume of data without overwriting existing data should also be 
considered. This situation will be further discussed in the second scenario. 
If the equipment is capable of automated backups, backups are recommended at the same frequency 
at which data is generated. If new data is being generated daily (e.g., using an MES or historian), a 
daily backup is warranted. 
The second scenario is associated with looped memory. For the purposes of this technical report, 
looped memory is used in an electronic system with a limited storage capacity. Once the capacity 
limit is reached, new data automatically overwrites older data. For example, in a compression ma-
chine capable of storing 10 batches worth of data, the data for Batch 11 automatically overwrites the 
data for Batch 1.
Table 5.3.6-1 describes controls for systems with a looped memory. For systems storing Highly 
critical data, like certain makes or models of filter integrity testers used in sterile filling operations, 
the backup should occur before the data is overwritten. A similar expectation should be in place for 
systems storing Medium-critical data, such as a pH meter used on the shop floor. For systems storing 
Low-critical data, like secondary packaging systems that do not store data relating to quality attri-
butes or such parameters as expiry dates, the backup should ensure that the data will not be overwrit-
ten before batch disposition has occurred. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

37
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.3.6-1	
Data Integrity Control Grid for Data Backup for System with Limited Storage Capacity
Backup of Electronic Data
High Data Criticality
Medium Data Criticality
Low Data Criticality
Prevention Control
Looped Memory
Perform backup before 
data is overwritten
Perform backup before 
data is overwritten
Ensure availability until 
batch disposition is 
complete
5.3.7	 Use of Electronic Data
Once electronic data is generated, the information may be further processed in numerous ways. In 
the two scenarios described in Sections 5.3.7.1 and 5.3.7.2, the controls to be applied may be dif-
ferentiated based on criticality: when electronic data is exported to generate reports or records, and 
when data is transferred or migrated between electronic systems. These controls are targeted at the 
data and record levels to help prevent a data integrity incident from occurring.
5.3.7.1	 Exporting Electronic Data to Generate Reports and Records
Table 5.3.7.1-1 identifies prevention controls related to reports and records generation. For reports 
and records used to display High-critical data, such as a batch record from an MES used for making 
release decisions, validation with change control and appropriate test plans is required for changes 
to the report template. The validation should ensure that the report or record is accurate, and that 
all data displayed will remain unchanged from the electronic raw data. IT or automation personnel 
should perform these changes to the template and ensure that the content of the reports and records 
are static and cannot be altered in any way. 
For reports and records related to Medium-critical data, such as a building management system 
monitoring temperature and humidity, IT or automation personnel should perform an initial valida-
tion. Any changes to the report template should be performed following SOPs, but revalidation of 
the template would not be required. That the report contains limited flexibility (via filters or drop 
downs) and is working as intended is acceptable, so the user may run these reports based on a pre-
defined set of filters or criteria. 
For reports and records displaying Low-critical data, verification governed by work instructions 
should suffice. The business unit creates these reports and records, and their content may be flexible 
in nature, for example, exporting data into a data lake for future non-GMP analysis. 
Regardless of the criticality, the quality unit should review and approve changes to report templates, 
especially for any changes that could impact the information displayed.
Table 5.3.7.1-1	 Data Integrity Control Grid for Data Export for Generation of Reports and Records
Data Export or Generation of 
Report and Records
High Data Criticality
Medium Data 
Criticality
Low Data Criticality
Prevention Control
Report validation, 
verification
Validation, revalidation if 
changed
Initial validation only
Verification
Documentation of 
changes in reports
Change control and test 
plan
Procedural control
Work instructions
Modification of template 
performed by
IT/Automation unit
IT/Automation unit
Business unit
Report content flexibility
Static/fixed
Limited flexibility, drop-
downs or predefined 
selection criteria
Flexible, based on criteria 
defined in the work 
instructions
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

38
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
5.3.7.2	 Data Transfer and Migration Between Electronic Systems
The technical report team also identified different levels of control that may be applicable for the 
transfer or migration of electronic data based on criticality, as illustrated in Table 5.3.7.2-1.
For High- or Medium-critical data transfers and migrations, the transfer of the electronic data should 
be prepared using full change control, with a test plan in place to ensure that all data is transferred. 
It also is advisable to use a verification tool, such as a checksum, to confirm that all data sent was 
received. Two examples of this type of transfer are presented in this section.
One example is the migration of data from one platform to another as part of a software or hard-
ware upgrade, for example, when moving from one software version to another, moving from an old 
server to a new server, or moving to the cloud is one type of transfer. This is generally considered a 
once-off activity specifically associated with the upgrade. 
A second example is the transfer of High- and Medium-critical batch data (e.g., CPPs, calibration 
records, environmental monitoring data) from a standalone system to an upper-level system like an 
MES or data historian. This type of data transfer occurs on a defined periodic basis (e.g., once a day, 
once a week, after each batch) based on how the data transfer has been set up. For both examples, 
the transfer or migration of the data should be safeguarded by change control, a test plan, and a tool 
to verify that all the data have been transferred or migrated.
Data of varying criticalities are regularly transferred into different formats for making continuous 
process verification conclusions, for example, transferring data into a data lake for further trending or 
analysis. These are considered Low-critical transfers, so a procedural control is adequate for describ-
ing the steps to be taken to transfer the data.
Table 5.3.7.2-1	 Data Integrity Control Grid for Data Transfer and Migration Between Electronic Systems
Data Transfer and Migration
High Data Criticality
Medium Data Criticality
Low Data Criticality
Prevention Control
Data migration – How 
executed to ensure 
complete transfer of data
Under change control 
with test plan
Under change control 
with test plan
Under procedural 
control
Verification of data 
migration
Checksum, or 
equivalent tool, that 
confirms all data sent 
was received
Checksum, or equivalent 
tool, that confirms all 
data sent was received
N/A
6.0 
Controls for Big Data as it Relates to Data Integrity
Pharmaceutical manufacturing data is being collected at an accelerated rate, beyond human processing 
capability using traditional mechanisms. These challenges increasingly drive the need for governance and 
active controls of data and information. Processes, roles, and standards must be created to allow the effec-
tive and efficient use of information and technology tools to enable an organization to achieve its goals. 
A forthcoming PDA technical report will provide additional guidance on governance and controls 
for big data in manufacturing. That technical report will address topics such as data classification, 
data ownership, access management, source data, results and data insights, and change management, 
within the framework of governance and controls of big data in manufacturing. 
Collectively, these two technical reports will provide guidance on the management of data and big 
data in a regulated pharmaceutical or biopharmaceutical facility. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

39
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7.0 
References
1.	
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report 
No. 80: Data Integrity Management System for 
Pharmaceutical Laboratories; PDA: Bethesda, 
Md., 2018; p 63.
2.	
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Data 
Integrity and Compliance with cGMP: Questions 
and Answers, Guidance for Industry; U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services: Silver 
Spring, Md., 2018.
3.	
Medicines and Healthcare products Regula-
tory Agency. ‘GXP’ Data Integrity Guidance and 
Definitions, Rev. 1; MHRA: London, 2018.
4.	
World Health Organization. Annex 5: Draft 
Guidance on Good Data and Record Manage-
ment Practices; WHO: Geneva, 2016 p46.
5.	
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/Co-
operation Scheme (PIC/S). Draft PIC/S Good 
Practices for Data Management and Integrity in 
Regulated GMP/GDP Environments; PIC/S: 
Geneva, 2018.
6.	
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report 
No. 54-2: Implementation of Quality Risk Man-
agement for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology 
Manufacturing Operations, Annex 1: Case Study 
Examples for Quality Risk Management in Pack-
aging and Labeling; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2013.
7.	
International Conference for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q10: Pharmaceutical Quality 
System; ICH: Geneva, 2008.
8.	
International Conference for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Manage-
ment; ICH: Geneva, 2005.
9.	
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR 
Part 211–Current Good Manufacturing Practice 
for Finished Pharmaceuticals, Subpart J–Records 
and Reports; Government Publishing Office: 
Washington, D.C., 2005.
10.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. PART 
133—Drugs; Current Good Manufacturing 
Practice in Manufacture, Processing, Packing, 
or Holding. Fed Regist 1963, 28 (120, Part II), 
6385-87.
11.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Current 
Good Manufacturing Practice in Manufacture, 
Processing, PackIng, or Holding. Fed Regist 
1978, 43 (44813 (Sept. 29, 1978), Book 2), 
45014-336.
12.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA 
Compliance Program Guidance Manual; 
7346.832 (5/12/2010), Pre-Approval Inspec-
tions. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2010.
13.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR 
Part 11, Electronic Records; Electronic Signa-
tures—Scope and Application; Pharmaceuti-
cal CGMPs. Government Publishing Office: 
Washington, D.C., 2003.
14.	 F-D-C Reports, Inc. Data Manipulation is 
Being Uncovered and Referred for Criminal 
Investigation. The Gold Sheet 2007, 41 (4).
15.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warn-
ing Letter No. 320-19-29 to Indoco Remedies 
Limited, dated 7/9/2019; Office of Compliance, 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services: 
Silver Spring, Md., 2019.
16.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Warn-
ing Letter No. 320-20-15 to Apollo Health and 
Beauty Care, Inc., dated 12/23/2019; Office of 
Compliance, Center for Drug Evaluation and 
Research. U.S. Department of Health and Hu-
man Services: Silver Spring, Md., 2019.
17.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR 
58 Good Laboratory Practice for Nonclinical 
Laboratory Studies; U.S. Department of Health 
& Human Services: Washington, DC, 1978.
18.	 World Health Organization. Good Chromatog-
raphy Practices, Draft for Comments (July 2019) 
WHO: Geneva, 2019.
19.	 China National Medical Products Administra-
tion. Draft Drug Data Management Standard; 
NMPA: Beijing, 2016.
20.	 Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration. 
Data Management and Data Integrity (DMDI); 
TGA: Symonston ACT, Australia, 2017.
21.	 Federal State Institute of Drugs and Good 
Practices. Guidelines: Data Integrity & Computer 
System Validation; SID&GP: Moscow, 2018.
22.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Elements of a Code 
of Conduct for Data Integrity in the Pharma-
ceutical Industry; PDA. PDA: Bethesda, Md., 
2016. https://www.pda.org/scientific-and-
regulatory-affairs/regulatory-resources/code-of-
conduct/elements-of-a-code-of-conduct-for-
data-integrity-in-the-pharmaceutical-industry 
(accessed Aug 15 2019).
23.	 International Society for Pharmaceutical 
Engineering. GAMP Guide: Records & Data 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

40
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
Integrity; ISPE: Bethesda, Md., 2017.
24.	 International Society for Pharmaceutical Engi-
neering. Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity - 
Key Concepts; ISPE: Bethesda, Md., 2018.
25.	 Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients Committee 
(APIC). Practical Risk-Based Guide for Manag-
ing Data Integrity APIC/Cefic: Online, 2019.
26.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report 
No. 54: Implementation of Quality Risk Man-
agement for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology 
Manufacturing Operations; PDA: Bethesda, 
Md., 2012; p 60.
27.	 International Conference for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q8(R2): Pharmaceutical 
Development; ICH Geneva, 2009.
28.	 International Conference for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q12: Technical and Regula-
tory Considerations for Pharmaceutical Product 
Lifecycle Management, Draft Version; ICH: 
Geneva, 2017.
29.	 European Commission. Annex 11: Comput-
erised Systems, EudraLex – Volume 4 – Good 
Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products 
for Human and Veterinary Use; European Com-
mission: Brussels, 2011.
8.0 
Appendix I: Examples — How to Use the 9-Box 
Vulnerability Grid
8.1	
API Process Examples
The following examples demonstrate how High, Medium, and Low criticality data from various 
API manufacturing processes reside in the 9-Box vulnerability grid based on the level of controls in 
place. The vulnerability of data from each unit operation must be considered separately, because the 
data-capture features of various manufacturing equipment is different, the method of recording data 
varies, and the data integrity controls in place will vary. Once evaluated, however, data vulnerability 
of similar manufacturing operations can be leveraged. 
For each unit operation of the manufacturing processes, the user must assess the criticality of the 
data and the existing data integrity controls in place. The criticality of the data will be either High, 
Medium, or Low as defined in Section 4.2.1 Classification of Data Criticality. Table 4.2.1-1 con-
tains definitions of the classes of data criticality. The criticality of the data determines the row of the 
9-Box vulnerability grid in which the data will reside. As shown in Table 4.3-1, High-critical data is 
in the top row, Medium-critical data in the middle row, and Low-critical data in the bottom row.
For the purposes of this technical report, the existing data integrity controls will be considered as 
High, Medium, or Low based on the definitions in Table 4.2.2-1. The level of existing data in-
tegrity controls associated with the manufacturing process will determine in which column of the 
9-Box vulnerability grid the data belongs. Manufacturing processes with a High level of data integ-
rity controls in the form of computerized controls reside in the first column (moving from left to 
right); manufacturing processes with a Medium level of data integrity controls in the form of hybrid 
systems reside in the second column; and manufacturing processes with a Low level of data integrity 
controls in the form of manual records reside in the third column.
As the user moves down the grid from top to bottom, the criticality of the data decreases. As a user 
moves across the grid from left to right, the level of control decreases. The goal of decreasing the 
vulnerability of the data is not impacted by the criticality of the data; instead, the goal of decreasing 
the vulnerability of the data is achieved by increasing the controls. 
Example 1 involves a reactor in an API manufacturing process (Table 8.1-1). The reaction needs 
to be precisely controlled to maximize the production of the API intermediate while controlling an 
unwanted and difficult-to-remove impurity that will impact a critical quality attribute (CQA) of the 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

41
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
final product. The reaction is controlled to minimize the impurity and maximize the yield by ensur-
ing that the critical process parameters (CPP) remain in their validated range during this critical 
process step. Therefore, the data regarding the control of the reactor is Highly critical. Using Table 
4.3-1 as a guide, this data would reside in the top row of the 9Box vulnerability grid. 
Example 1a illustrates High-criticality data with manual operation of the reactor, manual capture 
of data, and manual transcription of data by the operator into a paper manufacturing record. In 
addition, the data controls for this process are a Low level, as they rely on second-person witnessing 
of the manufacturing operation, human oversight of the manufacturing process, and human review 
release process. The High criticality of the data combined with the Low level of controls yields a 
Significant data vulnerability risk (Red), as defined in Section 4.3. 
Example 1b illustrates the same High-criticality data but with the reactor better controlled using a 
validated programmable logic controller (PLC). The data integrity controls are increased with the 
PLC printouts included with the batch processing record (BPR) for the review and release process, 
rather than relying on the manual transcription of data from the human machine interface (HMI) of 
the PLC into a paper batch production record. Therefore, Example 1b yields Moderate risk of data 
vulnerability (Orange). 
Example 1c illustrates the same High-criticality data but with the use of additional controls: a vali-
dated electronic batch recording (EBR) with automatic data capture; the inability to erase any data; 
the use of access controls, activated audit trails, and automated data archiving; and the ability to 
trend the electronically stored production data. With these additional controls employed, the vulner-
ability of the High-criticality data has reached an Acceptable level (Green).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

