Annex F
Guidance on( irnisfokrsm reatlaivtee)d to security
F.1 General
risk management process hazards risks
medical device Risks
The described in ISO 14971:2019can be applied to and assopcroiacteesds
with the security of the risks . related to dmatead iacnadl d seyvsicteesms security are specifically
mentioned in the scope of ISO 14971:2019 to avoid any misunderstanding that a separate
would be needed to manage relaterids ktso the security of . This does not preclude the
possibility of applying specific standards, in which specific methods and requirements are provided for
the assessment and control of security . harm
Breamcehdeisc aolf ddeavtiac eand systems security can lead to , e.g. through loss of data, uncontrolled access to
data, corruption or loss of diagnostic information, or corruption of software leading to malfunction of
the .
Security in this document includes cybersecurity and data and systems security.
F.2 Terminology used in security risk management
risk management
risk management
Security often employs different terminology than ISO 14971:2019. Nevertheless,
correspondence exists between the terms used rinis ks mecaunraitgye ment and those used in
[4]
ISO 14971:2019. The following defined terms originate from IEC Guide 120 . Other definitions such as
[1]
thosSee fcroumri tAyA:MI TIR 57 are also used in security .
— a condition that results from the establishment and maintenance of protective measures
[4]
that ensure a state of inviolability from hostile acts or influences (see 3.13 in IEC Guide 120:2018 ),
where hostile acts or influences could be intentional or unintentional.
medical device
[1] [19]
NOTE In 2.6 of AAMI TIR 57:2016 and 2.5 of IEC 80001-1:2010 , security is defined as an operational
state of a in which irnifsokrmation assets (data and systems) are reasonably protected from
degradation of confidenrtiisaklity, integritys aafnetdy availability. This can be seen that security is focused on hostile
acts as events that can contribute to , and that security is considered to be a state of inviolability as being
fTrheer efraotm: unacceptable (similar to , see 3.26 in ISO 14971:2019).
harm
— potential for violation of security, which exists when there is a circumstance, capability,
[4]
ahcatziaornd, oours esivteunatt itohnat could breach security and cause (see 3.16 in IEC Guide 120:2018 ).
Threat corresponds to an event or a sequence of events that can exploit a vulnerability leading to a
Vulnerability: (see 3.5 in ISO 14971:2019).
— flaw or weakness in a system’s design, implementation, or operation and management
[4]
that could be exploited to violate the system’s security policy (see 3.18 in IEC Guide 120:2018 ).
VCounlnfeidraebnitliitayl ictayn be seen as a type of event or circumstance (see Table C.2 in ISO 14971:2019).
processes
— : property that information is not made available or disclosed to unauthorized
[4]
iInndteivgirdiutayls, entities, or (see 3.6 in IEC Guide 120:2018 ).
[4]
— Availabili: tpyroperty of accuracy and completeness (see 3.9 in IEC Guide 120:2018 ).
— : property of being accessible and usable upon demand by an authorized entity (see 3.5
[4]
in IEC Guide 120:2018 ).
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 55
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
hazard hazardous situation harm
The relationship between a , sequence of events, , and relating to
security can be represented as shown in Figure F.1.
Figure F.1 — Relation between hazard, hazardous situation, harm and security terminology
F.3 Relation between ISO 14971 and security
harm
A common misconception is that ISO 14971:2019 would only apply to the health of people, disregarding
tharti stkhse definition of includes damage to property and trhiesk esnvironment. This misconception is
often discovered during discussions of security, where it is assumed that ISO 14971:2019is restricted
to related to the patient and the user and would not cover related to security.
safety Safety risk management,
[4]
It should be noted that the definition of security from IEC Guide 120 is not on the same level as the
definition of . is related to the final outcome of while security looks at the
effects of hostile ahcatsr mor events on the characteristics and performance of the system.
record
The definition of in ISO 14971:2019 applies to people, property, and the environment, with the
potential for some overlap. For reixsakm mpalnea, gdeammeangte to an electronic health (damage to prhoapzearrtdys)
can additionallyh raersmult in incorrect diagnosis which can lead to patient injury (damage to people). It is
noted that the scope of security is often broader. Several examples of security
that can lead to are shown in Table F.1.
56 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Table F.1 — Examples of hazard, sequence of events, hazardous situation and harm
in the situation of security hazards
Hazard Sequence of events Hazardous situation Harm
Loss of data 1) The vulnerability of Incorrect dosage data Deterioration of health.
integrity unnecessarily opened leading to infusion fluid
Death.
network port is exploited. not being delivered as
intended.
2) Dose setting data of
infusion pump is modified
by unauthorized access.
Loss of data 1) The vulnerability of Modifiedp droactead luearedsing to Deterioration of health.
integrity unnecessarily opened incorrect clinical deci-
Unnecessary surgery.
network port is exploited. sions or , or
lack of treatment.
2) Patient data or diagnostic
results are modified by
medical device
unauthorized access.
Loss of data 1) The vulnerability of Delay of therapy. Loss of
availability unnecessarily opened functionality.
Inability of diagnosis.
nMeetdwicoarlk d peovircte is exploited.
Deterioration of health.
2)
performance is reduced
or is terminated by DDoS
attack or ransomware.
Loss of data 1) The vulnerability of Denial of insurance cov- Psychological stress.
confidentiality unnecessarily opened erage leading to lack of Deterioration of health.
network port is exploited. treatment.
2) Disclosure of personal
health information.
Additionally, when differentiating between thessea fedtoymains, the terms “safety risk management”
and “security risk management” are somriestki mmeasn augseemd.e nTthis document folloswasfe ttyhe suggestion from
[20]
ISO/IEC Guider i6sk3 which states that the term “ ” should notr ibsek sused as an adjective. It should
be kept in mind that the goal of security is also to achieve (i.e. freedom from
unacceptable ) when using the ISO 14971 framework to manage related to security.
[4]
hIta izsa nrodtsed that the definition of security from IEC Guide 120 includes unintentional acts, such as the
accidental release of personal health information that is not due to a malicious attack, and that security
related to normal use should also be evaluated, such as displaying personal health information
to unauthorized persons.
F.4 Characteristics of security risk management
risk management process risks process
risk risk analysis risk evaluation risk
cSoencturroilty follroewsisd uaa sl imrisiklar as management of other in that the
steps include establishing criteria for acceptability, performing process , ,
, evaluation of overall , etc. The specific details regarding the data sources used,
analysis tools and techniques, and validationri cskasn vary, but the roivsekr caolln trol is the same.
risks
ISO 14971:2019 requires the evaluation of arising from measuresm. Iet diisc aplo dsesvibiclee that
new are introduced by security control measures or vice versa. For example, a security control
measure is to require the user to enter a password before use, but on a life-saving (e.g.
an automatic external defibrillator) the potential for delays due to a forgotten password might be
unacceptable, and therefore different options should be considered. This relationship is illustrated in
Figure F.2.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 57
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
hazards
hazards risks
Management of related to security can require different methods and approaches than
management of other , similar to differences in methods for controlling related to usability
or reliability.
Figure F.2 — Possible interaction of security risk control measures
with other risk control measures
Severity hazard
Severity severity
is defined as the “measure of the possible consequences of a ” (see 3.27 in ISOs 1e4ve9r7i1ty:2019).
is often represented in degrees of degradatisoenv oerf iat yperson’s health. A low can be defined
as temporary discomfort or a light injury requiring no medical intervention, a mediurmisk manage mase natn
injury requiring medical intervention, and a high as an injury requiring immediate mseevdericitayl
inthearrvmention and possibly leading to permanent impairment or even death. In security ,
a secure data system maintains high confidentiality, integrity, and availability. Therefore, the
of related to the damage to a secure system could consider among others the consequences of loss
oHra drmegradation of these three factors. safety
intended use medical device risk
manag iesm oeftnetn injuhrayr omr damage to the health of people and related to basic (e.g. emleecdtirciacl sdheovcicke)
or the of the (e.g. radiation exposure during X-ray imaging). In security
, the is often damage to property and related to information on the
itself (e.g. disclosure of personal health information, modification or corruption of software or data), or
information available on connheacrtmed devices (e.g. loss of connectivity, access to credit card information).
Probabilirtiys ko fm oacncaugreremnecnet of is often a function of design and manufacturing, material selection,
tolerances, design margins, etc. These factors can often be predicted with high levels of confidence. In
security , probability of occurrence is often a function of motivation, financial gain,
as well as function of opportunity, e.g. open vulnerabilities. These factors are not easily estimated.
Additionally, the probability (likelihood) of a vulnerability being exploited can quickly change from
“remote” to “every time” once vulnerability information is published on the internet.
F.5 Prioritizing confidentiality, integrity, and availability
risks manufacturer
intended use medical device
When evaluating security-related , the ensures that the security priorities
(confidentiality, integrity and availabilirteyc)o rpdroperly take the of the into
account. For some applications, integrity of information is of high concern and a loss of integrity could
result in changes to a patient’s medical (e.g. changes in drug orders or medical data/images). In
other instances, loss of confidentiality could be more important, because disclosure of personal health
information can create a potential for blackmail.
58 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Amneodtichaelr d eexvaicmeple of loss of confidentiality is a situation where design femaetduirceasl daervei cneot encrypted
(data at rest or in transit). Reverse engineering of those features could compromise ompeedraictaiol nd eovfi ctehse
and result in injury to the patient. Loss of availability of the can result in
delay of diagnosis or delraisyk osf treatment. Especially for life supporting or life-saving ,
linotsesn odfe adv uasielability omre ad irceadl udcetviiocne in effectiveness can be most important to the health of people. These
examples indicate that related to security can impact the patient’s health, depending on the
of the .
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 59
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Annex G
Components and device(si ndfeosrimgnateivde w) ithout using ISO 14971
G.1 General
manufacturer risk management process
This guidance assumesm tehdaict atlh dee vice has already established ma anufacturer
compliant with ISO 14971:2019. riIstk dmoaensa gneomt ernet pfillaece or eliminate any of the requirements in
ISO 14971:2019 for a , but recommends a way for the to remediate
deficiencies that might exmisatn iunf athcteu rer . processes
medical device
For various reasons, a might not have followed all the med icaanl dd erveiqceusirements
described in ISO 14971:2019 for each constimtuaennutf acoctmupreorn’se nrits ko f ma anagement , such as proprietary
components, software components, subsystems of non-medical origin, or for already
available on the market. In such cases, the medical device documentation could be
limited and insufficient for the purpose of demonstrating compliance with ISO 14971:2019. In mpoosstt-
cparosedsu,c thioownever, a wealmthe doifc ailn dfoervmiceation about them edical devices and its constituent components
is available. For example, information on the saacfetutyal use could be acquired through a review of
data for the or for similar on the market. Relevant reliability
and production data and prevmioaunsulyf accotmurpeirled -related documentation could also be available.
risk management file
This annex aims to provide a with guidance on how available information can be used to
build an iniMtieadl ical device that can be maintained in the future.
NOTE “ ” includes its subsystems, components and software components of medical origin and
of non-medical origin. manufacturer risk management
risk management file medical device
Using available information, the can establish documenritsaktsion that
would be thmee bdiacsails dfoerv ibceuilding an initial medica lf odre vthicee particular intended u suender
consideration. This dmoacnuumfaecnttuarteiron could be sufficient evidencer itsok dcoenmtoronlstrate that the for the
particular are acceptable, and that the state of the ar its safe for its . On
the other hand, the could decide that additional measures are appropriate.
For example, comparison to the generally acknowledged could indicate that additional
actions are warranted in order to become fully compliant with ISO 14971:2019.
G.2 Risk management plan
risk management
risk management file medical device intended use
ISO 14971:2019 requires thatr aislkl management activities be planned, especially those activities for
the creation of a demonstrating that the is safe for its .
The mandatory erleismk emnatsn aogf eam ent plan are given in ISO 14971:2019.
In esrtiasbk lmisahninagg eam ent plan, particular attention sholiufeld c ybcel egiven tom:edical device
a) activities for the remaining phases of the of the (especially
maintenance, decommissioning and disposal, where applicable);
b) the assignment of responsibriilsikti emsa annadg eamutehnotrities;
c) requirements forri rskeview of activmitaineus ffarcotmur nero’ws on;
risk risks harm
d) the criteria for acceptability, based on the policy for determining acceptable
, including criteria for accepting when the probability of occurrence of cannot be
estimated;
60 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
residual risk residual risk
e) a method to evaluate the overall and criteria for acceptabilpitoys to-pf rtohdeu ocvtieornall ;
NveOrTifEic 1a tionThe criteria under d) and e) canr bisek s cuopnptorrotled by production and risk control information.
f) activities, both for existing measures and for new measures that
are considered necessary; post-production
risks medical device
g) activities for the collection and review of production and information, and how this
information is used to determine if the associated with the verific aartieo nacceptable.
NOTE 2 The design documentation or other documentation can include some evidence.
G.3 Risk management file
medical device manufacturer
risk management file risk control
Since the was designed without ushinazga rIdSOs 149h7a1z:a2r0d1o9u, s tshiteu ations should
starmt ebduiicladli ndegv aic e manu. fIatc itsu rliekrely that some measures have already been
implemmenetdeidca bl udte wviictehout recorded traceability to thhaez ards ahnadz ardous situations associated with
the . Therefore, the could begirnis bky c iodnetnrtoilfying the solutions already adopted
for trhisek management f ialend then by identifying the and that are controlled
by these solutions. These solutions are now considered measures and are documented in
the .risk management file
Such approach to build ian tended use m ecdainca clo dnesvisict eof the froelalosownianbgl ys tfeoprse.seeable misuse
safety Reasonably foreseeable misuse
1. Documenting the of thpeo st-production , the and the
characteristics related to . safety can be derived from the information
about actual use gathered during the phase. The questions in Annex A can be useful
to determine the characteristics related to m. edical device risk control
2. Identifying all solutions already adopted in the that can be considered
measures. hazards hazardous situations medical device
harm
3. Identifying all and associated with the and the possible
that can result fhroamza rthdem. hazardous situation risk control
manufacturer risk
4. Determining if any h aozra rds hazardous si tueaxtiisotns sfor which rnisok control measure
is implemented. Inm athnuofsaec tcuarseers, the should estimate and evaluate the and
raepspidlyu aISl Ori s1k4971:r2e0si1d9u. aFl orris ks and for which ris kmeasures are
implemented, trhies k management should vermifayn tuhfaecirt uerfefrectiveness and estimate anridsk e cvoanlutraotel the
. For that are not judged acceptable using the criteria for acceptability
defined in the plan, the should consider further and
apply ISO 14971:2019. hazard hazardous situation risk control
5. Documenting traceability for each identified and to the
measures. The traceability can be documented with the following elements:
— the identified hazards and hazardous situations;
— the possible harm that can occur;
— the risk control measures;
— verification of implementation and effectiveness; and
— the acceptability orf easnidyu raels ridisukal risks.
6. Evaluating the overall r aisckc omrdainnagg teom IeSnOt 14971:2019 Clause 8.
risk management
7. Reviewing the execution of the plan according to ISO 14971:2019 Clause 9.
Dreoccourmdsent the result in a report. risk management file
The and other documents generated during these steps form the initial .
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 61
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Annex H
Guidance for in vi(tirnof odrimagantiovset)i c medical devices
H.1 General
H.1.1 Risk management for IVD medical devices
in vitro diagnostic (IVD) medical devices
Trihskes purpose of this annex is to provide guidance for the application of particular aspects of
ISO 14971:2019 to R.i sTkhsis guidance is focused on the indirect
to patients from incorrect or delayed in vitro diagnosMtiacn ruefasuctltusr,e arsnd is intended to suppmleemdiecnatl
tdheev igceesneral guidance provided throughout this document. to device users, other persons and the
environment are addressed elsewhere in this document. of other diagnostic
might also find these guidelines useful.
Throughout this annex, “clinician” is used as a general term to mean a healthcare provider who sees
patients and who orders, interprets and acts upon IVD examination results. For definitions of other
[34]
terms comIVmD omnelyd iucsael dd einvi tchees IVD indusitnrtye nadnedd l aubsoeratory medicine, see ISO 18113-1 .
Because manufact uarnedr ’sth reisirk management a prreo scoes dsiverse, this annex can only provide general
guidance, with the intent to foster critical thinking, cross-functional analysis and informed decision-
making within the risk management IVD med. iTcahle dqeuveicsetisons and examples in this annex
are intended to guide those with appropriate scientific, IeVnDg imneeedricinagl daenvdic ecslinical emxapneurftaiscetu troe rdevelop
and execute effective plans fIoVrD medical devices . They are not intended to be
exhaustive nor necessarily represent best practice for all . Each should
dHe.1te.r2m iCnoe nwtheaxtt i sfo arp pIVlicDa brlies kto m thaenira pgaermticeunltar .
risks manufacturers IVD medical devices risks
Managing to patients can bIeV cDh malelednicgainl gd efovirc es of . These are
indirect, often characterized by extended sequences of events that involve “competent intermediaries”
such as trained users who use to perform IVDr eisxkasminations and clinicians who
[27]
rely on the examination results. ISO 15189 , the internationalr sistka nmdaanrda gfeomr eqnutalpitryo caensds competence
of medical laboratories, requires medical laboratories to control to patients. To support this
[38]
requiremreinskt, ISO 22367 is being dmeavneulofapcetdu rteor sdesIcVrDib me ead ical devices for medical
laboratories based on the same principles and concepts described in ISO 14971:2019. This will promote
effective commusnaifceattyion between residu oafl risks manu afnadct mureedr’isc arils lka bmoarnaatogreimese.nt
process risk management process
The information fIoVrD medic aanl dd etvhiec edsisclosure of from the
IVD med aicrael dimevpicoerstant inputs to the medical lmabaonruafatocrtuyr’se r’s risk management proces.s Conversely, the
needs of umsaernsu foafc turer for such informraitsiko mn aannadg tehme elanbtoratory’s feedback from using the
are impoIrVtDa nmt eindpicuatls d teov tichee . It is incumbent
upon the to include the user needs for information as design input when
developinmga onru fmacotduirfeyring an IVD medical. device risks
When a safety supplies an risks man tuof aac tmueredrical laboratory, any residu tahla rti sckosuld not
bacec coomnptraonlyleindg t dhorcouumghe ndteastiigonn or protective measures are transferred to the laborartioskrsy along with the
information for to control those . The also discloses any in the
, so that the laboratory director can evaluate these and determine
tMhaeniru afacccteuprtearbsility. safety IVD medical devices
can provide information for to inform users of , but they cannot
influence the actions of clinicians who order, receive and act upon the examination results.
62 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
IVD medical devices IVD
medical devices risk
Some are inrteisnkdsed for use by clinicians at the point of care, while self-testing
are actually used by patients. Althourigshk sciomntilraorl scenarios can exist for these devices,
the user’s ability to control the can be more limited. Therefore, it is important that point of care
devices and self-testing devices are designed with measures appropriate for the (intended)
users and the (intended) use environment outside laboratories.
H.2 Risk analysis
H.2.1 Intended use and reasonably foreseeable misuse
H.2.1.1 Analytical and clinical use
IVD medical devices
Most have two users. It is important to consider:
— a user who performs all or part of an examination (“analytical use”); and
— a clinicianI VwDh mo erdeciceaivl edse,v iincetesrprets and acts on the examination results (“clinical use”).
In the case of intended for self-testing, the patient can be the only user.
H.2.1.2 Device description
risk analysis IVD medical device
IVD
mEaecdhic al device begins with identifying and documenting a clear description of the
and its specific role in producing the examination result. Questions to consider when describing the
include:
— Is the device used alone to produce examination results or in combination with other devices?
— If the device is a standalone analyticIaVl Ds ymsteedmic,a ils dite avuicteosmated (software, robotics)?
— If used in combination with other to form a system, what is its role in
producing the examination result (e.g. sample collection system, sample receptacle, measuring
instrument, software, databaseIsV, Dre mageednictasl, dceavliibcerators, control materials, or accessory)?
— If part of a system, how does the interact with other components of the system?
— Are other reagents or accessories necessary but not provided?
— Does the device employ new or novel technology (e.g. for measurement, communication)?
— Does the device employ digital information technology for documenting and/or transmitting
examination results to clinicians or communicating with mobile applications?
— Do softwaIrVeD a pmpleidciactaiol ndse vpircoevide diagnostic or treatmmeednitc rael cdoemvimceendations?
IVD medical device
— Does the communicate with a that immediately administers
treatment based on the IVD result (e.g. an that measures blood glucose levels and
communicates with an implanted insulin administration system)?
H.2.1.3 Analytical use
intended use IVD medical device
The of the reas oinnaclbuldy efos rtehsee eaanballey mtei(ssu) sientended to be detected or measured;
acceptable sample types; calibration, quality control and preventive maintenance activities; and the
use environment. It is important that IVD i sm aeldsoic acol ndesvidiceered (see H.2.3.5).
Questions to consider when identifying the analytical use of the include:
— What analyte is the device intended to measure or examine?
— Will the examination results be qualitative, semi-quantitative or quantitative?
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 63
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
— Will the device be used in the pre-examination, examination or post-examination phase?
— What specimens can be analysed (e.g. serum, plasma, blood, urine, other body fluids, ptrisoscueesss)?
— Do other substances potenptrioaclelyd uforuesnd in these samples interfere with the analytical ?
— In nucleic acid sequencing , is the amplicon sensitive to contamination from environmental
sources of DNA/RNA?
— Are there any additional limitations for use in specific use environments (e.g. medical laboratories,
emergency room, operating room, ambulance, intensive care unit, neonatal care unit, nursing home,
physicianI’sV Dof mficeed,i sccarl edeenviinceg clinics, or the patient’s home)?
— Does the IV Din tmerefdaiccea,l c odnevnieccet or communicate with other devices or networks?
— Who will be using the to perform examinations, and what training and
qualifications will be appropriate?
H.2.1.4 Clinical use
IVD medical device
TMhaen uinfatcetnudreedrs clinical use of the (called indications for use in some jurisdictions)
includes the medical conditions and patient populations for which the examination results are used.
can rely on internal or external clinical experts to understand the following:
— how the IVD examination results will be used in clinical decision making;
— the medical decision points and degree of accuracy required;
— whether clinicians can recognize incorrect results (e.g. based on magnitude of error or consistency
with other clinical information);
— what actions the clinician would take in the event of an abnormal or unexpected result;
— the clinical significance of delayed results, if any;
— potential adverse consequences of unnecessary medical intervention.
Additional questions to consider when identifying the clinical use include:
— Will the examination results be used for:
— diagnosis in order to cure, treat or prevent a disease or other condition?
— measuring body fluid constituents to determine a patient’s state of health?
— monitoring theraspaefeuttyic drug levels to ensure an effective dose?
— determining the of donated blood or organs?
— screening a population for the presence or absence of a specific marker?
— predicting the erifsfkectiveness of a therapeutic alternatives (“companion diagnostic”)?
— predicting the of develoipnitnegn dae md eudseical condition?
— applications other than the ?
— What injury, illness or condition will the results be used to detect, diagnose, predict or monitor?
— Who will use the IVD examination results: medical specialists, general clinicians or patients?
— Is the role of the examination results in medical decisions to be used:
— as the basis for immediate medical decisions?
64 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
— with other relevant information to guide a medical decision?
— Which patient populations will primarily experience the benefit from the IVD examinations?
—H. 2.S2h oCuhlda arnayc tpeartiiesntitc pso rpeullaattieodn st ob ep eaxtpielincitt lsya cfoenttyraindicated?
H.2.2.1 General considerations
medical devices IVD medical devices
In addition to biological, chemical, electrical, mechanical and security characteristiIcVsD i nm ceodmicmalo dne vwicitehs
other (see Annex A), have analytical performance and reliability
characteristics that determine the suitability for their intendeIdV Dcl imniecdailc auls ed.e Svoicmese
can perform multiple examinations simultaneously, and their clinical performance can rely on the
interpretation of patterns of results (e.g. multiplex assays). that employ digital
information technology can also have characteristics related to their ability to store and transmit an
examinathioanrm result or ancillary information to where it is needed for a medical decision. Failure to meet
a performance, reliability or communication requirement can initiate a sequence of events that might
result in to a patient.
H.2.2.2 Performance characteristics related to patient safety
a) Quantitative examinations measure a quantity in a representative specimen taken from a patient.
The results are usually expressed as a concentration or percentage. The required analhyatircmal
performance dseevpeernitdys onh atrhme medical application, but false high, false normal or false low results
can potentially affect a diagnosis, cause inappropriate or delayed therapy, and lead to patient .
The type and of can depend on the magnitudIVeD o fm eerdriocra al td emveicdeiscal decision points.
The relevant performance characteristics of quantitative can include:
— trueness of the measured values (bias, traceability to a reference standard);
— measurement precision (repeatability, intermediate precision, reproducibility);
— analytical specificity (influence of interfering or cross-reacting substances);
— analytical sensitivity (ability to discriminate between quantity limits or ranges);
— detection limit (lowest quantity that can be reliably detected);
— quantitation limit (lowest quantity that can be accurately measured);
— measuring interval (range of values over which the analytical performance was validated).
b) Semi-quantitative examinations provide a clinically useful approximation of the quantity being
measured. Values are typically assigned based on an ordinal scale or are reported as a quantity
limit, and can be expressed numerically (e.g. within a specified range of values, or greater or less
than a specific quantity, titer or serial dilution) opr rroecleadtuivreelsy (e.g. as +3, +2, +1 or trace amount).
Common examples of semi-quantitative examinations are urine “dipsticks,” tablets that detect the
presence of ketones, and serological agglutination .
Microscopic examinations can also be considered semi-quantitative if the results are reported as
the number of cells observed in a low-power or high-power field. For example, a urine microscopic
examination might report a value of 0 to 5 red blood ceIlVlsD i mn ead hicigahl -dpeovwiceers field.
The performance characteristics of semi-quantitative can include:
— analytical sensitivity (ability to discriminate between quantity limits or ranges);
— analytical specificity (influence of interfering or cross-reacting substances)
— detection limit (lowest quantity thaPtR cOaOnF b/eÉ PrRelEiaUbVlEy detected); 65
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
— precision of the measured signal values (repeatability, reproducibility).
c) Qualitative examinations determine the presence or absence of an analyte, and results are reported
as positive, negative or indeterminate. Cut-off values and relevant databases can define positive or
negative results. A positive result when the analyte is absent or a negative result when the analyte
is present can affect the diagnosis or treatmentI.VD medical devices
The performance characteristics of qualitative can include:
— analytical sensitivity (fraction of true positive results in samples containing the analyte);
— analytical specificity (fraction of true negative results in samples containing the analyte);
— diagnostic sensitivity (fraction of true positive results in patients with disease);
— diagnostic specificity (fraction of true negative results in patients without disease).
H.2.2.3 Reliability characteristics related to patient safety
When clinicians depend on IVD examination results for urgent medical decisions, such as in emergency
or intensive care settings, timely results can be as important as accurate results. Failure to produce a
result when it is needed can delayIV nDe cmeesdsiacrayl mdeevdiciecasl intervention.
The reliability characteristics of can include:
— system reliability (mean time between failures, mean time to failure);
— component compatibility (including versions and critical tolerances);
— software reliability (error-free operation);
— reagent or control stability; use errors
— system usability (avoidance of ).
H.2.2.4 Digital information technology characteristics related to patient safety
Correct identificaItVioDn mofe tdhicea pl adteiveincte and the sample is clearly essential. Some examinations also require
ancillary information about the patient, the sample, or the examination for proper interpretation of
the results. If an is designed to collect, store and report such information with the
examination result, device characteristics leading to data corruption or alteration can contribute to
misdiagnosis or inappropriate therapy.
The ancillary patient information required by the clinicians can include:
— correct patient name and sample identification;
— patient details (age, gender, population, genetic factors, medications, nutritional state);
— sample details (sample type, descriptpioronc, eadcuqrueisition time);
— measurement details (measurement , units of measure, measurement uncertainty);
— application details (cut-off points, reference intervals). safety
Digital information technology characteristics that can affect patient include:
— connections between devices and/or networks (wireless or wired);
— internet data transmission;
— interface with digital applications (networked or mobile);
66 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
IVD medical device
— applications that emulate results from an ;
— embedded software applications (e.g. interpretation or treatment recommendations);
— unshielded data transfer (e.g. ESD susceptibility);
— digital data storage (e.g. susceptibility to corruption, maniphualzaatriodns or deletion);
—H. 2.d3i srKunptoiownn o af ontdh efro croensneeecatbedle d hevaizcaesr d(csr etoat pinagt iaedndtitsional ).
H.2.3.1 Identification of hazards
hazard
harm
From the standpoint of the patient, an IVD examination result would be choanzsaidredrsed a if it
could lead to (1) inappropriate medical intervention that can rehsauzlat ridns , or (2) lack of medical
intervention necessary to prevent being harmed. The following general could cause or
contribute to potentially harmful medical decisions. The specific should be identified in terms
of the magnitude and direction of error, the extent of delay, or the ancillary information that is incorrect
or missing. hazard IVD medical device hazard
IVD medical devices
In addition to identification for the itself, identification related to
connectivity should be evaluated. The increased use of connectIeVdD t om oetdhiecra ld edveivcieces
or systems, eithers adfierteyctly or through a computer network, wireless technology or the internet, has
created new challenges for their safe operation. The need to ensurIVe De fmfeecdtiicvael devices
functionality and hahs abzeacrodmse more important with the increasing use of connected devices, and
the rfirsekq mueannta geleemcternotnpirco ecxescshange ofI VhDea mltehd iicnafol drmevaictieon produced by . Identifying
failures that can cause the described below, due to connectivity, should be performed as part of
the for the .
a) Incorrect examination result
For quantitative and semi-quantitative examinations, results are considered incorpreroctc eisfs the
difference from a correct value exceeds the error limit required for the clinical application.
Analytical performance requirements are typically established during the design input .
Some medical decisions can be influenced by the magnitude of the examination result, so the
clinical significance of an incorrect result can depend on the magnitude of the difference between
the measured value and the trpureo cveadluuree.s
For qualitative examination , in which only a positive or negative result is provided,
(e.g. HIV and pregnancy examinations), examination results are either correct, incorrect or
indeterminate.
b) Delayed examination result
An examination result or its ancillary information is considered delayed if it is needed for a medical
decision and the clinician does not receive it in time to support a critical therapeutic or intervention
decision. Criteria can be established to define what constitutes a clinically significant delay for the
medical application (e.g. urgent care situation).
c) Incorrect information accompanying the result
The consequences of anh aerrmror in the ancillary information provided with an IVD examination result
depends on how the information is used in clinical decision making, and whether the error could
cause or contribute to .
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 67
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
H.2.3.2 Identification of hazards from fault conditions
IVD medical devices hazards
hazards
that fail during use can lead to one or more of the general defined in H.2.3.1.
Fault conditions potentially leading to can include the following:
— within-batch or batch-to-batch inconsistency (e.g. reagents, calibrators, controls);
— non-traceable value assignment (e.g. calibrators, proficiency materials, assayed controls);
— reagent non-specificity (e.g. interfering factors, antibodies);
— sample or reagent carryover (e.g. pipetting instruments);
— measurement imprecision (e.g. system-level);
— unstable materials (e.g. during transportation, storage or use);
— system malfunctions (e.g. hardware, software, components, accessories);
— digital technology failures such as:
— software/firmware vulnerability to intrusion (e.g. data modification or theft).
— data transfers resulting in incorrect or missing results, inappropriate treatment recommendations,
or delays from loss of function due to environmental condmiteiodnicsa (le d.ge.v eicleectrostatic discharge, ESD);
— connections disrupting the performance of the connected , creating unsafe conditions
for the patient;
— digital applications incorrectly connected to another device or digital application;
— corruption during data storage that causes incorrect information or delayed results; or
— delays IiVnD a vmaeildaibcailli tdye ovfic reesults or patient information due to loss of network connectivity.
When the is used with digital software applications, failures leading to a delay of
results include:
— smart device operating system changes, resulting in application not being available and causing
delay of treatment, or in unexpected behaviour causing incorrect recommendation for treatment;
— smart device data storage capacity or rate of transfer data limitations, resulting in delay of treatment
or incorrect recommended treatment;
— time inconsistencies between application and smart devices, resulting in delay of treatment or
incorrect results (specifically related to out-of-date results appearing as valid).
H.2.3.3 Identification of hazards from normal use
IVD medical device
hazards
Inherent limitations in technology can occasionally lead to one or more of the general
manufac ttou rpeartients described in H.2.3.1, even though all warnings, precautions and instructions for use
were followed, the device functioned as intended, and the analryistkicsal performance met the claims of the
haza.r dEvery examination result is subject to unavoidable sources of variability. Even when the
analytical performance has been optimized to minimize the , an occasional result in normal use
cHaanz abred as for an individual patient.
potentially occurring in normal use can include inaccurate results duep rtoo ctehdeu froelslowing:
— inherent false negative and false positive rates of qualitative examination caused by the
uncertainty of statistically assigned cut-off values; procedures
— measurement uncertainty associated with quantitative examination (performance
claims often represent 95 % of the results within medically defined target limits);
68 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
— misclassification of results as “abnormal” or outside a “normal” reference interval (determined
empirically from the central 95 % of results in a “normal” population study);
— influence of interfering substances in the sample (e.g. cross-reacting antibodies, certain drugs or
biochemical metabolites, or sample preparation materials);
— biological variability of the analyte itself (e.g. heterogeneity of natural proteins, population
differences in normal analyte concentrations);
— chemical properties of the analyte itself (e.g. intrinsic instability, adhesiveness);
— variability of the patient sample matrix (i.e. “matrix effects”);
— the finite reliability of instrument components.
hazardous situation
NOTE Medically defined performance rereqsuidirueaml erinstks take into account the statistical distribution of
examination results in the intended patient populations. The occurrence of a in normal use is
considered an unavoidable contribution to the .
H.2.3.4 Identification of hazards from use errors
Use errors hazards
processes use error use errors
can cause one or more of the general described in H.2.3.1. Non-routine laboratory
canp broec eessspecially prIVoDne mtoe dical devi.c Reeasonably foreseeable (i.e. resulting from
readily predictable human behaviour) can be identified and potentially prevented by a usability
[16]
engineering during design and development. See IEC 62366-1 for
iUnsfeo errmroartison and guidance. hazards
potentially leading to IVD in the medical laboratory or at the point of care can include
the following:
— overlooking special requirements (e.g. outside the normal laboratory routine); processes
— performing operations out of sequence, including pre-examination and post-examination
(e.g. unclear instructions, confusing user interface);
—Us e edrartoar sentry errors (e.g. patient name, identification number, birth date or age, gender, etc.).
by patients performing self-testing can include the following:
— applying insufficient volume of sample (e.g. too little for accurate measurement);
— inserting reagent module improperly (e.g. before device is ready for measuring).
H.2.3.5 Identification of hazards from reasonably foreseeable misuse
process manufacturers IVD medical devices hazards
hazardous situations reasonably foreseeable misuse
A usability engineering can also help of to prevent
[16]
and reasonably fo arreisseineagb flreo mmi suse . See IEC 62366-1 for guidance.
Examples of IVD medical device include the following:
— use of an prior to reading the instruction msaafneutayl or completing training;
— disregard of warnings, instructions, or other information for ;
— collection of an inappropriate sample type (e.g. serum when citrated plasma is specified);
— reporting examinatIiVoDn mreesduilctasl fdoerv cicoentraindicated or unvalidated clinical use;
— using a self-testing in a critical care setting (e.g. accuracy might not be adequate);
— using unverified third-party calibrator, reagent, control material or accessory;
— storing materials in incorrect conditions (e.g. room temperature when refrigeration is specified);
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 69
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
— operation of an IVD instrument outside spsaecfeitfiyed environmental conditions;
— disabling, overriding, or failing to enable features (e.g. to reduce annoyance to users);
— neglecting to perform prescribed instrument maintenance;
— connection to an information system without adequate network connectivity or security;
— malicious intent to create incorrect results or delay in treatment, including:
— hijacked and impersonated device by third-party application or individual to alter results,
producing incorrect results on connected digital applications;
— corrupted device software configuration, producing incorrect results;
Reas—on abinlyt eforcreespeteeadb dlea tmai sinu steransit to delay results or send incorrect results to the user.
by patients performing self-testing can include the following:
— dividing or reusing reagent test strips (e.g. to reduce cost);
— taking samples from an alternative site (e.g. other than fingertip due to pain);
— failing to clean and disinfect the venipuncture site (e.g. potential for contamination/infection);
—H. 2.s4t orIidneg nretiafgicenatt isotrni posf ipn ointeapnptriaolp rhiaatrem esnvironmental condition (e.g. overheated vehicle).
manufacturers risks hazardous
situation severity harm
ImSaOn 1u4fa9c7t1u:r2e0r19 requires thoa remstsimate the associated with each identified
, based on stehvee rpitryobability of occurrence and the of possible . This requires the
to identify the potential (e.g. injuries) to patients with sufficient specificity to
assign appropriate valuehs.azardous situation harms
severities Manufacturers harms risk analysis
For some examinations, a single saf ectayn result in several different h raerpmressenting
a range of . should determhinaer mwshich to includries ki na ntahley sis to
enspuorset- par hoidguhc tdioegnree of protection of health and , and document the rationale. All judged
reasonably likely to occur should be included. Other can be added to the if production
or information hsahromwss theyr iwske raen aelxypsiesrienced. severity
NOTE Identifying potential for risk analys iasnd determining their and probability of
occurrence requires an understanding of the clinical use of the IVD examination results. For this reason,
participation of qualified medical experts in the is eshsaernmtiasl.
Questions itnhtaetn dmeidg huts ehelp to identify and classify potential include: harms
— Is the a major determinant of therapy for a serious medical condition? If so, what
might occiuntre fnrdoemd au smeisdiagnosis or inappropriate therapy?
— Does the involve detection of an infectious disease agent (e.g. hepatitis A or HIV)? If so,
could a finatlseen dneedg autisvee result allow the infection to spread to others in the population?
risk
— Is the to detect and diagnose an inherited condition (e.g. sickle cell disease,
hemoglobinopathy carrier, predisposition to Alzheimer’s disease, increased of breast chaanrcmer,
etc.)? If so, could a false negative result allow progression of an otherwise preventable or treatable
diseasien?t eCnodueldd au sfealse positive result lead to unnecessary medical intervention and potential ?
benefits harm
— Is the to predict drug or device effectiveness? If so, could a false negative result cause
the loss of therapeutic and subsequent ? Could a false positive result have harmful
conseqinuteenncdeesd? use
— Is the to screen transfusion or transplant donors? If so, could incorrect results cause
transmission of disease to recipients or lead to rejection of a properly functioning organ?
70 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
intended use harms
— Is the to monitor a critical body function? If so, what might occur from an
