5 Risk analysis
5.1 Risk analysis process
risk analysisprocess
The consists of the following steps, which are explained in further detail in the next
subclauses: intended use medical device reasonably foreseeable misuse
— description of the of the medical de avnicde safety ;
— identification of thhaez acrhdasracterhiasztiacrsd oofu tsh seit uations that are relatemde tdoic al dev;ice
— identification roifs ks andh azardous situation associated with the ;
— estimation of for each .
5.2 Intended use and reasonably foreseeable misuse
intended use
The should take into account information such as:
— the intended medical indication, e.g. treatment or diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular
disease, bone fracture, infertility;
— patient population, e.g. age groups (adults, children, adolescent, elderly), gender (male, female), or
disease state;
— part of the body or type of tissue interacted with, e.g. leg or arm;
— user profile, e.g. patient, lay person, health care provider;
— use environment, e.g. home, hospital, intensive care unit; and
— operating principle, e.g. mechanical piston driven syringe, X-ray imaging, MR imaging, subcutaneous
Reasdornuagb ldye lfiovreersye.eable misuse medical device
manufacturer
use error is defined as use of the in a way not intmeneddiecda l bdye vtihcee
, but which can result from readily predmicatanbulfea chtuurmearn behaviourer.a sTohniasb lcya nfo rreesleaetea btloe
misuse (slip, lapse or mistake), intentional acts of misuse, and intentional use of the
for other (medical) applications than intended by the . Cases of
can be identified during design and development by an analysis of simulated use, for example
6 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
process post-production
Reasonably foreseeable misuse life cycle medical device
by applying a usability engineering , or during tmhea nufacturer’s phase by an analysis of
actual use. can be identified throughout the of a ,
including iterations of design activities, during which the ability to anticipate potential
misuse progressively increapsreosc.ess
The usability engineering m ceadnic ahle dlpe vtioc edetermine whether a particular misusem isa nruefaascotnuraebrl’ys
foreseeable or not, for example by observation during usability testing. The usarbisiklity test might reveal
that users could routinely use the in a mparnonceedr uthreast is not according to the
instructions. This misuse can occur due to poor working culture, inadequate perception, limited
knowledge of the consequences, or because operreaatsionnga bly foresee aarbele n omti csulesaer.
process
The following example illustrates a case of that was identified and
analysed by application of a usability engineering . More information on usability engineering
[16] [17]
medical device
can be found in IEC 62366-1 and IEC TR 62366-2 .
medical device
EXAMPLEha rm A single-use is designed to baec cuosmedp aonnylyin ogn dcoec, ubmute intt iast iroenasonably foreseeable that
some users might attempt to reuse the . Therefore, warnings againsts arfeeutsye and indications of the
possible resulting from reuse were included in threis k medical devic.e Application of usability
[16]
engineering according to IEC 62366-1 demonstrated that this information for would be effective, i.e.
umseedrisc awl oduelvdi ckenow the correct use and understand the of reusing the . However, the usability
evaluation alpsroo csehsoswed that some users are likely to disregard this information and intentionally reuse the
. Intentional reuse can be considered abnormal user, ewashoinchab ilsy bfoeryeosnedea tbhlee msciosupsee of ther iuskssability
engineering , because threis ka smsoacniaagteemd ernistkpsr occaensnsot be controlled in the user interface (rsieske 3.1 and 3.26
[16]
of IEC 62366-1:2015 ). Since this behaviour can be considererdis k control , the from
such reuse are analysed in the and evaluated against the criteria for acceptability
according to ISO 14971:2019. It could be necessary to implement measures outside the user interface.
5.3 Identification of characteristics related to safety
medical device safety
It is important to identify the mchedaircaaclt deervisictiecss of the that could affect . These
chasraafecttyeristics can be qualitative or quantitative and can be bound by certain limits. The questions in
Annex A cover many aspects of hazards haanzda cradnou ass ssiitsuta itni oidnesntifying the charactemriesdtiiccas lr deelavticeed
to . For every question, it is indicated which factors should be considered in further detail, with
the ultimate goal of identifying all and associated wmitehd tihcael devices .
The list of questions in Annex A should not be used as a check list. It can also be helpful to review
avmaialanbulfea cintuforremr ation and literature, including adverse event reports, mfoerd siicmali ldaerv ice .
intended use safety hazardous situations
A can identify the performance or the functions of the that are necessary
to achieve its or that could affect , and consider whether any
could occur, if any of these functions did not perform properly.
5.4 Identification of hazards and hazardous situations
5.4.1 Hazards
hazard harm hazards
hazards
A is a potential source of a . Depending on the specific situation, can have different
origins/natures. Examples of are electricity, moving parts, infectious bacteria, chemicals,
gHaaszeasr,d ssharp edges, high currenmtse,d tiecmalp deervaitcuere, and ionising radiation. intended use reasonably
foreseeable misuse safety
associated with the can be deduced from the hazards and
as dehtaezramrdinoeuds siintu 5a.t2i oannsd the characteristics related to asI VdDet meremdiicnaeld d einv i5ce.3s.
Annex C of ISO 14971:2019provides guidance that can helrpi sikns identifying and sequences of
events that can lead to . Annex H provides similar guidance for ,
where incorrect diagnostic information can lead to indirect to patients.
5.4.2 Hazardous situations in general
Medical devices harm hazardous situation
harm
only cause if a sequence of events occurs that results in a ,
which then causes or leads to . Sequences of events can include a chronological series of causes
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 7
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
hazardous situation
hazards
and effects, as well as combinations of concurrent events. A occurs when people,
pHraozpaerrdtoyu os rs itthuea teinovnisronment are exposed to one or more . medical
device Hazardous situations
can arise even when there are no faults, i.e. in the normal condition for the
when it is performing as intended. can be intrinsic aspects of certain
therapies. For example, an automated external defibrillator (AED) delivers an electric shock to the
patient as part of its normal operation. Similarly, wound cauterization involves the application of high
energy to a wound site, and a scalpel has a sharp blade intended to make incisions. medical device
safety hazards hazardous situations
Annex A provides guidance in the form of questions on the characterirsitsikc sa noaf ltyhseis that
could affect . Those charachtaezraisrdtiscs canh ahzealrpd oinu si dsietnutaitfiyoinnsg in vitr oanddia gnostic (IVD) medical.
dAenvniceexs B provides guidance on several techniques that can support a . Annex H provides
specific guidance on identifying and for
.
5.4.3 Hazardous situations resulting from faults
hazardous situation
harm
In cases where a hazardous osintluya oticocnurs hdauzea trod oa ufas usilttu, tahteio pnrobability of a fault occurrhinagr mis not
the same as the probability of the occurrence of . A fault can initiate a sequence of events but does
not necessarily result in a . A does not always result inh azard.ous
situation
It is important to understand that there are generally two types of fault that can lead to a
: random and systematic faults.
5.4.4 Hazardous situations resulting from random faults
Random faults are typically due to physical or chemical causes such as corrosion, contamination,
thermal stress, and wear-out. For many random faults, a numerical value can be given for the probability
that the fault will occur. Some examples of random faults are:
— the failure of a part such as an integrated circuit in an electronic assembly;
— the contamination of an IVD reagent leading to incorrect rmeseudlitcsa;l device
— the presence of an infectious or toxic substance in or on a risks .
hazard hazardous situation
NOTE A quantitative estimate can only be applied to biological if sufficient information is known about
the and the circumstances affecting the probability of the occurring, for example in
the use of sterility assurance levels.
5.4.5 Hazardous situations resulting from systematic faults
A systematic fault can be caused by an error in any activity. It will systematically give rise to a failure
when some particular combination of inputs or environmental conditions arises, but will otherwise
remain latent. medical device
medical devices use errors
Errors lmeaeddiincag l tdoe svyicsetematic faults can occur in any part of the such asm headricdawl adreev iacned
software in electro-mechanical . Systematic faults in labelling can lead to
for any . These systematic faults can be introduced at any time during a ’s
development, manufacture or maintenance. Someh eaxzaamrdpoluess osift suyasttioenmatic faults are:
— an incorrectly rated fuse fails to prevent a : the fuse rating could have been
incorrectly specified during design;
— a software database does not provide for the condition of full database: if the database is full, it is
not clear what the software will do, with possible consequence that the system will simply replace
existing data with new data; medical device
— a fluid, used during the production of a , has a boiling point lower than body
temperature: residues of the fluid can, in certain circumstances, be introduced into the blood,
8 possibly leading to an embolism; PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
— the antibody in a hepatitis assay does not detect some variants of the virus;
— inadequately designed environmental control leads to contamination with a toxic substance or an
infectious agent;
— the user’s manual is written so that if a maintenance routine is performed according to the
instructions, the user could be injured (e.g. by a sharp probe).
The accurate estimation of the probability of occurrence of systematic faults is difficult. This is
primarily for the following reasons.
— Threi fsrke cqounetnrocyl of systematic faults is laborious to measure. Achieving a reasonable level of confidence
in the result will not be possible without extensive data on systematic faults or parameters relevant
to .
— Consensus does not exist for a method to quantitatively estimate the probability of occurrence of
systermisakt iec sftaiumlatst.ion manufacturer
risk
Because is difficult ihna ztahredsoeu sc isritcuuamtisotnasncesh, atrhme should not focus on
estimating the of systematic faults but rather on implementing robust systems to prevent
systematic faults which could lead to or .
5.4.6 Hazardous situations arising from security vulnerabilities
Sreeccourrditsy in this document includes cybersecurity and data and systems security. Security vhualnrmerabilities
can lead to loss of data, disclosure of personal health information, unauthorized access to patient
, etc. Such situations can initiate sequences of events, which can ultimately lead to (patient
injury or damage to property). For example:
— loss of confidentiality can lead to the disclosure of personal health information; medical device
— loss of integrity can lead to incorrectly represented lab results or mmaeldfiucnacl tdieovni coef the ;
medical device
— loss of availability can prevent the use of critical functionality of a or can stop the use
of a altogether.
See Annex F for further guidance on security.
5.4.7 Sequences or combinations of events
hazardous situation
P hazardous situation
The can be the result of a sequence or combinations of independent events. This
is illustrated in Figure 1. Theh parzoabradboiulsit syi tu1a toifo nthse occurring is then givheanz abryd othues
psirtoudauticotn of the probabilities of occurrence of the independent events. A sequence of events can have
branches leading to different and different events can lead to the same
. These complexities are not shown ihna Fziagrudre 1.
The example in Figure 1 is for an electricity and is related to an insulated wire inside a medical
electrical device. There is a smamll epdricoabla dbeilviticye that the insulation material is degraded and becomes
damaged by cracks, and that the cracks lead to an exposed wire. The next possible events are that the
uhasezra rcdoonunse scittsu aatniodn turns on the , and that (depending on choices in the user interface)
the exposed wire now has line voltage.P When the user subsequently opens the protective cover, the
occurs, namely that the user is exposed to the line voltage of 220 V. The combined
probability of this sequence of events is 1.
P
The probability that the user actually touches the exposed wire is estimated to be 0,10. Since the user
will always experience a shock from the line voltage, the probability of discomfort is 2 = 0,10. The
prhoabzaabridliotyu so fs iat ubautrionn is lower (0,01) and the probability of dheaarthm is even lower (0,001).
hazardous situation harm
A (HhSa1r)m can lead to different kinds of P (H1 to H3), raPnging from discomfort,
to a burn to death. The probability that the leads to can have different values
depending on the kind of , which values are described as 2(HS1)H1 through 2(HS1)H3 in Figure 1. The
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 9
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
severity harm
of can be affected by the circumstances of the exposure. For example, the consequences
of an electric shock can vary from muscle contractions to burns, heart fibrillation or cardiac arrest,
depending on voltage, current, duration of the exposure, and location on the human body. severity
harm harm
Imt ains uefmacptuhraesrized that several scenarios can be relevant, not only thoshea zwairtdho uthse s ihtuigahtieosnt of
or with the highest probability of occurrence of haza. rOdtohuesr ssictuenatairoinos can also be relevant. The
harm should consider what the best manner is to document the , describing
one or more sequences of events that can lead to this and the different kinds of
that can occur. Hazard
: electricity
medical device
Situation: line voltage (220 V) of an insulated
wire beneath a cover of the
Events:
P
A. Insulation material is damaged by cracks
( A = 0,01)
P
B. Insulation material falls off the wire
( B = 0,10)
P
C. User connects and turns on the device
P
( C = 0,10)
Hazardous situation
D. User removes cover ( D = 0,10)
P P P P P
: user is exposed to line
-5
voltage ( 1 = A * B * C * D = 1 × 10 )
Probability that the user touches the wire and
P
experiences:
— discomPfort ( 2 = 0,10)
— burn ( P2 = 0,01)
— death ( 2 = 0,001)
Figure 1 — Pictorial example of a relationship of hazard,
sequence of events, hazardous situation and harm
medical devices risk
Information about the on the market can be useful in estimating . Several approaches
are commonly employed to estimate probabilities:
— use of historical design and development data;
— prediction of probabilities using analytical or simulation techniques;
— use of experimental data;
— reliability estimpaotesst-;production
— production and information;
— use of expert judgment (an expert in this context can be a person competent on the basis of
[24]
appropriate education, training, skills and experience; see ISO 13485 ).
Each of these approaches has strengths and weaknesses. Complementary approaches should be used
to increase confidence in the results. Expert judgment should be supplemented with one or more of the
10 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
other approaches wherever possible. When the other approaches cannot be used or are not sufficient, it
might be necessary to rely solely on expert judgment.
5.5 Risk estimation
5.5.1 General
manufacturer risk estimation
risk
ISO 14971:2019 requires the to perform . Various methods can be used to
estimate . Those methods shouhladz eaxradmine, for example:
— the circumstances in which a ha izsa prrdeosuesn sti;tuation
— the sequence of evenhtasz laeraddoiunsg s tiotu aa tion ;
— the probability of a hazardous situation occurring;harm
— the probability ofh aa rm leading to ;
R—is kthe nature of the that could result. risk
risk control severity risks
should be expressed in termsesv etrhiatyt facilitate decision making on acceptability and the need
for , for example, using and probability scales. In order to analyse , their
components, i.e. probability and , should be analysed separately.
Key
harm
severity harm
X probability of occurrence of
Y of
Figure 2 — Example of a risk chart that illustrates the distribution of estimated risks
risk risks
risks R R R
A chartR issukch as that shown in Figure 2 shows the distribution of the estimated , which can
be useful for later decision making. The ( 1, 2, 3, …) would bme epdloictatle dde ovnic ethse chart as they are
estimated. matrices deverliospked from trhisiks figure will be used in examripskless throughout thriiss kclause.
Thrisis dkoes not imply that this method has general applicability to all ; however, it can be
useful in many instances. If a chart or matrix is used for ranking , the particular chart
or matrix and the interpretation used should be justified for that application.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 11
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
5.5.2 Probability
harm
When sufficient data are available to estimate the probability of occurrence of with adequate
confidemnecdei,c aa lq dueavnicteitative method should be used. Otherwise, a qualitative method based on expert
judgmpeonstt i-sp rpordeufecrtiaobnle to a quantitative estimate with high uncertainty. Anm eaxnaumfapclteu oref rthis situation is
a new where suitable quantitative data are not amvaeidlaicballe d uenvticile design validation or later
when data become available. For a qualitative method, the can describe a
series of probability levels with descriptors appropriate for the .
manufacturer
Although probability is a continuous variable, a number of discrete levels can be used in practice to
simplify the analysis. The decides how many probability levels are appropriate, based
on the expected confidence in the estimates. A larger number of probability levels can be used when
estimates are mmeaddicea wl diethvi cgereater confidence. At least three levels should be identified to facilitate
dMeacnisuifoanc tmuraekrsing. The levels can be descriptive and qualitative (e.g. not expected to occur during the
lifetime of the , likely to occur a few times, likely to occur frequently, etc.) or quantitative.
should define the levels explicitly, so that there will be no confusion over what falls
within each level. A particularly effective way is to assign ranges of non-overlapping numerical values
to the discrete levels. An example of three qualitative probability levels is given in Table 3 and an
example of five semi-quantitative probability levels in Table 5.
manufacturer
The definitions of the probability ranges can be the same or different for different product families.
For example, a can chhoaorsme to use one set of probability ranges for X-ray equipment, but
can have a different set of probability ranges for sterile disposable dressings. Scales for probability can
include probability of occurrence of per use, per device, per hour of use, or within a population, reitsck.
management file medical device
It is required to document the chosen probability levels or ranges and their descriptors in the
for the particular (see ISO 14971:2019, 5.5). harm
There are several factors that are important for estimating the probability of occurrence of . These
include, but are not limited to,m thede ifcoalll odweviincge.
— How often is a particular medical device used?
— What is the lifetime of the ?
— Who makes up the user and patient populations?
— What is the number of users/patients?
— How long and under what circumstances is the user/patient exposed?
harm P
Probability eshtaimrmation encompasses the circumstancesP and thhea zsaerqduoeunsc seist uaotfi oenvents from the
occurrence of the initiatinhga zeavrednt through to the Poccurrenceh aozfa rtdhoeu s situa. tTiohne probabhilaitrym of
occurrence of can be decomposed into a probPability P1 that a occurs (i.e. thaPt
persons are expohsaerdm to the ) and a probability 2 that the leads to . See
Figure C.1 in ISO 14971:2019. A decomposition into 1 and 2 can be useful to estimate the probability
of occurrence of , but such decomhpaorsmition is not mandatoryP. P
When the probability of occurrence of is decomposed into 1 and 2, it could be the case that one of
them can be estimated and the oritshker not. In such cases, a conservative approach can be used by setting
the unknownr ipsrkobability equal to 1. Such approach can be useful when the estimated probability is
either so low that the resulting becomes clearly insignificant or negligible, or so high that it is clear
the resulting should be reduced.
5.5.3 Risks for which probability cannot be estimated
risk
harm
Confidence in a estimate can be enhanced when a quantitative estimate of the probability of
occurrence of is made on the basis of accurate and reliable data, or when a reasonable qualitative
estimate is based on a consensus by qualified experts. However, this is not always achievable. For
example, the probabilities of systematic faults, such as those discussed in 5.4.5, are difficult to estimate.
12 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
When the accuracy of the probability estimate is in doubt, it is often necessary to establish a broad
range for the probability or to determine that it is no worse than some particular value.
Examples where probabilities are difficult to estimate include:
— software failure; medical device
— excepthioanzaalr mdsisuse situations, such as sabotage or tampering with a ;
risk
— novel that are poorly understood, e.g. imprecise knowledge of the infectivity of the
causative agent of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) prevents quantification of the of
transmission; hazards
— certain toxicological , such as genotoxic carcinogens and sensitizing agents, where it might
not be possible to determine a threshhaorldm of exposure below which toxic effects do not occur. risk
severity harm risk control
hWahzaenrd tohues psirtoubaatiboinlity of occurrence of cannot beh aezsatirmdoautesd s,i tiut aist ionnecessary toh aervmaluate the
on the basis roifs kt hceo ntrol of alone. The measseuvererist yshould hfoacrums on preventing the
entirely or on preventing that the leads to . If this is not
possible, the measures should focus on reducing the of thper ocesse.s
An inverse relationship can be presumed between the rigoprsr ocoef sstehse used in design,
development, mseavneurfiatcyturing and maintenance and the probability of some systematic fraiuslkt sc obnetirnogl
introduced or remaining umndeedticeaclt edde.v Tichee required rigor of these can be determined by taking
account of threis k contro lof the consequences of systematic pfaruolctess saensd the effectiveness of
measures external to the . The more severe the consequences are and the less effective
the external measures, the more rigorous these should be.
5.5.4 Severity
severity harm manufacturer
medical device Severity
To categorizseev tehreit y of the potential , the shomualndu ufascet dueresrcriptors appropriate
for the . is, in reality, a continuum; however, in practice, the use of a discrete
number of levels simplifies the analysis. In such cases, the decides how many
categories are appropriate and how they are to be defined. The levels should be descriptive and should
nSeovte irnictlyude any element of probability. See the emxaanmupfalecstu irne Trable 2 and Tabhlea r4m. s
medical device severity
levels asreev ecrhiotysen and justified by the harm based on rtihske analysi sthat could result for a
particular . The levels should be defined with sufficient specificity, so that the
correct level of can be assigned tos eeavcehri ty identified in the . risk
management file medical device
It is required to document the chosen levels or ranges and their descriptors in the
for the particular (see ISO 14971:2019, 5.5). severity harm
NOTE Terminology used by regulators can be useful in describing the levels of of .
5.5.5 Examples
severities harm hazardous situation
Several approaches can be used for qualitative analysis. A tyspeivcearl iatpyproach is to use an N-by-M matrix to
describe the and probarbisiklisties of occurrence of associated with each .
One carefully defines N levels of probability and M levels of . Each cell of the matrix represents a
subset of the full set of possiblrei sk . severity
risks R R R
A simple example is a 3 × 3 matrix constructed by using the three Manufa cletuvreelsr sof Table 2 as
columns and the three qualitative probability levels of Table 3 as rows. The estimated ( 1, 2, 3,
...) are entered into the appropriate cells and the result is shown in Figure 3. should make
these definitions as device-specific and explicit as needed to ensure their reproducible use.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 13
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Table 2 — Example of three qualitative severity levels
Common terms Possible description
Significant Death or loss of function or structure
Moderate Reversible or minor injury
Negligible No injury or slight injury
Table 3 — Example of three qualitative probability levels
Common terms Possible description
High Likely to happen, often, frequently, always
medical device
Likely to happen several times during the lifetime of the
Medium Can happen, but not frequently
medical device
Likely to occur a few times during the lifetime of the
medical
Low Unlikely to happen, rare, remote
device
Not likely to occur during the lifetime of the
risks
NOTE The estimated in Figure 3 are not the same as those depicted in Figure 2.
Figure 3 — Example of a qualitative 3 × 3 risk matrix
risk severity
risks R R
AR more elaborate example is a 5 × 5 matrix constructed by using the five levels of Table 4 as
columns and the five semi-quantitative probability levels of Table 5 as rows. The estimated ( 1, 2,
3, …) are entered into the appropriate cells and the result is shown in Figure 4.
Table 4 — Example of five qualitative severity levels
Common terms Possible description
Catastrophic / Fatal Results in death
Critical Results in permanent impairment or irreversible
injury
Serious / Major Results in injury or impairment requiring medical
or surgical intervention
Minor Results in temporary injury or impairment not
requiring medical or surgical intervention
Negligible Results in inconvenience or temporary discomfort
14 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Table 5 — Example of five semi-quantitative probability levels
Common terms Examples of probability range
−3
Frequent ≥10
−3 −4
Probable <10 and ≥10
−4 −5
Occasional <10 and ≥10
−5 −6
Remote <10 and ≥10
−6
Improbable <10
Figure 4 — Example of a semi-quantitative 5 × 5 risk matrix
Other sizes than 3 × 3 or 5 × 5 matrices can be employed. However, matrices with more than five
levels can require significantly more data to be able to distinguish between the various levels and to
avoid overlap of the levels. Rationales for the selection of matrices and their outcome scores should
be documented. Note that matrices with three levels might not always be sufficiently accurate for
adequate decision making. While the above examples were 3 × 3 and 5 × 5, there is no need that these
matrices be balanced. For example, a 4 × 5 matrix could be appropriate for a given application.
