6 Risk evaluation
process risk evaluation
risk risk manufacturer’s
ISO 14971:2019 describreiss kthe for risk. mTahnea sgteamnednatrd, however, does not specify
levels of acceptable . The criteria for acceptability are based on the policy for
determinriisnkg aecvcaelupattaibolne amnda naurefa dcotucruemrented in the ris pkslan. risk
During , the risk compares threi seks etvimalautaetdio n with the criteria for
acceptability and determines if these criteria are met or not. See Annex C for further guidance and
examples of applying the criteria for acceptability in .
7 Risk control
7.1 Risk control option analysis
7.1.1 Risk control for medical device design
risks medical device
manufacturer risks
Several options exist to reduce associated with a . These can be used alone or in
combination. The can explore different options to reduce the to acceptable levels in
a reasonably practicable way. The order of priority is important, as emphasised in ISO 14971:2019. This
is explained belomwe daincda lc dlaerviifcieed with some examples. process
a) Making the dehsaigzna radnd the manufacturing inherently safe by:
— eliminating a particular ; PROOF/ÉPREUVE 15
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
hazard
hazard
EXAMPLE 1 Eliminating the of sharp edges that can cause injury by designing the surfaces
with rounded edges. Eliminating the of electric shock by using a manually operated pump
instead of an electrical pump. harm
harm
— reducing the probability of occurrence of the ;
EXAMPLE 2 Reducing the probability of fibrillation due to an electric shock by having no
accessible live parts. Reducing the probability of unauthorised access to data by identity management.
Reducing the probability of biological reactions due to microbial contamination by using cleanroom
technologies osre svteerriiltiyzation. harm
severity harm
— reducing the of the .
severity harm
EXAMPLE 3 Reducing the of from being squeezed by a moving part by using a low-
power motor and low speed. Reducing the of from an electric shock by using low electric
voltage (below 42 V).
b) Taking protective measures by: hazardous situation
— preventing the occurrence of a ;
EXAMPLE 4 Using automatic cut-off or over-pressure valves. Protective covers of electrical wires
and power units (covered plugs, sockets and connectors). Guards for moving parts or to prevent patients
falling off a tabhlea zoar roduotu osf sbietuda. Itniospnection testing in mhaanrumfacturing to detect non-conforming products.
hazardous situation
— preventing a from leading to .
EXAMPLE 5 Using vissuaafel toyr acoustic alarms to alert the user to a .
c) Providing information for med bicya:l device
— placing warnings on the ;
EXAMPLE 6 Warning: Do not use afatecrc o[emxppairnyy dinagte d].ocumentation
— including contra-indications in the ;
EXAMPLE 7 Do not use with neonates. use error
— providing instructions to support correct use and to avoid ;
EXAMPLE 8 Apply epinephrine injector to the middle of your outer thigh (upper leg), through
clothing if necessary. Do not inject into your veins, buttocks, fingers, toes, hands or feet. Hold the leg of
young children firmly in place before and during injection to prevent injuries.
— providing instructions to use personal protective equipment;
EXAMPLE 9 Use gloves and eyeglasses when handling tsoexvice roirt yhazahradromus materials.
— providing instructions about measures to reduce the of ;
EXAMPLE 10 Rinse immediately with water aftemr ecodnictaalm dienvaitcioen with hazardous substances.
— providing training to users on how to use the correctly;
EXAMPLE 11 Training program for operators of radiotherapy equipment or for home-use dialysis
machines.
medical device
— providing instructions relating to installation and maintenance during the lifetime of the
medical
.
device
EXAMPLE 12 Maintenance intervals, maximum expected lifetime, how to dispose of the
properly.
16 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
risk manufacturer
Options a) to c) are listed in descendirnigsk o crodnetrr oolf priority with regard to their generally recognised
effectiveness in reducing . The should take this order into account before deciding on
the most appropriate r(cisokm cboinntartoilon of) measures. medical devices
safety
Examples of specific measures for different types of are given in Table 6.
Further guidance on providing information for is given in Annex D.
Table 6 — Examples of risk control measures
Hazardous Inherently Protective Information
Medical device Hazard
situation safe design measure for safety
Reuse after
Syringe (for Biological con- Self-destruction Clear indication of Warning against
previous use on
single use) tamination after use first use reuse
another patient
Pacemaker stops
Information on
Implantable Loss of func- functioning due Reliable long-life Alarm before bat-
typical battery
pacemaker tionality to early battery batteries tery depletion
lifetime
depletion
Software failure Over-pressure Instruction to use
Mechanical Blower incapable
causes excessive valve in ventila- only breathing
patient Air pressure of delivering high
pressure in pa- tor or in breath- hose delivered by
ventilator pressure
tient airway ing hose manufacturer
Instruction to
Metrologically
IVD blood Systematic Incorrect result re- verify calibration
Self-calibration traceable calibra-
analyser error or bias ported to clinician with trueness
tors provided
controls
Not feasible Information on
X-ray Ionising radi- Staff exposed to Lead shields and
(stray radiation radiation level in
equipment ation stray radiation lead aprons
always occurs) occupancy zones
In this step possible solutions for inherently safe design and prortiescktsive measures can be invepsrtoicgeastsed for
mthaeniru sfatrcetunrgetrhs and weaknesses. The choice of design solutions should be based on these investigations.
Much knowledge of the possible design solutions and related can be created in this . The
should consider how to retain this knowledge for future use.
7.1.2 Risk control for manufacturing processes
processes safety medical devices
Deviations or errors in manufacturing can compromise the of , for
example, by:
— introducing hazardous residues or particulates;
— affecting critical physical or chemical properties such as surface coating, tensile strength, resistance
to ageing, homogeneity, etc.;
— exceeding crpirtoiccaels tsolerances;
— insufficient control, leading to mix up of gas lines during the assembly of a respirator; or
— impairing the integrity of welding, gluing, or bondingh oafz caormdponents. process
hazard medical device
Ipnrhoceersesntly safe manufacture eliminates the particular from the manufacturing and
ensures thamt ethdiec al devic eiss not present in the . Protective measures in the manufacturing
, such as inspection and/or testing, can detect non-conformities and can prevent the distribution
of affected .
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 17
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Techniques such as Failure Modper oacnedss Eesffects Analysis (FMEA, see Annex B.5) and Hriaskz acrodn tAronlalysis
and Critical Control Points (HACCP, see Annex B.7) can be useful for analysing critical steps in the
manufacturing apnrdo cdeissstersibution . It is important to also consider the need for in:
— outsourced m, seudcicha al sd peuvircceh alisfee dc ypcrloeducts, components and services; and
— other phases of the , such as storage, distribution, installation, servicing,
decommissioning and disposal.
7.1.3 Standards and risk control
state of
the art manufacturer residual risks
Generally, international standards can be considered trois rkespresent the generamllye daicckanl doewvliecdeged
. By applying a standard, the can simplify the task of analysing , but it
is emphasised that the standard misgahfte ntyot address all associated with a safety. medical
devices risks
mMeadniyc aslt daenvdiacerds admdraensusf ainchtuerreernt , protective measures, and ionbfojercmtiavtei oenvi dfoern ce for
. When relevant standards exist, they can address some or all asrsiosckisated with a particular
. The can presume that, in the absence of to the contrary,
meeting the requirements of the relevant standards results in particular being reduced to an
acceptable level. See Annex E for further guidance on the use of international standards.
7.2 Implementation of risk control measures
risk control verification
verification risk control risk management
ISO 14971: 2019v reerqifuiciaretiso inmplementation of measures, of implementation and
of the effectiveness of those measures. The plan specifies how
tVheer itfiwcaot dioinstinct activitireissk w ciolln btero clarried out. medical device
Verification risk control medical device
of implementation of risk control measures in the medical dceavnic bee obtavienreifdic afrtoiomn
design documentation. risk contr oolf the effectiveness of the mseaafestuyres in the
can require testing of individual ve mrifeiacasutiroens or testing the . The
requirements apply to all measures, including information for . Testing with useinr sv ictarno
pdiraogvnidoest iucs mefeudl icinafl odremviacteison supporting the of effectiveness, for example usability testing
[16] [26]
r(siseke mIEaCn 6a2ge3m66e-n1t ), clinical investigation (see ISO 14155 ) or clinical performance studies of
[37]
(see ISO 20916 ). More guidance on the use of international standards in
Verification is provided in Anrnieskx Eco.ntrol process
process Verification risk control
of imprpolecemsesntation of measures in the manufacturingp rocess can be dpornoec ebsys
checking the specifications. of the effectiveness of measures in the
manufacturing can be done by qualification of the manufacturing , such as
validraistkio mn,a innaspgeemcteionnt method qualificatiovne roirfi coathtieorn appropriate means.
verification
The plan can detail the activities explicitly or by reference to the plan for
other activities.
7.3 Residual risk evaluation
Residual risks risk
risks residual risk risk
control are evaluated by the same method rainskd cwonitthr otlhe same criteria for ben eafcitc-eripstkability as
the initial . TheR esidual risk is either acceptable or unacceptable. Whliefen cuyncalecceptabmlee, dfuicratlh deer vice
options shouldp obset -ipnrvoedsutcigtiaotned. If further is not practricisakble, a analysis
may be performed. evaluation can be repeated through the of the ,
when production and information indicate that either the or its acceptability could
have changed.
7.4 Benefit-risk analysis
7.4.1 General
manufacturer benefit-risk risks
risk management risk
ISO 14971:2019 allows the to perform a analysis for those that are not
j1u8d ged acceptable using the criteria establi
P
sh
R
e
O
d
O
i
F
n
/ É
th
P
e
R EUVE
plan and for which further
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
control benefit-risk residual risk
benefits intended use medical device
is not practicable. The analysis is used to determine if the is outweighed
bBye ntehfeit e-rxipskected of the of threes idual risks .
analyses cannot be used to weigh against business advantages or economic
advantages (i.e. for business rdiesckision making). See also ISO 14971:2019, A.2.7.4. benefits
risks benefits
The practicability of further reduction should be taken into account before considering the
(see Annex C). The decision as to whether are outweighed by is essentially a mabtteenre foitf
judgment by experienced and knowledgeable individuals, usually a multridisiksciplinary team cormispkrising
medical, clinical or applicraestiidouna el xrpisekrts. An immpaonrtuafanct tcuorners’isd emreadtiiocanl ids ewvihceether an antriecsiipdautaeld r isk
can be amcehdieicvaeld d etvhircoeusgh the use of alternative solutions without that or with smaller . This
involves comparing the for the with the for
similar .
7.4.2 Benefit estimation
benefit medical device
Benefits
The arising from a is related to the likelihood and extent of improvement of
health expected from its use. can be described in terms of positive impact obnen celfiintiscal outcome,
the patient’s quality of life, outcomes related to diagnosis, positive impact from diagnostic devices on
clinical outcomes, or a positive impact on public health. The nature and degree of can depend
on the patienbte npeofpituslation.
benefit benefit
Sometimes can be described in terms of magnitude of the positive effects, for example the
pBreonpefoirttion of patients that will experience the and the duration of .
can be estimated from knowledge of several factors such as:
— the performance expected during clinical use;
— btheen ecfliitnsical outcome expected from that pmerefdoircmal adnecveic;es
— resulting fromr tihskes use obf esnimefiiltasr ;
— factors relevabnetn teof itthe and of other diagnosis or treatment options.
Confidence in the estimate is strongly dependent on the reliability of the information addressing
these factors. This includes recognition that there is likely to be a range of possible outcomes. For
example:
— It can be difficult to compare different outcomes, e.g. which is worse, pain or loss of mobility?
Different outcomes can result from the side-effects being very different from the initial problem.
— It is difficult to take account of non-stable outcomes. These can arise both from the recovery time
and long-term effects.
Due to the difficulties in applying a rigorous approach, it is generally necessary to make simplifying
assumptions. Therefore, it will usually prove expedient to focus on the most likely outcomes for each
option and those that are the most favourable or unfavourable.
The following aspects shobuelnde bfiet staken into account: medical device
— the type of expected for the patient or other people (e.g. the is life-saving or
essential in a given medical scenbaerinoe)f;its
benefit
— the magnitude of the expected (e.g. the degree to which the patient will experience the
therapeutic or diagnostic ); benefits
medical device
— the probability that the patient will experience the expected (i.e. the likelihood that the
is effective in treating or diagnosing theb epnaetfiietnt’s disease or condition); and
— the duration of the expected effects (i.e. how long the is expected to last for the patient).
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 19
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
benefit process
medical device
An ebsetnimefaitte of can vary markedly across different phases of the design . If reliable clinical
dbeantae fditemonstrating the consistent performance and effectiveness of the are available,
the can be estimated confidently. In caspesro wcehsesre clinical data abreen leimfitited in quantity or quality,
is estimated with greater uncertainty from whatever relevant information is available. For
example, it is sometimes necessary early in the to estimate the from the expected degree
of health improvemreisnkts and the likelihood of abchenieevfiitng the intended performance.
Where significant are present and the estimateb ehnaesf ita- rhisigkh degree of uncertainty, it will
be necessary to verify the anticipated performance roers iedfufaelc rtiivskeness through a simulatiporno csetduudrye sor a
clinical investigation. Thims eids iceasls ednetviiacle sto confirm that the balance is as expected inan vdit rtoo
[26]
pdiraegvneonstt uicn mweadrircaanl tdeedv iecxepsosure of patients to a large . ISO 14155 specifies for
[37]
clinical investigations of and ISO 20916 for clinical performance studies of
.
7.4.3 Criteria for benefit-risk analysis
benefit-risk
risk management
Those involved in making judgments have a responsibility to understand and take into
account the technical, regulatorym, eedciocnaol mdeicv iacned sociological context of their decisions.
This can involve an interpretation of fundamental requirements set out in applicable regulations or
standards, as they appsalyfe ttoy the under consideration under the anticipated conditionriss kosf
use. Since this type of analysis is highly product-specific, furthreisrk guidance of a general nature is not
possible. Instead, the requirements specified by standards addressing specific products or
can be presumed to be consistent with an abcecneepfittable lreevseidl uoafl risk, especially where the use of those
standards is sanctioned by the prevailing regulatory system. Note that a clinical investigation might be
required to verify that the balance between and is acceptable.
7.4.4 Benefit-risk comparison
benefit risk
A direct comparison of and is complicated and should take the following into account:
— characterization of the disease or condition of the intended pahtaieznartsd;s medical device
benefit risk
— the uncertainty of data. Initially, a literature search for the and the being
considered can pproosvt-ipdreo dinuscitgihont into the balance betweemn edical d eavnidc es ;
— production and information for similar that are already available on
the market; state of the art
— the generally acknowbleedngefeidts medical; device benefits
medical devices
— a comparison of the of the under development with the of similar
availraebslied uoanl trhisek msarket;medical device residual risks
medical devices
— a comparison of the of the under development with the of
similar avamilaanbulefa ocnt utrheer market. benefit-risk risk
management file
ISO 14971:2019 requires the to record the results of a analysis in the
. It is recommended to include the rationale how the conclusion was reached.
7.4.5 Examples of benefit-risk analyses
benefit-risk
The following examples illustrate the conclusions of analyses.
EXAMPLE 1 Burns can occur where the returnb eenleefcittrode of a high-frequency surgery device is improperly
arettsaidcuhaeld r itsok the patient. Although conformance to the relevant product standard minimizes the probability of
such burns, they can still occur. Nevertheless, the of using a high-frequency surgery device outweighs the
of burns.
20 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
EXAMPLE 2 Although X-rays are known to be potentially harmful, the clinical effectiveness of conventional
diagnostic imaging almost always justifies its use. However, the unmwaannutfeadc teufrfeercts of radiation on the patient
abreen enfoitt- riigsnkored. Standards exist to minimize radiation exposure tom peadtiiceanlt ds.e Wvicheesn a new application of ionizing
radiation is developed and existing standards are not applicable, the verifies that the results of the
analysis are at least as favourable as that of alternative and treatments.
EXAMPLE 3 Once implanted, some cochlear implant components, such as the implant receiver stimulator
with electrode array, cannot easily be replaced. They are intended to remain implanted for life and are required
to perform reliably for years and even decades. (This is an especially important consideration in the case of a
young adult or crheislidd.)u aAlc creislkeratedm reedliicaabli lditeyv itceesting of these components can be cboenndeufictted for specific failure
mechanisms. Howerveesird, uvaall ridisakting the reliability of components that are to last for decades is not practical.
Therefore, the of failure is weighed against the r eosifd upaolt reinstkial hearing
impbroenveefmitent. The b edneepfietnds on the estimriastked reliability of the components and the confidence in the
reliability estimates for those components that cannot be validated. In some cases, the outweighs
the ; in other cases the outweighs the .
7.5 Risks arising from risk control measures
risk control risk risks risks
risk
Implementing a measure to reduce one can introdmuecdei cnaelw d evice or increase other ,
including those hparzeavrioduouslsy s eitvuaalutiaotnesd to be acceptable. For example, elimination of a use-related in
trhisek user interface can restrict the user’s flexibility riins ku scionngt rtohle and restrict his ability
to intervene in manufacturer . A second example is a software chanrgisek sto control one particular
, which unintentionally undermines another measure embedded in the software
architecture. The reviews these effecrtiss kto a ennaslyusries that thomseed ical d aervei csetill acceptable. risk
control risks risks risk
Oconnet rwolay to perform this review is to uppdraotcee stshe manufactu orfe rthe , including all
process mriseka asunraelyss, iasnd ptoro icdeesnstify if new are introduced or existing are increased. For
measures in the manufacturing , the can perform the review as part of
or validation.
7.6 Completeness of risk control
risks hazardous situations
risk control hazards
hISaOz a1r4d9o7u1s :2si0tu1a9t rioenqsuires that the frroimsk sall identified are considerrisekds and that
all haza radcotiuvsi tsiietsu aatrieo ncsompleted. This can be achieved by mriasiknstaining a list of all and
and the associaritsekd m ana.g Temhee nlits fti lcean be checked to ensure that the from all
identified have been considered and that no are overlooked. The results of
this activity are documented in the .
8 Evaluation of overall residual risk
8.1 General considerations
residual risk benefits
intended use medical device residual risk
ISO 14971:2019 requires that the overarells idual risk be evaluated irni srke mlaatinoang etom ethnte of the
of the , and that both the criteria for acceptability of the overall
and the method of evaluarteiosind uoaf lo rviesrkall be irnecsliuddueadl r iinsk the plan.
hazardous situations risks
The evaluation of overall is the bpeoninefti tw-rhisekre is viewmeadn furfoamct uar berroad perspective.
All idenrteifsiieddu al risk have bmeeendi ecavla dlueavtieced and all have been reduced to an acceptable
level or havrees bideueanl arcisckepted based upon a analysis. Now, the cornessiiddeurasl irf itshkes
overall associatbeedn ewfiittsh the intended use as a whomlee dsiactails fdieesv itchee criteria for acceptability
of overall .m Tehdiisc aclo dnesviidceersation takmese diinctaol daecvciocuesnt the contributions of all risks
together in relation to the of the medic aolf dtehvei ce . This step is particularly
important for complex and for with a large number of individual .
The evaluation can lead to the conclusion that the is safe.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 21
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
residual risk
risks
The evaluation of overall is a challenging task that cannot be achieved by adding all
individual numerically. The diffichualrtmy arises for the following rheaarsmons: severity
hazardous situations
— Each probability of occurrence of is related to a different with different and can
be related to different .
— Probabilities are often known with different degree of uncertainty. Some probabilities could
be known precisely from either historical data or testing. Other probabilities might be known
imprecisely such as estimates by expert judgment, or cannot be estimated such as the probability of
a software failure. severities harms
risk analysis
— It is not possible to combine the of individual within the broad categories usually
employed in . residual risk
risks risks
Furthermore, the criteria for acceptahbairlimty of the overall severity can be different from the criteria
for accerpetsaibdiulaitly r oisfk individual . The criteria used to evaluate individubaeln efits usuallyin itnecnluddede luismeits
for tmheed picraolb daebviilcitey of occurrence of with a particular . The criteria used to evaluate the
overall are often based on additional elements, such as the of the of
the . residual risk manufacturer
There is no preferred way for evaluating the overall . The is responsible
fmoar nduefatecrtmurienrisng an appropriate method. In the following subclauses some examples of approaches
are presented that can be used in defining the evaluation method. This guidance is intended to assist
in establishing methods andr cersiitdeuraial .risk
ISO 14971:2019 requires that the overall medical dev bicee evaluated by persons with the knowledge,
experience and authority to perform such tasks. It is recommended to involve application specialists
with knowledge of and experience with the . Ultimately, the evaluation should be based
on expert judgment with essential roles for raepspidluicaalt iroinsk knowledge and clinicraislk e xmpaenrtaigseem. ent file
residual risk
The results of the evaluation of overall form part of the . It is
recommended to document thme arnatuifoancatuler eforr the acceptance of the overall residual risk.s
accompanying documentation residual risks
ISO 14971:2019 requires the re tsoid iunaflo rrimsk users of significant and to provide
the necessary information in the to disclose those . See
Annex D for guidance on the disclosure of .
8.2 Inputs and other considerations
residual risk
The evaluation of overall can take several inputs and considerations into account. Some
examples of inputs and their use are presented below. hazardous situations risks
residual risk
a) Different sequences of events can lead to different and , each contributing
to the overall . For example, the reuse of a single-use device can be associated with
infection, leachinrgi skosf toxic substances, mechanical failure due to ageing and bio-incompatible
disinfectant residues. Event Tree Anasleyvseisr it(yETAh, asreme Annex B.4) can be a suitable methroisdk sfor
analysing these , to differentiate bertewsiedeuna ls reiqskuences of events with considerable versus
negligible probability of occurrence or of . The combined contribution of these is
considered inh tahrem evaluation of the overall hazardo. us situations
harm residual risk
b) A particular can originate from different . In such cases, the probability
of occurrence of the can be used to determine the overall harm based on a combination
of the individual probabilities. Fault Tree Analysis (FTA, see Annex B.3) can be a suitable method
Rfoirs ke sctoimntartoilng the combined probability of occurrence of a particular . risks
residual risk
c) meriasskures that are appropriate for independent individual could result in
conflicting requirements, which can increase the overall . For example, an instruction
to address the of an unconscious patient falling off a patient table could be “never leave an
unconscious patient unattended”. This could conflict with the instruction “stand behind protective
screen when making X-ray images” intended to protect medical staff from being exposed to X-rays.
22 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
risk
medical device
d) A warning considered on its own could provide adequate reduction of an individual . However,
too many warnings can confuse the user of the and can thursis kreduce the effect of
the indirveisdiduuaal lw riasrknings. An analysis might be needed to determine if there is an over-reliance
on warnings and whether such over-reliance could have an impact on the reduction and the
overall . medical device
e) Are sciodmuaplr reihskensive review of all operating instructions for the might reveal that the
instructions are inconsistent or too difficult to follow. This can also have an impact on the overall
.
residual risk
f) The results of the design validation, usability studies, clinical evaluations and clinical investigations
can provide useful information about the overall . Appropriate input from stakeholders
canb pernoevfiitd-rei sukseful information. risks
g) All analyses for individual shroiusklds be takenri isnkt oa naacclyosuisnt.
residual risk risk
h) When there have been trade-offs between in the risk , the impact on the overall
risk should be analysed with extra care. These are insrtisaknces where one might have
been allowed to increase somewhat in order that another could be rerdisukcsed. For example, the
to one person (the user) is allowed to increase so that the r itsok sanother (the patient) can be
reduced. The evaluation can take the form of going through related major , describing why the
trade-off balance is justified, and why the combined level of the in the trade-off decision is
acceptable.
8.3 Possible approaches
residual risk
manufacturer
The method to evaluate the overall can include the following approaches or other
approachbeesn defeietsmed appropriatinet beyn dtehde use med.ical device residual
risk Benefits
a) Tbehnee fit related to the of the are weighed against the overbaelnl efit
. can be described by their magnitude or extent, the probability of experiencing the
within tshtaet ien otef nthdee adr ptatient population, and the duration and frequency of the me.d Tichael
edvevailcueastion should take into account knowledge of the intended medical indication, the generally
acknowledged in technology and medicine, and the availability of alternative
or treatments. residual risks residual risk
risk risk
b) Visual representatiornissk osf the r icsakns be useful. Each indisveivdeuriatly can be shown
in a chart or matrriisxk, such as those in Figurries k3s and Figure 4, giving a graphic view of the
rdiissktsribution of the . If many roefs itdhuea l risk are in the higher regions or in the higrhieskr
probability regions of the matrix, or clusters of are borderline, then the distribution of the
can indicate that the overall might not be acceptable, even if each individual
has bmeaennu jufadcgteudre arcceptable. medical device medical devices
medical device
c) The rceasni dcuoaml rpiaskre the underb ceonnefsiitdseration to similar medical
advevaiiclaebsleR oesni dtuhael m riasrkkset. The key quemsteidoinca ils dwehveicteher the under consideration has an
raicsckesptable overall medical dinev riecleation to the medical , in compianrtiesnodne dto ussime ilar
. intend peods eudse by the can be compmaerdeidca iln ddievviidcuesally to corresponding
for the similar , taking account of differences in . Up-to-date
information on and adverse events of similar should be carefully
reviewed, as well as information from scientific literature, including information about clinical
expemriaennucefa.cturer residual risk
benefits medical device
d) The can use experts to support the evaluation of the overall in relation
to the expected from usingm theed ical devices under consideration. These experts can come
from a variety of disciplines and should include those with clinmiceadli coarl adpepvilciceation experience and
tmhaonsuef awcittuhr ekrnowledge of similar . The experts should have an appropriate level
of independence from those who designed and developed the . They can assist the
in taking into account stakeholder concerns. Attention is drawn to the requirements
in ISO 14971:2019 for training and experience.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 23
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
risks
risks
e) rEevseidnu tahlo ruigskh all individual should have been identified, rciosnktsrolled and judged acceptable at
this point, it could brees iadpuparlo rpisrkiate that some are investigated further as a result of the overall
evaluation. For example, there could be many close to being not acceptable.
Hence, the overall could not be deemed acceptable and a further investigation would
be appropriate. risks
risk control Risk control
f) Further investigation can also be appropriate when some are interdepernisdke ncot nwtritohl respect to
either their causes or rtihske control measures applied. meraisskusres should be verified
for effectiveness, not only individually but also in combination with other measures.
This can arlisskos applyr tisok control measures designed to control multiple simultaneously. Fault
Tree Analysis (FTA) or Event Tree Analysis (ETA) can be useful tools to discover such relationships
between and measures.
9 Risk management review
risk managementprocess
risk management residual risk
ISO 14971:2019 requires that the final results of the be reviewedp otost e-pnrsoudruec tthioant
the risk pmlaann ahgaesm beenetn appropriately executed, that the overall verifica tisio ancceptarbilsek,
aconndt trhoalt appropriate methods are in place to collect and revmieewdi rcealle dveavnitc eproducrtiisokn manadn agement
information. The review is performed afterri sikm mplaenmaegnemtaetniotn f ialend of all
measures but prior to commercial release of the . The report
provides the summary of this review and is inclurdisekd mina tnhaeg ement .
post-production manufacturer
There can be a need to revise or update the risk manage rmeepnotrt if new information becomriesks
amvaanilaagbelme, efnotr example during the production and phases. The me ddiectaelr dmevinicees
when subsequent reviews of the execution of the plan and updates of the
report are performed, froisrk e mxaamnapglee,m afetnetr a major change in the design of the .
risk managementprocess top management risk
Tmhaen argevemieewn tof the execution of thel ife cycle plan mise ndoicta tl od ebvei cceonfumseedd iwcaitlh d ethviec ereview of the
suitability of the risk manage mate pnlta pnrnoecde sisntervals by (see 4.2.p3r)o. cTehses
proc pelsasn is related to the of one type of (or family). The
review of the suitability of the is related to the effectiveness of the and
how this is implemented.
10 Production and post-production activities
10.1 General
post-production medical device
manufacturers risk management life cycle process
Monitoring of production and information is the critical step that enables
safety to close the feedback loop and to make risk ma an acognemtinenutouprso cess .
Dursinafge ttyhis phamsee, diincfaolr dmevaitcieon is collected from many different sources, reviewed for relevance to
, and where appropriate, fed back into earlier phases of the to maintain
the of the . manufacturer
medical device safety
ISO 14971:2019 requires the risk managem etnot establish a system to actively collect and review
information about the that could be related to . The activities necessary to establish
this system are recorpdoesdt -ipnr tohdeu ction plan (see 4.4.8).
The production and activities can be part of a post-market surveillance system. See
[35]
ISO/TR 20416 for more guidance on post-market surveillance.
ISO 13485:2016– Medical devices – A practical guide
[24]
NOTE This phase is aligned with the relevant parts of Clauses 7 and 8 of ISO 13485:2016 . More guidance
[25]
is provided in the ISO Handbook: .
10.2 Information collection
safety medical device
manufacturer medical devices
Information relevant to the of the can come from a variety of sources. The more
experience a has in developing and marketing similar , the more likely the
24 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
manufacturer medical device
reasonably foreseeable misuse risks medical device
will have a good understanding of the performance, the patient population,
the post-production that could occur, and the associated with the medical d.evice
safety
Production and activities can include receiving informahtairomn about the
hazard aonuds spiteurafotiromnsance. Sources typically ihnacrlmude general feedback from users, distributors, service
personnel amnedd itcraali ndienvgi cpeersonnel. The information crainsk bse related to that has occurred or to
that occurred without . The activities can also include soliciting information
about the performance anmd arneulfaatcetdu rer . These acmtievditicieasl idnevvoiclvee reaching out to
stakeholders to obtain specific information and insight, using methods such as customer surveys,
expert user groups (focus groups) and -sponsored tracking/implant
registries. It also includes publicly available information such as clinical literature, incident reports and
adverse event databases.
safety
The macetdivicitaile ds ecvaince further include post-market clinical follow-up (PMCF) studies carried out following
market approvsaalf,e twyhich are intended to enhraenscide utahle r icslkinsical evidemneced icfoarl dthevei ce and performance
of a intended u saefter it is placed on the market. PMCF studies typically address specific questions
related to the or performance (i.e. the ) when a is used in accordance
[26]
with its . See ISO 14155 for requirements on clinical investigations and GHTF/SG5/N4:
[3]
2010 for further guidance on PMCF studies. manufacturer’s medical
device medical devices intended use hazards
The information collected does not necreissskasrily have to be directmlya rneulafatectdu troe rt’hs em edical device
. Other with similar , similar principle of operation or similar
can yield useful information about the associated with the . This also
applies to other products without a medical purpose but with similar upsoes to-rp rsoimduilcatrio onperating principle.
safety
Table 7 presents a list of data sources containing production and information that
should be considered for analysis and possible relevance to . This table is based on GHTF/SG3/
[2]
N18: 2010 .
If the collection and review of information is performed by different departments, effective
communication and coordination between those departments is essential.
Table 7 — Data sources related to production and post-production information
Data sources Information
— PDraotcae fsrsom monitoring supplier performance/controls
— proce mssonitoring
Production
— In- inspection/testing
— Internal/external audits
— Quamnetditiycal device
— By family
— By customer (physician, healthcare facility, patient, etc.)
Complaint handling — Reason for complaint
— SCeovmerpiltayint codehsarm
— of any
— Component involved
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 25
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Table 7 (continued)
Data sources Information
— Installationmedical device
— First use of
— Frequency of maintenance visits
— Types of repairs
Service reports
— Frequency of repairs
— Usage frequency
— Parts replaced
medical devices
— Service personnel
Risk management
— Published adverse event reports for similar state of the art
— Stakeholder concerns and generally acknowledged
Clinical activities — Post-Market Clinical Follow-up (PMCF) studies
— Service response time medical devices
Market/patient surveys
— Solicited information on new or modified
Scientific literature — Research publications
— Online newsletters
Media sources — Medical information websites
— Articles in trade journals, scientific journals and other literature
— Independent security researchers
— In-house testing
— Suppliers of software or hardware technology
Security data sources
— Health care facilities
medical device
— Published events for devices sharing similar technologies as the
— Information Sharing and Analysis Center (ISAC)
10.3 Information review
safety
The collected information is reviewed to determine if the information is relevant to . The following
questions cinatne nhdeelpd iuns ethis review:
— Is the stbielln veafiltisd?
— Are the anticipated hazards achhieavzeadrd?ous situations
harm
— Is there evidence of or not previously identified? For example, did any
unforeseen occur?
— Are there occurrences of misuse which were previously not foreseiennte?nded use
— Is there an increasing trend of use for applications othhaezra trhdaonu st hseit uation ha?rm
harm
— Does the frequency of occurrence of a particular or suggest that the
probability of occurrence of was underestimated?
26 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
harm severity harm
— Does the reported inrdisicka ctoen tthraotl the of was underestimated?
— Is there evidence that the resi dmueaal sruisrkes are not effective?
— Does the evaluation of the overall accsutraattee olyf trheep raerstent the actual market experience?
— Are there changes in the generally acknowrilsekdged ?
— Are there indications that the criteria for acceptability should be adjusted?
The inforhmazaatriodn revhieawza cradno ulesa sdit utoa tsieovneral possible outcomes, for examrispkle:
— The and were correctly identified. The was adequately assessed and
remahianzsa arcdceptahbalez.ardous situation risk
— The and were correctly identified, but the has increased and is no
longehra zaaccrdeptahbalez.a Frudrotuhse sri taucattioionn is required.
— The or state w oafs t nhoet aidrtentified. bFeunretfhitesr action ims reedqicuairl edde.vice
— The generally acknowledged or the for the have changed.
Further action is required. state of the art
Concerning chasanfgeetsy in the generally acknowledged risks , consideration should alsor bisek sgiven
tboe ntehfeit asvailability of alternatives to treat or diagnose the medical condition of the intended patients,
including the and effectiveness and the associated of those alternatives. The and
man tuof apcattuiernerts in situations where no treatment or diagnosbies nise faitvsailable sihnoteunldde adl suos ebe considered.
benefits risks benefit
The residual ris kshould also assess whether the anticipated benefi tof the are achieved
or have changed. If the change while the remain the same, the balance between and
overall can also change. See 7.4.2 for a discussion of estimation.
Statisticmael dtieccahl ndieqvuiceess should be considered to assist in the processing of data, such as trmenandu afancatluyrseisr,
predictive mreeldiaicbailli tdye veincegsineering techniques (e.g. Weibull analysis), and reliability evaluation (e.g.
testing or components to failure, testing failed components returned to the ,
[21]
or testing from the same lot or previous/succeeding lots). See ISO/TR 10017 for
further guidance on the selection and use of statistical techniques.
10.4 Actions
safety
medical device
If the collected information is rreisvki emwaenda gaenmde dnettperromceinssed to be relevant to , several actions are
required by ISO 14971:2019. Some of these actions are related to the particular , while
othehra azcatriodns ahrae zraerladtoeuds tsoit tuhaet ion . risks
If a or risk assessment is present that was norits kp rceovnitoruoslly recognised, the associated risk
amraen aasgseemsseendt failned controlled where appropriate, following the steps of ISO 14971:2019 Clauses 5 to 7.
The results of the and the implemented measures are recorded in the
risk . risk
risk control
If a has become no longer acceptable, an update of the assessmenrti sokf the specific is necessary.
The impact of the collected information on previously implemmedenictaeld d evice measures is evaluated
to see if these measures are still effective and sufficient to reducrei stkh ec ontr.o Tlhe results of this evaluation
should be conrsiisdke raesds easssm aenn tinput for modification ofr itshke control . If appropriate, the stepsr isokf
mISaOn 1a4g9e7m1e:n2t0 f1i9le Clauses 5 to 7 are repeated and new/additional measures are implemented.
The updated and the implemented measures are recorded in the
. residual risk benefits intended
use medical device risk management
It couldri sbke mneacneasgseamrye ntot evaluate the overall again in relation to the of the
of the . It could also be necessary to repeat the review and to prepare
a new report. See Clauses 8 and 9 of ISO 14971:2019.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 27
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
manufacturer medical devices
The should also consider if actions are nmeaenduefda ctotu arderdress those thamt eadriec:al
devices
— already distributed (i.e. beyond the control of the ), because correction of these
or removal from the market could be necessary; manufacturer
medical devices
— already manufactured but not distributed (i.e. still under the control of the ), because
containment and correction of these could be necmesesdaircya;l odrevice
processes
— to be manufactured in the future, because modification of the design and related
mmeadniucafal cdteuvriicnegs or servicing ma cnouufladc tbuer enrecessary.
For on the market, the should consider whether anryis uk rcgoennttr oinlformation
should be communicated to users, patients and other stakeholders as an interim measure (for example
[24]
as an advirsiosrky notice as described in 8.3 of ISO 13485:2016 ), before further measures
are developed. The degree of urgency in this communication should be commensurate with rtihske
dmeagnraegee omf ent fi, lebecause the speed of these actions contributes to their effectiveness. The time period
can be subject to regulatory requirements. The decisions and actions taken are recorded in the
. risk management process
manufacturer
The results of the information review can indicate rtihsakt m tahnea gement is insufficient
or inadequate. Therefore, ISO 14971:2019 requires the ttoop emvaanluaagteem tehnet impact of the
collected information on the previously implemented actriivsikt imesa, ntoa gseeme wenhticphro accetsisvities
should Tboep i mmparnoavgeedm. Tenhte results of this evaluation are communicated trois k management p,r wocheos swill take
these results as input into the planned reviews of the suitability of the (see
4.2.3). then decides which parts or aspects of the require
improvement to ensure its continuing effectiveness.
28 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
