Annex A
Identification of hazards( iannfodr cmhaatrivaec)t eristics related to safety
A.1 General
manufacturer medical device
safety hazards
ISO 14971:2019 requmireedsi ctahla dt etvhiece identify those characteristics of the that
could affect . Consideratiionnte onfd tehde uses echraeraascotnearbislyti cfosr iess eaena ebsles emnitsiuals estep in identifying the
amsesdoicciaalt deedv wiceith the . One way of doing this is to ask a series of questions concerning the
manufacture, intended users, , , ahnadz aurldtismate disposal of the
. If one asks these questions from the point of view of all the individuals involved (e.g. users,
maintenance staff, patients, etc.), a more complete picture can emerge of the that mmigedhitc eaxl idste.vice
safety risks IVD
Tmheed iqcaule sdteivoincse sin A.2 can assist the reader in identifying all the characteristimcse doifc athl ed evices
tmhaant ucfoauctldu raefrfect . Annex H contains additional points to consider in estimating medi cfarol mde vice
. These lists are neither exhaustmivaen unfoarc truerperresentative of all , and the
is advised to add questions that can have applicability to the particular
and to skip questions that are not relevant. The is also advised to consider each question
not onmlayn ounf aitcst uorwern but also in relation to others.
safety medical devices in vitro
dTihaeg nostic medical dmevaicye sfurther consult relevant clinical literaturem, aedpipclaicl adbelvei ceresgulations, or the
[29]
essential principles of and performance for in ISO 16142-1 or for
[30]
in ISO 16142-2 . An additional source for where security is
[1]
a concern is AAMI TIR 57 .
A.2 Questions
A.2.1 What is the intended use and how is the medical device to be used?
Factors that shomuledd bicea cl odnevsiicdeered include:
— what is the ’s role relative to:
— diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation of disease,
— diagnosis, monitoring, treatment or alleviation of or compensation for an injury, process
— investigation, replacement, modification or support of anatomy or a physiological , or
— control of conception?
— what are the indications for use (e.g. patient population, user profile, use environment)?
— what are mtheed iccoanl tdreav-iicnedications?
— does the sustain or support life? medical device
— is special intervention necemsseadricya iln d ethveic cease of failure of the ?
— can the performance of the be impacted in the event of a security breach (performance
degradation or loss of availability)? medical devicesafety
— can unauthorized access, unauthorized activities, or loss of data affect the ?
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 29
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
A.2.2 Is the medical device intended to be implanted?
Factors that should be considered include the location of implantation, the characteristics of the patient
population, age, weight, physical activity, the effect of ageing on implant performance, the expected
lifetime of the implant, the reversibility of the implantation, whetmheedr icthael diemvpicleant can be modified or
configured while implanted and the access connection to perform this modification or configuration
(Ae..2g.. 3p hyIssi ctahle a cmceesdsi pcaoiln dt eovr iwceir ienletsesn cdoendn etcot iboen tino tchoen imtapclta wntietdh the patient o).r other persons?
Factors that should be considered include the nature of the intended contact, i.e. surface contact,
iAn.v2a.4si veW cohnatta cmt, aotre irmiapllasn otra tcioonm apnod,n feorn etsa cahr, eth uet pileirzieodd ainn dt hfree qmueedncicya olf dceovnitcaect o. r are used with,
or are in contact with, the medical device?
Factors that should be considered include:
— compatibility with relevant substances;
— compatibility with tissues or body flsuaifdest;y
— whethmere dchicaarla dcetveirciestics relevant to are known;
— is the manufactured utilizing materials of animal origin?
[22] [39]
NAO.2T.E5 Is Seenee Arngnye xd Be loifv IeSOre 1d0 9t9o3 o-1r:2 e0x18trac atendd aflrsoo mthe t hISeO p22a4t4ie2n set?ries of standards .
Factors that should be considered include:
— the type of energy transferred;
— its control, quality, quantity, intensity and duration; medical devices
—A.2 .w6 heAthreer s eunbesrgtayn lecveesl sd aerlei vheigrheedr ttoh aonr t ehxotsrea ccutrerden ftrloy mus ethd efo pr astimieinlatr? .
Factors that should be considered include:
— whether the substance is delivered or extracted;
— whether it is a single substance or range of substances;
—A.2 .t7h e Amraex ibmioulmo gaincda ml minaimteurmia tlrsa pnrsfoecre rsasteesd a bnyd tchonet mroel tdhiecraelo df.evice for subsequent reuse,
transfusion or transplantation?
process
Factors that should be considered include the type of and substance(s) processed (e.g. auto-
Atr.a2n.8sf usIiso nth, dei amlyesdisi,c ballo dode vciocme psounpepnlti oerd c setlle trhielera opry ipnrtoecnesdseindg t)o. be sterilized by the user, or
are other microbiological controls applicable?
Factors that shoumlde bdeic caol ndesivdiceered include:
— whether the is intended for single use or reuse packaging;
—30 shelf-life issues; PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
— limitation on the number of reuse cycles;
— method of product sterilization; manufacturer
—A.2 .t9h e Iism tphaect m ofe odtihcearl sdteerviilcizea itniotne nmdeethdo dtos nboet rinotuetnidneedl yb yc ltehae ned and disi.nfected by the user?
medical device
Factors that should be considered include the types of cleaning or disinfecting agents to be used and
any limitations on the number of cleaning cyclesas.f eTthye design of the medical dceavni cienfluence the
effectiveness of routine cleaning and disinfection. In addition, consideration should be given to the
Aef.f2e.c1t 0o fD coleeasn itnhge a mnde ddiiscianlf edcetivnigc ea gmenotds iofyn tthhee patie onrt peenrvfoirrmonanmcee notf ?the .
Factors that should be considered include:
— temperature;
— humidity;
— atmospheric gas composition;
— pressure;
—A.2 .l1ig1h At.re measurements taken?
Factors that should be considered include the variables measured and the accuracy and the precision of
the measurement results, as well as whether the measurement apparatus or data can be compromised.
IAn. 2ad.1d2it Iiosn t,h thee m neeeddic faolr dcaelvibicrea tiinonte arnpdr metaaitnitveen?ance should be considered (see also A.2.18).
medical device
Factors that should be considered include whether conclusions are presented by the from
input or acquired data, the algorithms used, and confidence limits. Special attention should be given to
unintended applications of the data or algorithm, as well as unauthorized manipulation or changes to
aAl.g2o.r1i3th Ims st haned m deadtai.cal device intended for use in conjunction with other medical devices,
medicines or other medical technologies?
Factors that should be conmsieddeirceadl dinevcilcuedse:
— identifying any other , medicines or other medical techmnoedloicgaiel sd tehvaict ecan be involved;
medical devices
— the potential problems associated with interactions (such as the impacting the
performance of other ); and
—A.2 .w14h eAthreer t thheer pea utinenwt afonltloewds o tuhtep inusttsr oucf teionnesr fgoyr tohre s tuhebrsatpayn.ces?
Energy-related factors that should be considered include noise and vibration, heat, radiation (including
ionizing, non-ionizing, and ultraviolet/visible/infrared radiation), contact temperatures, leakage
currents, and electric or magnetic fields.
Substance-related factors that should be considered include substances used in manufacturing,
cleaning or testing having unwanted physiological effects if they remain in the product.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 31
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Other substance-related factors that should be considered include discharge of chemicals, waste
pAr.2od.1u5ct Iss, atnhde bmodeyd ifcluaild ds.evice susceptible to environmental influences?
Factors that should be considered include the operational, transport and storage environments. These
include light, temperature, humidity, vibrations, spillage, susceptibility to variations in power and
cAo.2ol.i1n6g Dsuopepsli eths,e a nmde edleiccatrlo dmeavgincee tiinc filnuteernfecree nthcee. environment?
Factors that should be considered include:
— the effects on power and cooling supplies;
— emission of toxic materials;
—A.2 .t1h7e Dgeoneesr atthioen m ofe edlieccatrl odmevagicnee triec qduisitruer bcaonncseu.mables or accessories?
Factors that should be considered include specifications for such consumables or accessories and any
rAe.s2t.r1ic8t iIosn ms paliancteedn uapnocne u oserr cs ainli bthreairti soenle ncteiocne sosf athryes?e.
Factors that should be considered include:
— whether maintenance or calibration are to be carried out by the user or by a specialist;
— whether special substances or equipment are needed for proper maintenance or calibration;
— traceability of the calibrator values to a higher order reference;
— how to determine when maintenance or recalibration is needed;
—A.2 .h1o9w D tooe vse rtihfye tmhaetd ciaclaibl rdaetivoinc eis c (ostniltla) ianc cseopfttawblaer.e?
Factors that should be considered include whether software is intended to be installed, verified,
mA.o2d.2if0ie dD oore esx tchhea nmgeedd ibcya tlh dee uvsiecre o arl bloyw a sapcecceiaslsi stto, ainndfo trhme aauttihoenn?ticity of a software update.
Factors that should be considered include accessible Ethernet ports, USB ports, serial ports, and
rAe.m2.o2v1a bDleo ehsa rtdh der miveesd.ical device store data critical to patient care?
Factors that should be considered include the possibility of the data being modified or corrupted,
uAn.2au.2t2ho Driozeeds tahccee mss etod itchael d daetav,i caen dh tahvee c ao nrseesqtureicntceeds fsohr ethlfe l pifaet?ients.
medical device
Factors that should be considered include whether the can deteriomraetdei coavl edre vtiicmees, the
impact of storage conditions and primary packaging, the communication of the expiry date (by labelling
or an indicator), possibility of use after the expiry date, and the disposal of expired .
32 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
A.2.23 Are there any delayed or long-term use effects?
Factors that should be considered include ergonomic and cumulative effects. Examples could include
pumps for saline that corrode over time, mechanical fatigue, loosening of straps and attachments,
vAi.b2r.a2t4io Tno e fwfehctast, lmabeeclhs athnaitc wale faor rocre fsa lwl oiflfl, tlohneg m-teerdmic maal tdeerviailc dee bgera sduabtijoenc.ted?
medical device
Factors that should be considered include whether the forces to which the will be
sAu.2bj.e2c5te Wd ahraet u dnedteerr tmhei ncoenst trhole o lfi tfeheti umseer o ofr tchoen tmroelldeidc abyl dinetveircaec?tion with other persons.
Factors that should be considered include battery depletion, deterioration of materials and failure
of components due to ageing, wear, fatigue or repeated use. The availability of spare parts should be
cAo.2ns.2id6e rIesd t hase wmeelld. ical device intended for single use?
Factors that shoumlde bdeic caol ndesivdiceered include:
— whether the self-destructsm afetdeirc auls dee;vice
—A.2 .w27h eItsh sear fiet ids eocbovimoums itsos tihoen uinsegr othra dt itshpe osal of the m ehdaisc bael edne uvsiceed .necessary?
medical device medical
Fdaevcitcoers that should be considered include the waste products that are generated during the disposal
of the itself,m aenddic tahl ed epvriocpeer sanitization (removal) of all sensitive data on the
. For example, does it contain hazardous material (e.g. toxic chemical or biological agent), or is the
material recyclable? If the stores data, proper handling and security of the stored data
Ash.o2u.2ld8 b Deo ceons siindesrteadll, aintciolund ionrg duastea orefm thovea ml aendd irceatel ndteiovnic.e require special training or
special skills?
medical device
medical device
Factors that should be considered include the complexity and novelty of the and the
knowledge, skills and ability of the persons installing, maintaining or using the . This can
iAn.c2lu.2d9e tHroaiwni nwgi,l el dinucfoatrimona, tcioomnp feotern scaef aestsye bssem pernot,v ciedretdifi?cation or qualification.
Factors that should be considered include: manufacturer
— whether information will be provided directly to the end user by the or will it involve
the participation of third parties such as installers, care providers, health care professionals,
laboratory directors or pharmacists and whether this will have implications for training;
— commissioning and transferring to the end user and whether it is likely/possible that installation
can be carried out by people without the necesmseadriyc askl dilelsv;ice
— based on the type and expected lifetime of the , whether re-training or re-certification
A.2.o3f0 u Aserres nore wse rmviacen upefarscotnunreinl wg opurlodc bees saepsp reosptraibatleis.hed or introduced?
Factors that should be considered include the application of new or innovative technology and changes
in the scale of production. This can also involve changes in contract manufacturing, suppliers and
vendors.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 33
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
A.2.31 Is successful application of the medical device dependent on the usability of the
user interface?
A.2.31.1 Can the user interface design features contribute to use error?
medical devices
Factors that should be considered include: control and indicators, symbols used, ergonomic features,
physical design and layout, hierarchy of operation, menus for software-driven , visibility
[16]
of warnings, audibility of alarms, standardisation of colour coding. See IEC 62366-1 for additional
[7]
information on usability and IEC 60601-1-8 for alarms.
A.2.31.2 Is the medical device used in an environment where distractions can cause use error?
Factors that should be counses iedrerroerd include:
— the consequence of ;
— whether the distractions are commonplace;
— whether the user can be disturbed by an infrequent distraction;
— whether repetitive stress can reduce the user’s awareness or attention.
A.2.31.3 Does the medical device have connecting parts or accessories?
Factors that should be considered include the possibility of wrong connections, similarity to other
products’ connections, connection force, feedback on connection integrity, and over- and under-
tightening.
A.2.31.4 Does the medical device have a control interface?
Factors that should be considered include spacing, coding, grouping, mapping, modes of feedback,
blunders, slips, control differentiation, visibility, direction of activation or change, whether the controls
are continuous or discrete, and the reversibility of settings or actions.
A.2.31.5 Does the medical device display information?
Factors that should be considered include visibility in various environments, orientation, the visual
capabilities of the user, populations and perspectives, clarity of the presented information, units, colour
coding, and the accessibility of critical information.
A.2.31.6 Is the medical device controlled by a menu?
Factors that should be considered include complexity and number of layers, awareness of state,
location of settings, navigpartoiocned mureetshod, number of steps per action, sequence clarity and memorization
problems, and importance of control function relative to its accessibility and the impact of deviating
from specified operating .
A.2.31.7 Is the successful use of the medical device dependent on a user’s knowledge, skills and
abilities?
Factors that should be considered include:
— the (intended) users, their mental and physical abilities, skill and training;
— the use environment, ergonomic aspects, installation requirements; medical device
— the capability of intended users to control or influence the use of the ; and
34 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
medical device
— the personal characteristics of intended users that can affect their ability to successfully interact
[17]
with the . See IEC TR 62366-2 .
A.2.31.8 Will the medical device be used by persons with specific needs?
Factors that should be considered include:
medical device
— users with special characteristics, such as disabled persons, the elderly and children, who might
need assistance by another person to enable the use of a ;
medical device
— users having wide-ranging skill levels and differing cultural backgrounds and expectations that
could lead to differences in what is considered appropriate application of the .
A.2.31.9 Can the user interface be used to initiate unauthorised actions?
Factors that ushseo uerldro bre considered include whethriesrk sthe user interface allows the user to enter an
operation mode with restricted access (e.g. for maintenance or special use), which increases the
possibility of and thereby the associated , and whether the user becomes aware of having
eAn.2te.3re2d Dsuocehs o tpheer amtieond imcaold de.evice include an alarm system?
risk
Factors that should be considered are the of false alarms, missing alarms, disconnected alarm
systems, unreliable remote alarm systems, and the user’s ability of understanding how the alarm
[7]
sAy.2st.e3m3 wIno rwkhs.a Gtu widaaynsc em foigr hatla trhme smysetdemicsa lis d geivveicne i nb eIE mC 6is0u6s0e1d-1 -(8del.iberately or not)?
safety
manufacturer’s medical device
Fmaecdtiocrasl tdheavtic sehould be considered are incorrect use of connectors, disabling features or alarms,
neglect of recommended maintenance, unauthorized access to the or to
A.2.34 Is the fmunecdtiicoanls .device intended to be mobile or portable?
Factors that should be considered are the need for grips, handles, wheels or brakes, and the need for
mA.e2c.h3a5n Dicoale sst atbhieli tuys aen odf d tuhrea bmileitdy.ical device depend on essential performance?
medical devices
Factors that should be considered are, for example, the characteristics of the output of life supporting
[5]
or the operation of an alarm. See IEC 60601-1 for a discussion of essential performance
oAf. 2m.3ed6i cDaol eelse ctthreic mal eedquicipaml denevt iacned h maevdei caa ld eelgecrtereic oalf sayusttoemnos.my?
Factors that should be considered inmclueddiec:al device
— awareness of the user when the with a degree of autonomy generates an error, alarm
or failure;
— awareness of the user when intervention in an autonomously performed action is required;
— the ability of the user to intervene in or to abort an action that is performed autonomously; and
— the ability of the user to select and perform pmreodpicear lc doervrieccetsive actions.
[9]
See IEC TR 60601-4-1 for further guidance on with a degree of autonomy.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 35
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
A.2.37 Does the medical device produce an output that is used as an input in determining
clinical action?
risks
Factors that should be considered inicnl uvditer ow dhiaegthneors tiinc cmoerrdeiccat l odre vdiecleasyed outputs can result in direct
or indirect to patients, e.g. an incorrect diagnosis resulting in delayed or omitted therapy for a
patient. See Annex H for guidance on .
36 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Annex B
Techniques t(hinafto srumpaptiovret) risk analysis
B.1 General
risk analysis
harm harm
This annex provides guidance on several techniques that can be used to support a . Some
techniques start with the phoasrsmible and analyse the variety of events that can cause that .
Other techniques start with an initiating event and analyse the subsequent sequence or combinations
of events that could leadr itsok anal.y Tsihse basic principle is that the rsieskq umenacnea ogef meveennttsp riso caensaslysed.
Irti skis aenmalpyhsiassized that is only one step of the deshcarzibaerddo uins
IsSitOu a1t4io9n7s1:2019. Further, the techniques described in this annex do not address all elements of a
, and only provide supporting information. For example, the identificatriioskn aonfa lysis
is not included in all of these techniques. These techniques are complementary, and it can be
necessary to use more than one of them in order to support a thorough and complete .
The following analysis techniques are discussed in more detail: process
hazards hazardous situations harm
— Prelimmineadricya Hl adzeavircde Analysis (PHA) is a technique that can be used early in the development
to identify the , , and events that can cause when few of the details
of the design are known. safety
process
— hFaauzaltr dTsree Ahnaazlayrsdiosu (s FsTitAu)a taionnds Event Tree rAinska lcyosnistr o(lETA) are especially useful in
engineering, early in the development , for the identification and prioritization of
and and possible measures as well as for analysing the
consequences of adverse events.
— Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) is a technique by which effects or consequences of
individual components are systematically identified and is more appropriate as the design matures
and the failure modes are better understood.
process
— Hazard and Operability Study (HAZOP) is typically used in the early stages of the development
to study deviations from the intended performance.
process
— Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) is typically used in the later stages of the
development to verify and then optimize design concepts or changes.
B.2 Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA)
hazards hazardous
situations harm
PHA is an inductive method of analysis with the objective of identifying the ,
apnrodc eevdeunretss that can cause for a given activity, facility or system. It is most commonly
carried out early in the develophmaeznatr dosf a project when there is little information on design details or
operating and can often be a precursor to further studies. It can be useful when analysing
existing systems or prioritizing where circumstances prevent a more extensive technique from
being used. hazards hazardous situations
In a Preliminary Hazard Analysis, a list of and is formulated by considering
characteristics such as:
— materials used or produced and their reactivity;
— equipment used;
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 37
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
— use environment;
— layout;
— interfaces among system components.
The method is completed with: hazardous situation
hazardous situation harm
a) the identification of the probabilities that a occurs and the probabilities that a
leads to ; harm
b) the qualitative evaluation of trhisek e cxotnetnrto olf possible ; and
c) the identification of possible measures.
The results obtained can be presented in different ways such as tables and trees.
B.3 Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)
hazards
harm hazardous situation
FTA is primarily a means of analysing identified by other techniques and starts from a
postulated undesired consequence, i.e. a possible or , also called a “top event.”
In a deductive manner, starting with the top event and asking “Why?”, the possible causes or fault
modes of the next lower functional system level causing the undesired consequence are identified.
Following stepwrisiske c iodnetnrtoilfication of undesirable system operation to successively lower system levels
will lead to the desired system level, which is usually either the component fault mode or the lowest
level at which measures can be applied. This will reveal the combinations most likely to
lead to the postulated consequence. The results are represented pictorially in the form of a tree of fault
modes. At each level in the tree, combinations of fault modes are described with logical operators (AND,
OR, etc.). The fault modes identified in the tree can be events that are associated with hardware faults,
human errors, or any other pertinent event, which leads to the undesired event. They are not limited to
the single-fault condition.
risk analysis
FTA allows a systematic approach that is sufficiently flexible to allow analysis ofh aa zvaarrdieotuys osift ufaacttioonrss,
including human interactions. FTA is used in as a tool to provide an estimate of fault
probabilities and to identify single faults and common cause faults that result in .
The pictorial representation leads to an easy understanding of the system behaviour and the factors
included, but, as the trees become large, procepssrioncge douf rfeasult trees can require computer systems.
[12]
See IEC 61025 for more information on the for FTA.
B.4 Event Tree Analysis (ETA)
ETA is a causal analytical technique that is based on an analysis of a sequence of actions and events that
can lead to a negative outcome. ETA uses the same logical and mathematical techniques as Fault Tree
Analysis (FTA). However, whereas FTA analyses how an undesirable top event can occur, ETA considers
the impact of the failure of a particular component or item in the system, and works out the effect such
a failure can have on the overall system and on the users and patients. ETA uses an inductive approach,
whereas FTA is deductive.
The initiating event in an event tree willm uesduiacallly d feavlli ciento one of the following four categories:
a) ufasiel uerrerso ror unsafe conditions in the ;
b) ;
c) utility failures (such as loss of power or internet connectivity); and
d) environmental conditions (such as temperature, humidity, altitude, weather).
38 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
harm
The goal of ETA is to determine the probability of possible negative outcomes that can result from the
selected initiating event and that can eventually lead to . It is necessary to use detailed information
about a system to understand the sequence of events to construct the event tree diagram. The event
tree begins with the initiating event where consequences of this event follow in a binary (success/
failure) manner. Each event creates a path in which a series of successes or failures will occur where the
overall probability of occurrence for that path pcraonc bedeu ersetsimated.
[18]
See IEC 62502 for more information on the for ETA.
B.5 Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA)
FMEA is a technique by which the consequences of an individual fault mode are systematically identified
and evaluated. It is an ipnrdouccetdivuere technique using the question “What happens if ... ?”. Components are
analysed one at a time, thus generally looking at a single-fault condition. This is done in a “bottom-up”
mode, i.e. following the to the next higher functional system level.
Process
The FMEA is not restricted to a failure of a component’s design but can also include failures in the
manufacturing and assembling of components ( FMEA) and the use or misuse of the product
by the end user (Use FMEA). FMEA can be extended to incorporate an investigation of the individual
cseovmerpiotynent fault modes, their probability of occurrence and detectability (onlym etod ictahle d edveigcreee that
detection will enable preventive measures in the context of ISO 14971:2019) and also the degree of
of the consequences. In order to perform an FMEA, the construction of the should
be known in some detail.
Disadvantages of this technique can arise from difficulties in dealing with redundancies and the
incorporation of repair or preventive maintenance actions, as well as its restriction to single-fault
conditions. procedures
[10]
See IEC 60812 for more information on the for FMEA.
B.6 Hazard and Operability Study (HAZOP)
hazardous situations harm
process
HAZOP is based on a theory that assumes that and are caused byh daezasirgdns
deviations or operational variations. HAZOP can be performed early in the development when
only the design and development inputs are defined. It is a systematic technimqueed ifcoarl iddeenvitcifeying
and operability problems. It was originally developed fomre udiscea li nd etvhiece chemical industry focusing on
dpreovciaestisoenss from design intent, but there are alternative applications for developers.
HprAoZceOsPs can be applied to the operation/function of the medica l( ed.egv. itcoe the existing methods/
used for the diagnosis, treatment or almleevdiiactaiol nde ovfic deisease as the “design intent”), or to a
used in the manufacture or maintenance/service of the (e.g. sterilization) that
can have significant impact on the function of the .
Two particular features of a HAZOP are: medical device
— it uses a team of people with expertise covering the design of the and its application;
— guide words are used to help identify deviations from normal use (ALL, NONE, NO/NOT, MORE/
LESS THAN, AS WELL AS, PART OF, etc.).
The objectives of the technique are: medical device
— to produce a full description of the intended a unsde how it is intended to be used;
medical device
— to review systematically every part of the in order to discover how deviations from the
normal operating conditions and the design can occur;
hazardous situations
— to identify the consequences of such deviations and to decide whether these consequences can lead
to or operability problems.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 39
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
processes medical device
medical device process
When applied to the used to manufacture a , the last objective is particularly
useful in those cases where the pcrhoacreadcuterersistics depend upon the manufacturing .
[14]
See IEC 61882 for more information on the for HAZOP.
B.7 Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP)
hazards hazardous situations
risks process
HACCP is a systemriastki cm aapnpargoeamcehn tto identify and and to control and
monitor the associated by focusing on the critical control points in a manufacturing . In the
description below, terminology is supplemented to conventional HACCP terminology
where appropriate.
HACCP is based on the followingr issekv aenna cloysries principles: hazards hazardous situations
1. Conduct a hazard analysis ( ) to identify and ;
2. Determine the critical control points;
3. Establish appropriate limits;
4. Monitor each critical control point; risk control
5. Establish cpororrceecdtuirvees and vperreifviecanttiiovne actions (identify and implement measures);
6. Establish procedures for ; record
7. Emsteadbilcisahl device for docuhmaeznatradtsion anhda zardou kse seiptuinagti.ons intended
use reasonably foreseeable misuse safety Hazardous situations
Each has its own and life cycle that can be related to its
, or its characteristics related to . can be
initiated by events during different phases in the , such as design, development, manufacturing,
service, use, disposal, etc.
hazards hazardous situations manufacturer
The heart of rainsk e cffoencttriovle HACCP system focuses on the continuing contrporlo caensds monitoring of the
identified and . The demonstrates the effectiveness of the
implemented measures by establishing and documenting the flow diagram, the
hazard analysis worksheet and the critical control plan.
The PHrAoCcCesPs system uses the following tools as documented evidence:
a) flow diagram
process
The purpose of the diagram is to provide a clear and sipmropclee sdsescriptionve orfif itchaet isotneps involved in
the . Tphreo cdeisasgram is necessary to the HACCP team in its subsequent work. The diagram can
also serve as am fuatnuurfea cgtuuirdeer for others to understand the for their activities. The
scope of the flow diagram should cover all the processing steps that are under the direct
control of the .
b) Hazard analysis worksheet records risk analysis
The worksheet contains the of the hazarpdr oacneaslsysis ( hazards ):
— the identification and listingh aozf asrtedpss in thhea zardou sw shiteuraet ions of significance are present;
— the listing of all identified (and ) associated with each step and
their significancrei;sk control hazard hazardous situation
— the listing of all measures for each (and );
— the identification of all critical control points and their monitoring and controls.
40 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
c) Critical control plan procedures
process procedure
The plan is based on the seven principles of HACCP and delineates the to be followed to
assure the control of a specific design, product, or . The plan includes:
— identifying critical control points and appropriate limits;
— monitoring and continuing conrtirsokl caocnttivroitlies;
— implementingv earnifdi cmatoinonitoringr ecord measures;
— activities for and keeping.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 41
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
