Annex C
Relation between the pol(iicnyf,o crrmitaetriviae) f or risk acceptability,risk
control and risk evaluation
C.1 General
manufacturer’s risk
top management risk
This annex describes the relation between the policy for determining acceptable risk
as defined by risk a cnodn ttrhoel criterrisika efovar luati oancceptability established based on that policy.
This description incrliusdke esv aellueamteionnts that can be part of the policy. It explains how the criteria for
acceptability can be used in and . Examples of the relation between the policy,
the criteria and the are given for several policy elements.
C.2 Policy for establishing criteria for risk acceptability
risk
The policyr pesriodvuiadle rsi sak sframework for establishing the criteria for r eascidcueaplt aribsiklity. This framework
directs and guides the establishing of the criteria. This concerns both the criteria for acceptability of
individual and the criteria for acceptability of the overallr isk .
manufacturer’s
ISO 14971:2019 requires that the policyr fiosrk emstaanbalgisehmineng tt hfiele criteria for acceptability be documented,
for example as part of the quality management system documentation. However, it is not
necessary that the policy is part of the risk .
A policy for establishing the criteria for acceptability can typically address the following elements:
— purpose;
— scope; risk
— factors and conrsisidk ecroanttiroonls for determining acceptable ;
— approaches to ;
— requirements for approval and review. manufacturer’s
The policy and its elements should be tailored to fit the specific needs of the organization.
Each of the elements is discussed in more detail below. risk
risk
— The purpose describes the goals of the policy for establishing criteria for acceptability.
residual risks medical devices
EXAMPLE 1 Them apnuurfpaocstue reorf’ sthe policy is to provide guidance for mesetdaibcalils dheinvgic etshe criteria for
saacfceetpytability. These criteria are used in the evaluation of associated with the
manufactured by [ name]. The criteria will ensure that the have a high level of
consistent with stakeholder expectations.
— The scope specifies to whom, where and when the policy applies.
risk risk management medical devices
EXAMPLE 2 This policmy aanpupfalicetsu rteor' sall persons involved in establishing, reviewing, updating, and
approving the criteria for acceptability in plans for designed, developed
and/or manufactured by [ name] for commercial distribution.
risk
— The following factors and considerations should be taken into account when establishing the criteria
for acceptability: medical device
— Applicable regulatory requirements in the regions where the is to be marketed;
42 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
medical device
— Relevant international standards for the particular type of , including standards
for testing of specific propertiesst awtiet ho af ptphreo vaartl/rejection limits (see also Annex E);
— The generally acknowledged , which can be detmeremdiicnaeld d efrvoicmes a review of
international standards, best practices in technology, results of accepted scientific research,
publications from authorities, and other information for similar and similar
other products.
— Validated concerns from stakeholders, for example obtained through direct communication
from users, cliniciraisnks, patients or regulatory bodies, or through indirect communication via
news reports, social media or patient forums. It is important to consider that the perception and
understanding of acceptability can vary between different groups of stakeholders and can
be influencreidsk b yco tnhteriorl background and the nature of their interest.
risk
— Approachreiss kto can be defined according to ISOr i1s4k971:2019, 4.2, Note 1. The approach
can include cobnesnideefirta-rtiisokns of practicability, such as reducing ri saks lcoownt aros lreasonably practicable,
reducing as lorwis kas reasonably achievriasbkl ec,o onrt rroelducing as far as possibrlies kwsithout adversely
affecting the ratio. Another possible approach to can be related to the
magnitude of the , for example that can be omitted for small below a certain
Risks benefit-risk
limit. This is elaborated further in C.4.
risk
EXAinMtPenLdEe 3d use abreen reefidtuced ams efdairc aal sd epvoicsesible without adversely affecting the ratio.
Consideration is given to whether technically practicable measures would reduce the without impacting
the R oirs ktshe of the .
risk control
EXAMPLE 4 related to radiation exposure are reduced to a level as low as reasonably achievable
(ALARA), taking account of the technical practicability of the measures.
— Requirements for approval and review can be specified in the policy. This can include who approves
risk
and, if needed, how often the policy is reviewed.
top management
EXAMPLE 5 The policy for establishing the criteria for acceptability is approved by [title/function of
] and is reviewed at least every [X] years by [name of reviewing body].
C.3 Criteria for risk acceptability
risk manufacturer’s
risk risks
hTahrem criteria for acceptability are established based on the seve rpitoylicy hfoarr mdetermining
acceptable risk. This also applies to criteria for aricscke mptainnga gemen wthen the probability of occurrence of
cannot be estimated, in which case the criteria can be based on the of alone. The
criteria for acceptability are recorded in the medical device planm.edical device
intended use medical devices
Specific criterrisika can be established for each type of (or family), dependent
on its characteristics and , or the same criteria can be applied to all . The
criteria for acceptability can include combinations of qualitative requirements and quantitative
limits for specific properties, preferably based on international standards. residual risk
risks
ISO 14971:2019 requires that three scirdiutearl irai sfkor the acceptability of the overall be established
raiss kw melal.n Tagheemsee nctan be the same or different from the criteria for acceptability of individual . The
method to evaluate the overall and the criteria for its acceptability are documented in the
plan. More detailed guidance on the criteria and methods are provided in Clause 8.
C.4 Risk control
Risk control process risks
process
is the in which decisions are mraisdke and measures implemented by which rairske
rceodnturcoeld to, or maintained within, specified levels. This can be directed by the approaches
included in the policy for establishing criteria for acceptability (see C.2). Two approaches to
are discussed below. risk control
risk control
One possible approach is to consider the practicability of the measures. Practicability
(being practicable) refers to options that are considered viable or capable of being put into
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 43
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
practice. This is not to be confused with practicality (being practical), which refers to measures that are
useful or convenient. Practicability has two components, namely technical practicability and economic
practicability. risk
Technical practicability refers to the ability to reduce the regardless of cost. The following are a few
examples wrihske rceo ntetrcohlnical practicability is questionable: medical device
intended use
— using measures that diminish the beefnfeecfittivenersiss kof the or compromise the
(e.g. reducing the power of an electrosurgical unit below its effective level), which also
has a negative epfrfeoccte dounr tehse balance betmweedeinc al devic eand ; use error
intended use benefit
— roivsekrly complex for using the so that the probability of is increased
or the is compromised, which has a negative effect on the balance between and
(see ISO 14971:2019, 4.2, Note 1);
— multiple alarms that create confusion and thereby hamper the operation by the user;medical device
— including so many warningrse osrid cuaault rioisnk lsabels that the user is hampered in operating the ;
— communicating too many so that the user has difficulty understanding which ones are
really important. risk medical device
risk control medical device
Economic practicability refers to the ability to reduce the without making the an
unsound economic proposition, because the measures would make the too
expensive and therefore unavailable. risks
These decisions necessarily involve making trade-offs between accepting and the availability of
treatments or diagnosis. Cost and availability implicationsb aernee cfoitnssidered in deciding what is practicable
to the extent that these impact upon the preservation, promotion or improvement of human health. The
economic prarcitsikcability in such decisions relates to the for public health and for the society
as a whole. However, economic practicability should not be used as a rationale for the acceptance of
unnecessary . risk control residual risk
risk
Another possible approach to is to consider the magnitude of the . This can
include classifying ther esid uinalt or ioskne of three catmegaonruifeasc taucrceorr’dsing to its margisnkitude:
a) the mreasgidnuiatul dreis kof exceeds the criteria for acceptability;
residual risk
b) the is so small that it can be regarded as insignificant or negligible (i.e. removing it
wourleds indouta lle raidsk to a lower ); or
c) the is between the twrois sktates specified in a) and b). residual risks
risk evaluation
The policy can direct whether or not reduction efforts should continue for classified
as insignificant or nemglaigniubflaec (tcuarteergory b) before proceeding to risk ri.sk
risk estimation risk
In this approach ther isk may use a semi-quanrtiitsaktive crhisakrst or matrix as in Figure C.1
to support the risk (see also 5.5). This matrix irsi sdkisvidRed RintoR three regions corresponding
to a) unacceptable Ris, kbs) RinsigRnificant or negligibleR isks, Rand c)R that require investigation Rto
determine if further control is feasible. The estimamteadn ufact u(re1r, ’s2, 3, ...) have been entered into
the appropriate cells. 1 to 3 are not acceptable. 4 and 5 are investigated further, while 6
is insignificant and can be acceptable depending on the policy.
44 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Key
risk
unacceptable
riskcontrol
investigate further
risk
insignificant or negligible
Figure C.1 — Example of a three-region risk matrix
C.5 Risk evaluation
manufacturer risks risk
risk management residual risks risk
In this step the compares the estimated with the criteria for ri sakcceptability
definerdi sikns the plan and determines if the are acceptable or not. A
matrix as shown in 5.5 and Figure C.1 can support the estimation and evaluation of , especially
those for which no requirements or solutions in international standards exist.
C.6 Examples
manufacturer’s risk
risk risk evaluation
The policy for determining acceptable can include multiple elements and approaches.
Examples of the relation between the policy, the criteria for acceptability and the are
given in Table C.1 for several of those elements and approaches.
Table C.1 — Examples of the relation between elements in the policy, the criteria for risk
acceptability, and how the criteria are used in risk evaluation
Regulatory requirements
Policy: safety
medical device medical
Cdervitiecreia meet the safety requirements of the applicable regulations in each market in which
the is / will be marketed. For example, regulations require that the
Criteria: medical devices
maintains in single fault condition, including software failures.
Evaluation: medical device
The remain safe in single fault condition, including software failures.
Risk evaluation
The is tested and criteria based on testable limits in standards or regulations
are applied. can include inspection of test results, standard conformance
International standards
reports or certificates.
Policy: process
Criteria:
Criteria are based on applicable international product and standards.
process
1) Testable limits from international product standards are applied.
Evaluation: [16]
2) User interfaces are developed according to the in IEC 62366-1 .
1) Inspection of compliance assessment reports for each standard.
2) Inspection of the usability engineering file.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 45
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Table C.1 (continued)
State of the art
Policy: state of the art
medical devices intended use
Criteria are based on them geedniecaral ldleyv aicceksnowledged , as determined from similar
available on the market and a review of literature on and any
Criteria: medical device state of the art
alternative therapies or .
1) Leakage currents of the are , demonstrated by compliance to
state of the art [5]
the limits and tests regarding leakage current of IEC 60601-1 .
2) Dose accuracy of the delivery device are , as demonstrated by compliance
[23]
to the limits and tests regarding dose accuracy of ISO 11608-1 .
medical device
3) Protection against mechanical failure caused by impact is on the same level as or better
Evaluation: medical device
than a similar , as demonstrated by comparative test such as drop test.
state of the art
Inspection mofe ddiactaal adnedvi icneformation demoRnisstkr eavtianlug atthiaotn the conforms to or sur-
passes the limits based on the , based on international standards or compari-
son with a on the market. can include inspection and compari-
Stakeholder concerns
son of design specifications or comparative test results.
Policy:
intended use medical device
Criteria address known stakeholder concerns as identpifoisetd-p irno ad urcetviioenw of medical and scien-
tific literature on the of the , in usability studies, through feedback
Criteria: Risks
from advisory boards and/or focus groups, or during monitoring.
Risk medical devices
1) related to bovine materials are a public concern and are essentially eliminated by design.
risk
2) related to accidental multi-patient use of needle-based for drug delivery
is a concern for clinical organisations, and therefore warnings are required for the to be
Evaluation: Risk evaluation medical device
deemed acceptable.
risk eval cuaanti oinnclude reviewRiisnkg e pvearlufoartmionance of the r iasgka eisntsimt laimtioitnss
requiredr bisyk the stakeholders, or direct participation of stakeholders (in focus groups or sim-
ilar) in activities. can include comparing with
levels of that are considered acceptable by stakeholders.
46 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Annex D
Information for safety(i annfodr minaftoivrem) ation on residual risk
D.1 General
safety
residual risk safety residual
Trihskes purpose of this annex is to clarify the differenrciessk between “information for ” and “disclosure
of ”. It provides guidance on how information for can be provided, and how
can be disclosed in such a way as to promote awareness.
D.2 Information for safety
safety risk control manufacturer
risk
Inforrimskation for is a measure that should be usmeded oicnally d aefvtiecre the has
determined that (further) reduction by other measures is not prascatfiectayble. The preferred options
for reduction are implementing design features that make the inherently safe and, if
this is not possible, simafpetleymenting protective measures. Even then, the of the patient, the user or
others can still depend on certain actions to take or to avoid. Instructions on those actions constitute
the information fsoarf ety .
hazardous situation harm
Information for is instructive and gives the user clear instructions of what actions to take or
to avoid, in order to prevent a or from occurring. This information csaanf ebtey
provided in the form of warnings, (pre)cautions, contra-indications, instructions pfroorc uessse (including
installation, mairnitsekn aasnsceess amnedn dtisposarl)i,s ko rm taraniangienmg.e InStO f i1le4971:2019 requires the information for
to be verified for effectiveness (for example by applying a usability engineering ) and to be
traceable to the in the safety .
In some cases, the text for informatsiaofne tfyor is prescribed by local regulations.
risk
When developing information for , it is important to idheanrtmify to wmhaonmuf athctisu rienrformation is to be
provided and how it is to be provided. This can include an explanation of the , the consequences of
exposure and what should be done or avoidesda fteot yprevent any . Ther isk should consider:
— the need to classify the information for , based on thes alefevteyl of ;
— the level of detail necessary to convseayf ethtye information for ; medical device
— the location for the information for (e.g. a warning label on the );
— the wording, pictures or symbols to be used to ensure clarity and understandability;
— the intended recipients (e.g. users, service personnel, installers, patients);
— the appropriate media for providing the information, (e.g. instructions for use, labels, warnings in
the user interface);
— regulatory rseaqfeutiyrements. medical device
life cycle medical
Idnefvoicremation for can be communicaactceodm ipna dniyffienrge dnot cwuamyesn, tdaetpioennding on when in the
the information is to be communicated, e.g. via the user interface of a menu-driven
, as cautionary statements in the , or in an advisory notice.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 47
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
safety medical
device
Information for can be given in various forms, such as warning labels attached to the
, warning statements in the instructions for use, instructions on a graphical user interface, or
instructions in training videos. Some examples are given below.
— Warning: Do not step on surfacer.isk
— Warning: Do not remove cover, of electric shock.
— Warning: Do not use haemolyzed serum samples. These can interfere with the measurement and
affect the accuracy of the result.
D.3 Disclosure of residual risk
Residual risk risk risk control Residual
risks medical
device is the that remainms aafntuefra catlul rer measures have been imprleesmideunatl erdis. ks
can relate to the possible occurrence of side-effects or after-effects related to the use of a
. ISO 14r9e7s1id:2u0a1l 9ri srkequires the to inform users about significant .
residual risks medical device
Discalocscuomrep oafn ying docume ins tdaetsiocnriptive and provides the user with information necessary to understand
the associarteesdid wuaitl hr itshkes use of the benefits . The amimed iicsa tlo d edvisiccelose inmfoarnmufaatciotunr einr
the residual risks to enable the user, and potentially the patient, to make an informed
decisiomna tnhuafta wcteuirgehrs the against three sidual ri sokf using the risk m. Tahnea gement file
examines the and determines what information the user needs to receive. The decisions
of the regarding the disclosure of proce sasre recorded in the .
intended use medical device
The disclosed informatiobne nceafnit be significant in the of clinirceasli ddueacl irsiisokn making. Within the
framework of the , the user can decide in which clinical settings the harms can be
used to achieve a certain for tmheed picaatile dnetv. iTchee disclosure of the can also be useful for
the user or the hmoesdpiictaall doervgiacensization to prepare the patient for possible side-effects or that can
occur during or after the use of the . Note that user and patient can be the same person,
for example for used in the home heraelstihdcuaarl er iesnkvsironment.
manufacturer
When developing information on the disclosure of , it is important to identify what is to be
communicated and to whom the information is directed. The should consider:
— the level of detail of the information;
— the wording to be used to ensure clarity and understandability;
— the intended recipients (e.g. users, service personnel, installers, patients);
— the means and media to be used. manufacturer
risk
Wmahneang edmeetenrt mfiliening the appropriate level of detail, the should consider wrehseidthuearl
sriusmkmarizing information is more appropriate than providing detailed information from the
. The nature and extent of the information should be commensurate with the
and the knowledge and experience of the intreensdideuda rl ercisipkisent of the information.medical devices
Some examples are given below to illustrate the associated with using and
the side-effects that are normally disclosed. residual risks
— Linear accelerators can be used to treat tumours. The of radiation therapy for tumours
include the possibility of erythema or epilation.
— When undergoing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the patient can be in an enclosed space. Some
patients can experience claustrophobia.
— Mechanical ventilation to assist or replace spontaneous breathing can lead to complications such as
airway injury, alveolar damage or pneumothorax.
48 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
— After undergoing lithotripsy of kidney stones, about 10 % of patients have blood in their urine or
feel pain in the kidneys as small stone fragments pass, while about 2 % of patients incur an infection
of the urinary tract.
— Potential complications from using an ophthalmic surgical laser include swelling, inflammation or
pain in the eye. Mild light sensitivity occurred in 1 % of patients until 6 weeks after surgery.
— Patients with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) system can experience inappropriate
shocks, imagined (phantom) shocks, dependencrye, sdiedpurael srsisiokn, feianr voift rsoh odciakgsn woshtiilce m awedaikcael. devices.
See H.5 for additional guidance on the disclosure of for
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 49
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Annex E
Role of internationa(li nsftoarnmdaatridves) i n risk management
E.1 General
risk management
safety processes
Internationasl asfteatnydards can play a significant role in medical devic ebsy providing requirements for
[20]
the of products and/or . ISO/IEC Guide 63 provides guidance on the developmestnatt aen odf
itnhcel uarstion of aspects in international standards for . International standards are
developed by experts in the field and are considered to represent the generally acknowledged
. risk management manufacturer medical device
intended use safety hazards hazardous situations
WMahneunf apcetrufroerrmsing , the first conpsirdoecress sthe being designed,
its , its characteristics relatedr tiosk s , and the associated hazards and hazardous situations.
life ccyacnle select maneddi caapl pdleyv ipcreoduct standards and standards that contain specific
requirements to assist in managing the associated with those and
durimnge dthicea l devices of the .
residual risks hazards hazardous situations
For objective ev tidheant cseatisfy the requirements and the compliance criteria of these standards, the
related to those and can be considered acceptabplreo ucenslseesss
there is to the contrary (for example reports of adverse events, producrti srke ccaolnlst roorl
complaints). The requirements of internatiroinskasl standards h(sauzcahr daosu esn sgitiunaeteiroinnsg or analytical ,
specific output limits, warning statements, or design specifications) can be considered
measures that are intended to address the of specific . risk management
manufacturers
In many cases, the standards writers have perfroirsmk emda annadg ecmoemnptleted elememntasn uoffa cturers
and provide with solutions in the form of design requirements and test methods
for establishing conformity. When performing activities, risk can take
advantage of the work of the standards writers and not reppreoacte tshse analyses that led to the requirements
of the standard. International standards, therefore, provide valuable information on acceptability
that has been validated during a worldwide evaluation , including multiple rounds of review,
commenting and voting to reach international consensus.
E.2 Use of international product safety standards in risk management
safety
risk hazardous situations safety manufacturer
An international product standard can establish requirementrsi stkhat, when implemented, result in
acceptable for specific (e.g. design solutions, limits). The
can apply these requirements in the folsloawfeitnyg way when managing .
hazards hazardous situations
a) Where an international product standardr esspideuciafli ersi skresquirements addressing particular
or objective, teovgiedtehnecre with specific acceptance criteria, compliance with those
requirements is presumed to establish that the have been rerdiuskced to acceptable
[5]
levels, unless there is to the conrtisrka rmy.a nFaogr eemxeanmtple, IEC 60601-1 provides
leakage current limits that are considered to result in an acceptable level of when measured
under specified conditions. In this example, further would not be necessary. The
following steps are taken in this case. safety hazards hazardous situations
medical device
1. Identify characteristics related to and identify and
associated withha tzhaer ds hazardo.us situations
safety
2. Identify those and that are completely covered by the international
product standard.
50 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
hazards hazardous situations
safety manufacturer
3. For those identified and risk that are completely covered by the
international product standard, the can rely on the requirements in the
international standard to demmaonnusftarcattuer aecrceptable .
medical device risk control
4. To the extent possible, the should ensure that the design specifications of the
comply with the requirements in the standard that serve as
measures. safety
risk control
NOTE For smomedei cianlt edrenviacteiosnal product standards, the possibility of identifying all specific
measures is limited. One example is electromagnetic compatibility testing in IEC 60601-1-
[6]
2Ver iffoicr actoimonplex . risk control hazardous situations
Verification risk
5. control of the implementation of the measures for these medic aisl
doebvtaiciened from a review of the design documentation. of thsaef eetffyectiveness of the
measures is obtained from the tests and test results demonstrating that the
meets the relevant requirements of the internarteisoidnuaal lp rriosdkuct standard.
risk management file
6. If the rreelseivdaunatl rriesqkuirements are met, the associated is considered acceptable. The
use of the standard should be documented in the to support the acceptance
of the . safety
b) Where an international product standard hdaozeasr ndsot cohmazpalredteoluys sspiteucaitfiyo nrsequirements and
associated tests and test acceptance criteria, the situation is more complex. In some cases, the
standardh parzoavriddses spehcaizfaicr dteosutss rseitluaatetido ntos known or without specific
[8]
test acceptance criteria (e.g. IEC 60601-2-16 ). In some other cases, the standard only identifies
specific or risk managementpro cwesisthMouatn uffuarctthuerre rsrequirements (e.g. some clauses of
[5]
IEC 60601-1 ). The range of alterrnisakt imveasn aisg etomoe nlatrge to provide spmeceidfiicc aglu diedvainccee on how to use
such standards in the . are encouraged, however, to use the
content of such standahradzsa rind theihra zardous situation of the particular .
safety manufacturer hazard hazardous situation risk
c) Wmahneargee amne nidt epnrtoicfieesds ma nour facturer is not specificalrliys kaddressed in international
prodriusckt standards, the addresses that or in the
. The estimates and evaluates the and, if necessary, controls
the . safety
See Figure E.1 for a flowchart and an example outlining the use of international product
standards.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 51
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Figure E.1 — Use of international product safety standards and example of such standard that
specifies requirements and provides specific test acceptance criteria
52 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
E.3 International process standards and ISO 14971
process
International standards, as shown in the examples below, can often be used in conjunction with
ISO 14971. This is perfporromceedss in several ways:
process
— The international standard requires application of ISO 14971as part of the implementation
of the internationaplr ocess standard; or risk management
— The international standard is intendepdro tcoe sbse used in .
risk medical device
In either case, proper use of the international standard requires attention to the interfaces
between that standard and ISO 14971in order to achieve acceptable levels of for the .
The standards should work together such that inputs, outputs and their timing are optimized. Some
examples are g,i Mveend ibceallo dwe vtioc ed esomftownastrrea –t eS othftiws iadreea lli fsei tcuyaclteio pnr.ocesses
a) IEC 62304
The relationship between IEC 62304 and ISO 14971 is well-described in the introduction to
[15]
IEC 62304:2006 and AMD1: 2015 : medical device
risk
“mAasn aa gbeamseicn tfopurnodceastsion it is assumed that software is derviesklo pmeadn aagnedm menatinptraoicneesds
[15]
within a quality management system (see 4.1 of IEC 62304:2006 and AMD1: 2015 ) and a
[15]
(see IEC 62304:2006 4.2 and AMD1: 2015 ). The
irsis ka lrmeaandayg vemereyn twell addressed by the International Standard ISO 14971. Therefore IEC 62304
makes use of this advantage simply by a normhaatizvaer drseference to ISO 14971. Some minor additional
requirements are needed for software, especially in trhisek amraenaa ogfe mideennttipfricoacteisosn
of contributing software factors related to . These requirements are summarized and
[15]
captured in IEC 62304:2006 Clause 7 and AMD1: 201h5azar daosu tsh es istoufattwioanre .
hazard risk management process Hazardous situations
Whether software is a contributing factor to a is determined during the
identification activity of the . that could be
indirectly caused by software (for example, by providing misleading infroirskmation that could caruissek
icnoanptrporlopriate treatmernistk t mo abnea agdemmeinnitspterroecdes)s need to be conrsiisdke mreadn awgheemne ndtetperromceisnsing whether
software is a contributing factor. The decision tor uisske m soafntawgaerme etnot cpornotcreosls is made during the
activity of the . The software required in
this standard has to be embedded in the device according to ISO 14971.”
IEC 62304 makes a normative reference to ISO 14971 and specifically requires:
risk management
[15]
— software development planning (see IEC 62304:2006 5.1 and AMD1: 2015 ), which
requiremenrtiss ka rme acnoangseismteenntt wpriothce tshse plan required by ISO 14971; and
[15]
— a software (see IEC 62304:2006 Clause 7 and AMD1: 2015 ), which
requirements are based upon ISO 14971.
b) IEC 62366-1, Medical devices – Application of usability engineering to medical devices
processes risk management
[16]
The flow diagram in Figure A.4 of IEC 62366-1:2015 demonstrates the relationship and
ipnrtoecrecsosnnection of the two parallel and intreisrkc omnanneacgtienmg ent of and usability
[16]
engineering. IEC 62366-1 identifies several specific clauses where the usability engineering
can supplement and interact with manufacturer as described in ISO 14971:
intended use
[16]
— 5.1 of IEC 62366-1:2015 requires the to prepare a use specification, which can
be an input to determining the ma naucfcaocrtduirnegr to ISO 14971;
safety risk analysis
[16]
— 5.2 of IEC 62366-1:2015 requires the to identify user interface characteristics
that could be related to as part of ma anufacturer performed according to ISO 1497h1a;zards
hazardous situations
[16]
— m5.3ed oicf aIEl dCe 6v2ic3e66-1:2015 r rieskq uainraelsy tshise to identify known or foreseeable
and , which could affect patients, users or others, related to the use of the
, as part of a performed according to ISO 14971;
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 53
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
manufacturer
medical device risk management
[16]
— 5.9 of IEC 62366-1:2015 requires the to perform a summative evaluation on
the final user interface of the as part of .
c) ISO 10993-1, Biological evaluation of medical devices — Part 1: Evaluation and testing within a risk
management process medical devices risk
managementprocess medical device
[22]
ISO 10993-1 is a guidance document for the biological evaluation of within a
, as part of the overall evaluation and dreivske lmopamnaegnet mofe neatch .
hazards medical devices
[22]
Annex B of ISO 10993-r1i:s2k0s18 provides guidanrciesk osn the approach accordingri tsok
IcSoOnt 1r4o9l71for the identification of biological associated with , the estimation
and evaluation of the , the control of those , and monitoring the effectiveness of the
measures.
This approach combines the review andm eedviaclaula dteiovnic eof existing datas afrfeotmy all sources, with the
selection and application of additional tests (where necessary), thus enabling a full evaluation to be
made of the biological responses to each , relevant to its in use.
risks risk analysis hazards risks risk evaluation
The biological evaluatiorni sskh ocuonldt rboel conducted in a manner similar to that used for other product
resid,u aanl dr isshkould include a (what are the and associated ?), a
(are they acceptable?), (how will they be controlled?), and an evaluation of overall
. The biological evaluation should take account of:
— the physical and chemical characteristics of the various choices of materials;
— any history of clinical use or human exposursea fdeattya;
— any existing toxicology and other biological data on product and componinetnetn mdeadt eursieals.
The amount of data required and the depth of the investigation can vary with the and
can depend on the nature and duration of patient contact.
residual risk hazards
[22]
According to ISO 10993-1 , expert assessors should determine if the available information is
rsiusfkf imciaennat gtoem deentet rfmileine if the overall proce asssessociated with biological is acceptable.
This concluressioidnu iasl d roisckumented in the Biological Evaluraitsikosn Report, which becomes an erlieskm ceonnt torfo tlhe
. In agreement with the defined in ISO 14971:2019r, iisfk tshe evaluation
of overall concludes that the identified are acceptable, no further is
needed. OthCelirnwiciasle i,n avpepsrtiogpartiiaotne omf meaesduirceasl dsehvoiucelds bfoer thaukmena nto s ufubrjetchtesr — co Gnotroodl ctlhinei cal pr.actice
d) ISO 14155,
[26]
ISO 14155 addresses good clinical prascatfiectey for mtheed idcaels idgenv,i cceosnduct, recording and reporting of
pre-markerti saknsd post-market clinical invebsetnigefaitti-orinssk carried out mine dhicuaml daenv iscuebsjects to assess the
clinical performance or effectiveness and of . This is relevant to the estimation
of clinical and the assessment of the balance for .
54 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
