incorrect result or a significant delay in receiving the result?
— If medical intervention occurred, would the outcome be irreversible (e.g. surgical resection,
abortion)I, VoDr wmoeudlidca tlh dee oviuctecome be reversible (with or without further medical intervention)?
— Does the require connection to a network or the internet, where modification or
theft of a patient’s data cousldev oecrcituyr (eh.ga. rinmadequate security)?
GHu.2id.5el inIedse fnort idfiectaertmioinn ionfg hthaez ardous osfi tuati oanres found in 5.5.4.
manufacturers hazardous situations
risk analysis manufacturer hazardous situation
ISO 14971:2019 reqriusikr easn alysis to compile a comprehensive set of for the
, but leaves it up to the to determine what constitutes a for
the puhrpaozaserd of the (see Annex C.4 of ISO 14971:2019 form gaennuefraaclt ugrueirdance). One approach is
to review the semquaennucfaec otuf reevrents. See H.2.6 to identifyr aisnk eavneanlty soirs condition that (1) exposes the patient
to the , (2) is beyond any reasonable means of control by the or the device user, and
(3) enables thhea zardous situat itoon pserfoIrVmD amne odbicjaelc tdievvei ces .
Examples of for can include events such as:
— receipt of an incorrect laboratory result bIyV aD c mlinediciciaanl ;device
— delay in therapy (e.g. due to failure of the );
— delay in reporting an urgent laboratory result to a clinician;
— inappropriate therapy (e.g. based on incorrect selfu-tsees etirnrogr result);
— misidentification of a patient’s sample (e.g. due to );
— reporting incorrect information with a patienht’as zraersduoltu s(e s.igt.u dautieo tnos networking failure).
The following questions can be helpful to analyse related to incorrect outcomes:
— Is the condition that is the subject of the IVD examination such that a false negative or false positive
result would still appear “believable” given the likely context of other diagnostic indicators, and
therefore not be further confirmed before deciding on a course of clinical action/inaction?
— Are there few, limited or no other diagnostic tools available to confirm or deny a potentially false
H.2.p6o sIitdiveen otrif fiaclastei oneng oatfi vfoe rIeVsDe teeasbt rlees sueltq?uences of events
H.2.6.1 General considerations
hazardous situation harm
Identificahtaiormn and analysis of the reasonably foreseeable sequences or combinations of evmenatnsu tfhacattu craenr
lead to a hazardous situatio nand poritsekn tainaalllyy spisrogress to is necessary to ersitsikmate the probabirliitsyk
cthoantt rtohle would occur. Understanding these activities and events can also help the
select the for and identify opportunities for reduction and
. IVD medical device
intended use manufacturer
The specific sequence of events to be analysed will depend on the particular and its
. When outlining threis skesquence of events, the should consider the knowledge,
skills and abilities of the intended users, the use environment, and any events and circumstances that
could increase or decrease the . procedures
manufacturer
Although medical laboratories operate with control designed to detect errors, the
should consider their effectiveness in detecting specific failure modes. Sporadic random
failures are especially difficult for a laboratory to detect. Experienced clinicians know this and question
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 71
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
any results that are inconsistent with other available inhfaorrmmation or their clinical impression. If the
incorrect result is plausible, however, and if it influences the diagnosis or therapeutic decision, it could
lead to inapproprIiVaDte more ddieclaaly deedv tihceesrapy and potehnatziaarlldyo us sit utoa ttihoen spatient.
Malfunctions of can create if they cause a significant delay
in the availability of IVD results needed for critical medical decisions. Although the user bears the
primary responsibility to have a backup and recovery plan, a device failure can be a contributory factor.
Clinically significant delays are more likely to occur at the point of care or in laboratories that support
emergency care than in a laboratory performing routine examinations.
H.2.6.2 Description of the sequence of events
Risk IVD medical devices medical
devices manufacturer
scenarios for typically involve longer sequences of events than for other
. They include activities that are not under the direct control of the , such as those
performed by the device users (e.g. the medical laboratory or point of care user) and medical decisions
and actions by the clinicians who ordered the examination results. hazard
manufacturer
The description should start with the initiating event (typically the cause of the being analysed)
and thhea ervmensts directly under the control of the , progress logically through the foreseeable
decisions and actions of the device users, and end with the clinical decisions and actions leading to each
of the identified as foreseeable outcomes.
Manufacturers
The description should be as detailed as necessary to capture the main initiating and contributing
events, but not so detailed so that minor inconsequential events hinder the analysis.
can choose to divide complex sequences of events into shorter segments, so that the analysis can be
performed by individuals with the required expertise. This approach is discussed in H.2.7.2. A diagram
(e.g. flowchart, event tree) can bme aunseuffuacl ttuor deorcument and communicate complex sequences of events.
a) Events under control of the hazardous situation
manufacturer’s use error
The initiating event in the smeqauneunfcaec tlueraedri’sng to a can occur as a failure of the
quality management system. A fault condition or potential for can be
caused by activities under a direct control, such as:
— design and development;
— device labelling;
— manufacturing and supplier management;
— product inventory and distribution;
— equipment servicing;
— training and product support. IVD medical device
b) EUvsee netrsr ournsder control of the user of the
hazards
and device failures can happen during device operation in the laboratory or at the point
of care. Activities to prevent or detect sa afentdy the actions takenm ina nruefsapcotnurseer by the user are
ruinskd emr atnhaeg deimreecntt cpornotcreossl of the laboratory or point of care facility. These device users incorporate
the protective measures and information for provided by the into their own
IVD medical. devices risks
procedures
The users of can also cause or contribute to to patients through misuse
(see H.2.3.5), including failure to maintain adequate quality assurance , contingency
and IVreDc omveedriyc apl ldaenvsi,c eor security protection. Decisions to report or not report an examination
result to a clinician are completely under the control of the medical laboratorIyV oDr m oethdeicra ul dseervsic oef
the . The capabilities of the intended users and the use environments should be
considered when analysing the sequence of events under control of users of the .
72 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
IVD medical devicemanufacturer
Examples of activities typically under the user’s control, using information, materials and support
from the , include: IVD medical device
— selection, usage and storage of sample collection device used with the ;
— collection, processing and storage of patient samples;
verification
— system installation and setup, including user training, component or consumable qualification,
and performance ;
— selection, preparation, usage and storage of accessories, consumables, and parts (including
expiry date management);
— calibration activities and metrological traceability;
— quality assurance activities (e.g. quality control, proficiency testing, delta checks);
— review and reporting of examinaintitoenn dreeds uulstes;
— communication with clinicians ( , contraindication, recalled results, surveillance);
— local network and internet connectivity;
— biohazardous waste disposal;
— equipment maintenance, servicing, decommissioning and disposal;
— contingency and recovery planning (e.g. backup systems).
c) Events under control of the clinician
The events under control of the clinician normally begin with receipt and review of the examination
result and a decision whether to accept the result as valid. Large errors are likely to be questioned
and rejected (e.g. results contradicted by other diagnostic information, abnormal results
incompatible with life), but plausible results are likely to be accepted as valid and potentially used
for medical decisions.
medical device IVD medical device
NOTE Clinical decision making is specifically excluded from the scope of ISO 14971:2019. This refers to
clinical decisions whether to use a particular or , not to clinical decisions
affectedI VbDy inmceodrriceactl odre dveiclaeysed IVD results.
When are used at the point of care, such as a physician’s officIVe,D c mlineidci coarl
sdpeveicciealized hospital unit, clinicians are usually invomlvaendu fianc ttuhree rcollection, handling, inventory,
and storage of patient sasmafpetleys, and caacnco pmeprafonrymin gm daoncyu more natlal toiof nthe activities of the
user. In such craisske sa,n tahlyes iospportunities for the IVD m teod iicnafll udeenvcicee clinical activities
through information for in the can be greater. The sequence of
events identified for should reflect the use of the in the actual use
envirriosnk maneanlty.sis
accompanying documentation reasonably
Tfohree seeable misu ssheould consider any reasornisakb mlya fonraegseemeaenbtle clinical use. Clinical use coanctcroaminpdaicnaytiendg
odor cnuomt eenxtaptliicointly addressedI VinD tmhee dical device could be considered
for the purposes of . It should be noted that
written for users in the laboratory does not always reach the
clinicians who order and act upon the examination results.
Examples of decisions and activities typically under the clinician’s control, potentially with
guidance and support from the laboratory, include:
— comparing the result to expected values;
— requesting confirmatory or corroborating examinations;
— proceeding without the examination result (if delayed);
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 73
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
— establishing a clinical diagnosis;
H.2.—7 Einstitiimataintgio onr wofi tthhheo lpdrinogb tahbeirlaitpyy .of occurrence of harm
H.2.7.1 General considerations
risk analysis
The shhoauzladr dconsider the entire sehqaurmence of events as described in H.2.6.2. The probability
of a patient beihnagr mharmed is the combined probability of each event in the sequence of events associated
with a particular and the potential . The approach used to estimate the probability of
occurrence of IV cDa nm deedpiceanld d oenv itchee complexity of the sequence of events. An important consideration
is to ensure the analysis canm baen puefarcfoturmreerd by individuals with the appropriate knowledge and expertise
pertaining to the being analysed, including its analyticalr iasnkd a nclainlyisciasl use and the
technologies involvreisdk. aTnhael ysis can analyse thIVe Den mtierdei csaelq dueevniccee of events as a whole or divide
it into segments, based on which approach is more suitable for an objective . Examples of
applIyViDn gm deidffiecarel ndte vices approaches to common scenarios are given in H.7.
risk analysis
For involving short sequences of eventhsa, srumch as self-testing or phoainzta rodf ocuasr es idtuevaitcioens,
the can be relatively straightforward. A cross-functional team of experts can be assembled
to develop estimates of the probability of occurrence of p foosrt -eparcohd uidcteinotnified ,
based on their expert judgment, supplemented with available analytical and clinical information (e.g.
premarket studies, experience with similar products, relevant information). The cross-
functional team should include experts familiar with the design, construction, use and servicing of the
device, the use environment (e.g. medical laboratory, point of care, patient’s home), and the clinical
use of the examination results. For software-containing devices designed to communicate with other
devices and/or a network, the team should also include expertise in connectivity anhda szeacrudroiutys. situation
For complex sequences or combinations of events, segmenting thPe anPalysis at the
can make more efficient use of expert resources by applying their specialized knowledge and expertise
to the analysis of relevant sequences of events. This is called the “ 1 x 2” approach, which is explained
in more detail in the next subclause.
H.2.7.2 Particular guidance for using the “P x P ” approach
1 2
risk
The approach illustrated in Figure C.1 of ISO 14971:2019 can be useful for complex scenarios with
extended rsieskq uceonnctreosl of events. For example, emveanntusf afcrtoumre ran incorrect result can heaxzteanrddo bues ysoitnuda ttihone
medical laboratPory to the decisions and actionhsa ormf a clinician, which are largelhya bzeayrodnouds a nsiyt uraetaisoonnaPble
means of by the laboratory or the . The proPbability that a
would occur ( 1) anIdV Dt hmee dpircoabl dabeviliictey that would result from that P ( 2)
are estimated separately by appropriate experts. The probability 1 is related to the analysis in the
laboratory using the and producing the resulht aarnmd thPe pProbaPbility 2 is related to the
use of the result by the clinician and the decisions and actions based on that result. These probabilities
are comIVbDin meded tioc aolb dteavinic ethe overall probability of occurrence of ( = 1 x 2).
hazardous situation
For an intended for medical laboratory use, the sequence of events can be divided into
analytical and clinical segments, with the defined as an incorrect result reported
to a clinician, a clinically significant delay in reporting the result, or failure to report an important
examPination result. The probabilihtayz oafr edaocuhs ssietgumateionnt can be estimated separately as follows:
— P1 is the probability that the harm would occur; anhdazardous situation
— 2 is the probability that a specific P wouPld result from that risk . IVD
medical device
Figure H.1 illustrates one way to apply the “ 1 x 2” approach to a typical scenario inmvoalnvuinfagc atunr er’s
, in this case a pbrloooceds sanalyser performing glucose measurements in a medhaicraml lsaboratory.
The figure depicts the entire sequence of events, starting with the failure of the
calibrator value assignment and ending with the possibility of multiple patient .
74 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
hazard
manufacturer
The in this exammpalen uifsa catnu rienrcorrect (falsely high) glucose measuhreamzaerndto urse ssuitlut actaiounsed by
inaccurate calibrator values asmsiagnnuefda cbtyu rtehre’s . The first two events in this scenario are
under the contrsoalf eotfy the m. Tanhuef ascutbusreeqruent evaecnctosm lpeaandyiningg t doo acu mentation occur
in the laboratory beyond the direct control, bhuat ztahredsoeu sa sriet upaotitoenntially controlled by
information for hazar dprovided by the in the ris.k T choen rtreomlaining
emvaennutfsa occtucurerr beyond the directr icsokn atnroall yosfi sthe laboratory, so the in this scehnaazrairod (oiu.es.
seixtpuaotsiuorne to the ) can be defined as the event beyond any reasonable means of by the
. For an efficient in such cases involving incorrect IVD results, the
can be defined as the event when the laboratory reports and/or the clinician receives the
incorrercits kre asnualtly.sis hazardous situation P
hazardous situation harm P
In this , the probability of the occurring ( 1) and the probability ohfa rthme
leading to ( 2) can be estimated separately by the appropriate subject matter
ePxperts. The two probabilities can thheanz baer dcooumsb siintueadt tioo ngive an estimate of the overall probability of .
1: Probability of occurrence of the P
IVD medical device
The individuals assigned to estimate the probability 1 should be familiar with the design, construction,
use and servicing of the , as wPell as have an adequate understanding of the use
environment (e.g. medical laboratory, point of care, patient’s home). Expert knowledge of the medical
applications is generally not needed to analyse the 1 events.
Figure H.1 — Illustration of the sequence of events for a laboratory scenario involving an
incorrect glucose measurement from an IVD medical device
P : harm hazardous situation
2
Probability of occurring from Pa
P
The individuals assigned to estimate 2 should be familiar with the medical use of the IVD results.
Probability 2 can be estimated using expert clinical judgment and experience with similar IVD
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 75
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
post-production
IVD medical device
examinations, informed by adverse event data, mePdical literature and information from .
Detailed understanding of the performance of the or how the results were generated
and reported is generally not needed to estimate 2.
H.2.7.3 Guidance for estimating the probability of occurrence of harm
The questions IiVn DT ambeled iHca.1l daervei cientended to stiimntuelnadtee ds yussteematic anraislky seisst iomf athtieo nsequence of events and
guide the development of suitable probability estimates. The questions should be adapted as appropriate
for the type of , the specific and the approachm uasneudfa.cturer
P
mQuaensutfiaocntsu 1re tro 4 pertainP to the analytical segment of the sequence of events, and can help a
estimate 1. Questions 5 to 8 pertain to the clinical segment of the sequence of events, and can help a
estimate 2.
Table H.1 — Questions to help estimate the probability of occurrence of harm (1 of 2)
What is the
Points to consider
likelihood that …
1. … the initiating euvseen t — How effective are prevention/detection measures?
weroruorld occur (i.e. a
device failure or — Can probability be estimated? If not, set probability = 100%
)?
— Would frequency depend on use environmuseen et?r rAodrdsress worst case.
hazard
— Can specific faults, failure modes and/or occur in a reasonably
foreseeable combination to cause a ?
2. … anIV inDc morerdeiccat lr deseuvilct e — How effective are measures intended to ensure accurate results? Or detect an
would be guesne eerrartoerd by unacceptable change in analytical peprrfoocremduarnecse?
the
failure or ? — Would conventional quality control cause the incorrect
examination results to be rejected?
— What is the influence of the use environment (e.g. medical laboratory, point of
care, patient’s home)? Analyse different use environments separately.
— Would the device prompt a user to correct problem (e.g. “not enough blood”)
in time to obtain a valid examination result upon repeat?
3. … the incorrect result — Are abnormal results for the examination reviewed against critical value
or incorrect ancillary limits, or otherwise verified prior to reporting to the clinician?
information would
be reported to the — Are rare or unexpected results automatically confirmed prior to reporting
clinician? (e.g. new-born screening programs)?
4. … a clinically — Is the result critical for a timely diaghnaozsaisr dooru tsh seirtaupaetiuotnic decision?
significant delay
in reporting the — How much of a delay would create a ?
examination result
— Would the time necessary to troubleshoot a malfunction or out of control
(or ancillary patient
situation cause ap crloinceicdaulrlye unacceptable delay?
information) would
occur?
— Would a backup to ensure timely availability of results be an
expectation of standard laboratory/medical practice?
— Could a second examination be performed and the result be reported within
the time required for a critical result?
76 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Table H.1 (continued)
What is the
Points to consider
likelihood that …
5. … the clinician will — Would a clinician recognize the result as incorrect for reasons such as
believe the incorrect inconsistency with a patient’s clinical status, contradicted by other clinical
result to be valid? data, or being physiologically implausible?
— Would a competent clinician question, repeat or corroborate a result that did
not fit the clinical impression?
— Do current standards of medical practice require confirmation (e.g. two
independent HbA1c measurements for a diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus Type 2)?
6. … an incorrect — Are the results used for diagnosis, therapy or monitoring?
medical decision and/
or intervention (or — Will the result be the primary basis for a particular medical decision? Or only
lack of intervention) used in the context of signs, symptoms, other examination results and the
will occur due to the patient’s medical history?
incorrect result?
— Do positive or “abnormal” results always lead to a particular medical decision
or treatment, or only to further investigation?
— Would a false negative or false “normal” screening result cause the clinician
to miss a treatable medical condition?
7. … an inappropriate — To what degree is the result used to guide the intervention or therapy, given
medical decision or the signs, symptoms, medical history and other examination results that
action will be caused would be available to the clinician?
by failure to receive a
harm
timely IVD result?
8. … patient will — How urgent is an immediate decision or intervention for the patient?
be caused by the
inappropriate medical — What are the medical consequences of the inappropriate action or delay in
decision or action? taking necessary action?
harm
— To what extent would the condition of the patient increase the probability of
occurrence of ?
— Are there implications for individuals other than the patient, such as:
— potential for transmission of infectious agents to others?
— exposure of an embryo or foetus to teratogenic agents or radiation?
— antimicrobial resistance due to unnecessary exposure?
— false rejection of an organ for transplant?
— need for family counselling due to a false diagnosis?
— parental anxiety from false positive new-born screening result?
H.3 Risk control
H.3.1 General
risk
control manufacturer risk control
Since the decisions andm aacntiuofnasc tuorf etrhe clinicians are largely beyond any reassaofentayble means of
by the , safety activities should focus on redumcianngu tfhaect purreorbability of PevenPts
under the control of the risk control. This includes providing information for P and verifying the
effectiveness of information for to users in the laboratory. If the uses the 1 x 2
approach, this means that measures are directed at reducing probability 1.
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 77
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
H.3.2 Inherently safe design and manufacture
Risks
to patients are generally reduced by lowering the probability that incorrect results will be reported
or that clinically significant delays will occur (e.g. by ensuring that performance characteristics meet
medical requirements). For quantitative measurements of analytes such as blood glucose, electrolytes,
enzymes and therapeutic drugs, limiting the magnitude of errors can reduce the frequency of
inappropriate medical decisions.
Examples of design features that control the accuracy and reliability of the examination results include
the following:
— trueness of the calibrator values (e.g. traceability to a recognized reference standard);
— measurement uncertainty (e.g. precision of the measuring system);
— analytical specificity of IVD reagents (e.g. optimized components);
— detection limit or quantitation limit (e.g. improved measurement technology);
— reliability of the instrument (e.g. minimize hardware or software failures);
— discrimination between positive and negative samples (e.g. robust cut-off value);
— eliminating mistake-prone procedural steps (e.g. automation, mistake-proofing);
— component version traceabislittayt ea nodf t phoes aitritve sample identification (e.g. bar-coding);
— software functionality (e.g. coding standards);
— system ease of use (e.g. usability engineering);
— data network and internet connections (e.g. security);
— reduced reagent or calibrator variability (e.g. lot-to-lot specifications, supplier requirements);
— prevention of spurious results (e.g. intermittent component failures);
—H. 3.s3t abPilriotyt eocf trievaeg emntesa, scualribersa itnor tsh oer IcVoDnt rmole mdiactaelr idaelsv (iec.eg .o mr imcroabniuolfoagcitcualr cinongt prorlo);cess
IVD medical device
Examples of detection features in the or reagent kit intended to prevent conditions
that can cause incorrect or delayed results include:
— liquid level sensors to ensure sufficient sample volume (e.g. detect “short draws”);
— fault detection systems (e.g. spectrophotometer drift, inadequate temperature control);
— sample quality checks (e.g. hemolysis, icterus, lipemia);
— controls to detect and remove sample artefacts (e.g. foam or fibrin clots);
— built-in controls to verify correct calibrator or reagent lots (e.g. bar code repardoecerds)u;res
— alarms and error messages to alert users to fault conditions and recovery ;
— software that identifies questionable results for reflex testing, review or suppression;
— incpormocinegss inspections of supplied components;
— in- acceptance testing and final-product acceptance testing.
78 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
safety
NOTE Recommendations for detection methods to be implemented by the user, such as quality control
testing, confirmatory examinations or critical value notifications, are considered information for , not
pHr.o3t.e4c tivIen mfoeramsuaretsi.on for safety
safety IVD medical devices hazard
hazardous situation risk control
Information for is provided to users of to prevent the occurrence of a
or a . This can be an effective measure if (1) such information instructs
users what actions to take or saavfoetidy, (2) the intended users are capable of following the instructions, and
(3) it can be reasonably expected that they will follow those instructions. The adverse consequences of
ignoring the informatsiaofne tfyor should be clerairs.k management process
safety risks
The information for can be used in the of the medical laboratory or
by other intended users. Examples of information for that enable users to control include
warnings, instructions andh oatzhaerrd sinformation addressinIVgD: medical device
— chemical or biological associated with the ;
— contraindicated medical conditions or clinical applications;
— sample collection, storage and preparation;
— identification of inappropriate sample types;
— interferinhga szuabrsdtsances detectable by tuhsee u esrerro (res.g. visible haemolysis);
— causes of , including potential ;
— incompatible system componentIsV aDn md eadcciceasls doervieicse;
— utilities and facilities where the is to be installed (e.g. use environment);
— improper reagent storage or use beyond thIVeD e xmpeirdyic daal tdee;vice
— installation, servicing and disposal of the ;
— quality control samples and frequency;
— validated measuring intervals and dilution instructions for samples when the measured values are
above the upper limit of the measuring interval;
— biological reference intervals and medical decision points;
— validated cleaning methopdrso cfoerd urereussable items;
— preventive maintenance ;
— interface and connectivity requirements;
— backup and recovery in cassea foetf ysystem failure.
NOTE The information for can be subject to regulations or international standards, such the
[34]
IHSO.3 1.581 1R3 o(allel poafr stst)and. ards and analytical performance criteria
state of the art IVD medical
devices
Few international product standards define the generally acknowledged for IVD
[28] [32]
medical. dISeOvi c1e5s197 (self-monitoring devices for bsloaofedt yglucose) and ISO 17593 (self-monitorriisnkgs
devices for orhaal zaanrtdicoouas gsuitluaantti otnhserapy) are examples. Howesvtaetre, soof mthee ianrtternational standards for
address certain aspects of inherent , which can provide evidence that the
from specific have been reduced to the .
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 79
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
process
state of the art
[31]
For example, ISO 17511 defines a for establishing the metrological traceability of IVD
calibrator values to higher order reference materials that define the for accuracy of
patients’ results. The Joint Committee for Traceability in Laboratory Medicine (JCTLM) maintains the
IVD mRaenfeurfaenctcuer eMreasurement Systermissk sDatabase online at http:// www .bipm .org/ jctlm/ . Conformance
[31]
to ISO 17511 using a sJtCaTteL oMf -tahpep arrotved reference measurement system can provide evidence that
the has reduced the associated with the accuracy of its examination results to the
generally acknowledged . risk control
[33]
Other examples of IVD standards with potential relevance to include ISO 17822s-a1fety (nucleic
[36] [37]
acid-based detection systems), ISO 20776 (antimicrobial susceptibility), ISO 20916 (clinical
[40] [11]
performancem setduicdaile ds)e, vIicSeOs 23640 (stability of IVD reagents), IEC 61010-2-101 ( of IVD
[13] [19]
equipment), IEC 61326-2-6 (electromagnetic compatibility of IVD equipment), and IEC 80001-1
(networked ).
Widely recognized performance criteria for certain analytes can be found in publications of the World
Health Organization (WHO), as well as publications of international and national public health agencies,
standmaarndusf aocrtguarneirzations, professional medical societies and regulatory authorities.
IVD medical device intended use
The is respohnaszibalred foours j suistutiafytiionngs the extent that such standards and performance criteria
apply to their particular and its , and as required by ISO 14971:2019, for
vHe.r3i.f6y inUg stheart e adllu rcealetviaonnt and training have been considered.
procedures
safety manufacturer
For complex uuses eerr roinrsterfaces, difficult examination , or critical clinical applications,
information for can take the form of training and education programs offered by the
to help avoid . Training materials suitable for use in continuing education programs can also
be provided.
manufacturer
[32]
For example, the product standard for oral anticoagulation monitoring systems (ISO 17593 ) requires
the rtiosk p croonvtirdoel a validated training program for crliisnkiscians and an education program
for patients and other users of these devices. The experts who developed the International Standard
considered these measures necessary to ensure the of use in the home environment
were acceptable. risk safety
In determining the degree of reduction attributable to information for , consider that:
— the use environment, competence and capabilities of device users can vary widely;
— quality control and quality assurance practices are not uniform around the worldI;V aDn mdedical device
— information about contraindicated medical use and interfering drugs provided to
users might not always reach the clinicians who order the examinations.
H.4 Benefit-risk analysis
benefit-risk
7.4 provides guidance for performinbge an efits I VaDna mlyesdisic.al device
IVD medical device
If it is not possible to describe the of an directly, surrogate endpoints can
be established. Examples include the ability of an to identify a specific disease, to
provide diagnosis at different stages of a disease, to predict future disease onset, and/or to identify
patients likely to respond to a given therapy.
H.5 Disclosure of the residual risks
H.5.1 General considerations
residual risks
risks IVD medical
Annex D explains that the aim of disclosing the is to provide information to the device
user, and potentially the clinician and the patient, so they can weigh the of using the
80 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
device benefits risk Manufacturers
agraeisnisdtu aitls r isks and make informed decisions raisbkout the acceptability.
should take into account the information needed by medical laboratories and clinicians to evaluate the
inherent residual arnisdk dsetermIViDne m theed inceael dd feovric feusrther reduction measures.
accompanying documentation
Disclosure of IVD medic aflo dre vice pcraonc etdaukree different forms, including hinafzoarrmdsation
hparozvariddeodu s isnit utahteio ns aboutm tahneu fapcetrufroerrmance specificatiornessi d(u“acll ariimskss”),
limitations of the risk control or examination , and/or potenstaifaelt cyauses of and
that could not be eliminated by the . The disclosure of is
in addition to the res imdueaal sruisrkess proviadcecodm topa unsyeinrgs daos ciunmfoernmtaatitoionn for .
NOTE The disclosure of in the can also be prescribed by national
[34]
rHe.g5u.l2at ioPnes rofro irnmterannatcieon sapl setcainfdicaardtsio, snusch as the ISO 18113 (all parts) .
Description of the relevIVanDt maendaiclyalt idceavl icpeerformance characteristics and the results of clinical
[37]
performance studies (see ISO 20916 ), allow the medical laboratory director and clinicians to
evaluate the utility of the for its intended medical applications.
The description of the performance characteristics should be sufficiently detailed so the laboratory or
other users can: IVD medical device manufacturer
— verify that the is performing as intended by the ;
— determine the measurement uncertainty associated with the examination results; and
— know that the examination results will meet the medical needs of the clinicians.
accompanying documentation
Results of performance evaluations conducted in actual or simulated use conditions can be summarized
and presented in the .
EHx.5am.3p leLsi mof iptoatteiontniasl olyf rtehleev IaVnDt p merefdoricmaaln dceev cihcaeracteristics are given in H.2.2.2.
IVD medical device
accompanying documentation IVD medical device
[34]
ISO 18113-1 requires that the analytical and clinical limitations of the residual risks be disclosed
in the . The limitations describe situations in which the
might not perform as intended and can therefore be a means of disclosing , such as:
— interfering substances not detectable by the user (e.g. drugs, biological metabolites);
— specific patient populations in which the performance characteristics might not apply;
— values outside the measuring interval (where performance characteristics are not validated);
— patient populations where reference intervals or medical dienctiesniodne dp uosinets might not apply;
— primary sample types that have not been validated for the ;
—H. 5.c4ir cGumensetarnaclelys arnedc ofagcntoizres dth laimt mitigahtito anffse cotf e uxsaemination results, but have not been studied.
hazardous situation
risks
Some events or circumstances that can lead to a are considered general knowledge
in laboratorym maneudfiaccintuer. eTrhese are addressed by standard medical or laboratory practices and
are typically not described irni stkhse instructions for use to avoid overwhelming users with unnecessary
details. The should consider whether additional information is appropriate to ensure
that users are aware of the associated with these events or circumstances, keeping in mind the
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 81
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
hazard risks
of communicating so many that users might have difficulty understanding which ones are
important to control. For example: safety
hazards hazardous situations manufacturers
— Implicit in warnings, instructions and other inrfeosrimduaatli ornis kfosr is the understanding that failure
to follow them can result in and . It is not expected that
will specifically call out all such violations as . Failure to follow an explicit warning or
instruction is considered misuse (see H.2.3.5).
— It is expected that electromechanical equipment will occasionally fail and require servicing, and
that biological materials used beyond their expiry date can become unstable and fail.
— It is also expected that laboratories will implement a contingency plan (e.g. backup systems or an
alternative laboratory) to ensure that essential services are available during such situations (see
[27]
ISO 15189 ).
H.6 Production and post-production activities
H.6.1 General considerations
post-production
manufacturers
Establishing an effective system to monitor information (complaints, adverhsaez aervdeonutss
asintuda ptiroondsuct nhoanrcmonsformities) can be a challenge for , particuhlaazralyr dfosr devices intended
for use in medical laboratories, because reliable data to monitor the actual frequency of
and can be difficult tou soeb etrarionr. sMonitoring the occurrence of and their causes is
more straightforward, since this feedback can be provided directly by the device users who experience
the events. Reports of device failures, and medical incidents should be collected and analysed,
and the observed frequencies should be compared to the anticipated frequencies (allowing for the
possibility of underreporting by busy laboratoproisets-)p.roduction manufacturers
risk analysis harms hazardous
Wsithueanti oensstahbalizsahridnsg a system for collecting r isiknformation, can use the
product to develop a classification and cosedvinergi tsycheme for anticipahtaerdm s ,
, , and their causes, which can facilitateh arm-based prioritization of investigations.
Events can be classified according to the estimated of the potential , as well as the
probability that incorrect or delayed results would lead to . Such a tool can be useful for complaint
Hha.6nd.2li ngM, poonsitt-omrairnkge ta snuarlvyetiilclaanlc pe earnfdo ardmvearnsec eevent reporting as well as product failure investigations.
post-production IVD medical devices
An effective system to collect production and information for
requires monitoring of analytical performance data available from both internal and external sources.
processes
Internal sources of performance data can include production data routinely collected during product
release testing, value assignment activities, stability monitoring and product failure
investigations.
External sources of performance data can include data routinely obtained from voluntary participation
in external quality control and proficiency testing programs, user performance evaluations, and
iHn.s6tr.3u mMenot ninitsotarlilnatgi ocnli annidc asle rpveircifnogr macatinvicteies.
Medical laboratories generally have no swevaeyr ittoy know that a repohratremds result was incorrect and could
have led to an inappropriate mpeodsti-cparlo ddeuccitsioionn, intervention or injury unless they receive a complaint
from the clinician. For this reason, the of any reported and their frequency should be
carefully monitored as part of activities. manufacturer
hazards hazardous situations
In addition to monitoring customer feedback about clinical incidents, the should
investigate more sources to learn about new and emerging or occurring
with similar products. Such sources can include adverse event and recall databases maintained by
82 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
safety
regulatory authorities, as well as reports from public institutes, national medical laboratory
associations and the medical literature.
H.7 Examples of risk scenarios for IVD medical devices
H.7.1 General
risk analysis hazardous situations
IVD medical devices
The following generic examples illustrate different approaches infotre nded use IVD medical
cdreevaicteedm bayn ucofamctmuroenr stypes of . These examples are norti sinkt aennadleydsi tso represent the only
recommended apprrioska cmha, annadg emmiegnhtt not be appropriate for all such devices or . life
cycle have the responsibility to decide the appropriate approach to use for
their devices. The plan should document the approach to be used throughout their
H.7.2, a loAnugt womitha ttehed rmateiodniaclael f loarb soelreacttoinrgy i ta.nalyser: incorrect examination result
IVD medical device
In this scenario, a patient is being diagnosed bhya arm clinician who orders an IVD examination from the
central medical laboratory. If the result generated by the is incorrect and is reported
to the clinician, a sequence of events leading to use e crroourld occur as follows:
a) IinViDti mateindgic eavl ednetv ioccecurs (e.g. a device fault or ); hazard
b) produces a clinically incorrect examination result (i.e. a );
c) device user fails to detect the incorrect result (or its cause); hazardous situation
d) device user reports the incorrect result to the clinician (i.e. a );
e) clinician does not identify the result as incorrect;
f) incorrect result misleads clinician to a misdiagnosis;
g) clinician inappropriately intervenes/does not intervene; and harm
h) patient is injured by the clinician’s intervention/non-intervention (i.e. expehriaeznacreds ).
In the scenraisrkio c oounttlrionled abovem, tahneu sfeaqctuuernecre of events from an incorrecrti srke saunlat lysis extends through
the medical laboratorhya tzoa rad oculisn iscitiaunat, iwonhose decisions and actions are largely beyond any reasonable
means of by the . For the purpohsaersm of this , the patient can be
considered to be in a when an incorrect result is received by the clinician, because
after that event the patient is exposed to the possibility of from any clinical decisions and actions
based on the incorrecth raezsaurldto.us situation risk analysis
hazardous situation
This definition of the allows the to be divided into the analytical and
clinical segments, separated by the . Each segment can be analysed and documhenartemd
separately by cross-functional teams of appropriate experts, which can focus on the events relevant to
their expertise. The results of the two analyses can be combined to obtain the overall probability of .
risk analysis risk management file
Trihskis a anpaplyrosiasch makes efficient use of the technical and medical specialistsse. vIte railtsyo allows the creation of
clinical harm reports fohra ztahred ous situations , which can bep uosste-dp rtood suucptipoonrt updates to the
in the event of design changes, as well as to determine the and the probability of
oHc.c7u.3rr ePnceer osof nal ( sfreolfm-t aensyti ng) device: incorr eenctc oculanstesriefidc adutiroinng o f glycaemic st matounsitoring.
In this scenario, a patient diagnosed with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus rIeVgDu lmareldyi cmalo dneivtoicres his or her
blood glucose concentration and self-administers an anti-glycaemic drug when the results indicate
hyperglycaemia. Although the patient was actually hypoglycaemic, the incorrectly
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 83
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
harm
gave an elevated result and the anti-glycaemic drug caused the patient to become even further
hypoglycaemic. A sequence of events leading tou se err ocoruld occur as follows:
a) initiatingI eVvDe nmte odciccualr sd e(evi.gce. device fault or ); hazard
b) personal produces a clinically incorrect glucose result (i.e. a );
c) patient does not identify the result as incorrect; hazardous situation
d) incorrect result misleads patient to inappropriate therapeutic decision (i.e. a );
e) patient administers antiglycaemic therapy; and harm
f) patient becomes significantly hypoglycaemic (i.e. experiences ).
In the scenario outlined above, the mseaqnuuefanccteu roefr events from an incorrectly elevated blood glucose
measurement thsaatf ectayused incorrect clasmsaifnicuafaticotnu roefr the patient’s glycaemic startiusks aisn alalyrsgiesly limited to
the events under the controhl aozfa trhdeo us situation and decisions and actions by the patient basehda romn
information for provided by the . For the purposes of this , the patient
can be considered to be in a when an event occurs that could lead directly to
(e.g. self-administration of antiglycaemic drug). risk
analysis
In this case, there is no practical advantage to segmenting the sequence of events. The entire
can be performed efficiently by a single cross-functional team of the appropriate technical and
mH.e7d.i4c alP sopretcaiablilset sI.VD medical device for the point of care: critical result delayed
In this scenario, a patieInVtD s musepdeiccatel dd eovfi cienternal injuries is being treated in an urgent care facility,
which performs an IVD examination to assess potential organ damage. Although the user folplorowceedd utrhee
instructions for use, the harm displayed an error message and the examination result was
not available when the clinician needed to decide whether or not to undertake an emergency .
A sequence of events leading to could occuusre a esr froolrlows:
a) IinViDti mateindgic eavl ednetv ioccecurs (e.g. device fault or ); hazard
b) fails to produce a clinically necessary examination result (i.e. a );
c) device user cannot repeat the examination within the required timeframe; hazardous situation
d) result is not available to the clinician to support ibnetneerfvitention decision (i.e. a );
e) clinician takes critical decision / action without of the examination result;
f) clinician’s decision / action is not appropriate for the patient’s condihtiaornm); and
g) patient is injured by the clinician’s action/inaction (i.e. experiences ).
procedure risk analysis
In the scenario outlined above, the hsaezqaurdenouces soitf ueavteionnts led the clinician to perform an emergency
without an assessment of internal organ damage. For the purposes of this , the
patient cbaenn ebfeit considered to be in a when the expected result was not received at
the time it was needed, after which time the patient is exposed to clinical decisions and actions initiated
withmouatn ufactur oerf the examination result.
risk analysis
The can consider whether to analyse the entire sequence of events as a whole or to divide
it into segments based on which approach is more suitable for an objective .
84 PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Bibliography
Principles for medical device security — Risk management
[1] AAMI TIR 57:2016, Quality management system Medical devices Guidance on corrective
action and preventive action and related QMS processes
[2] GHTF/SG3/N18 2010, — —
(available from http:// www .imdrf .org/
documents/ doc -ghtf -sPgo3s .at-smp)arket clinical follow-up studies
[3] GHTF/SG5/N4 2010, (available from http:// www .imdrf
.org/ documents/ doc -Sgehctufr -sitgy5 a .assppe)cts — Guidelines for their inclusion in publications
[4] IEC Guide 120M:2e0d1i8ca, l electrical equipment — Part 1: General requirements for basic safety and
essential performance
[5] IEC 60601-1,
Medical electrical equipment — Part 1-2: General requirements for basic safety
and essential performance — Collateral Standard: Electromagnetic disturbances — Requirements
[6] aIEnCd t6e0s6ts01-1-2,
Medical electrical equipment — Part 1-8: General requirements for basic safety and
essential performance — Collateral standard: General requirements, tests and guidance for alarm
[7] IsEysCt e6m06s 0in1 -m1-e8d, ical electrical equipment and medical electrical systems
Medical electrical equipment — Part 2-16: Particular requirements for basic safety
and essential performance of haemodialysis, haemodiafiltration and haemofiltration equipment
[8] IEC 60601-2-16,
Medical electrical equipment — Part 4-1: Guidance and interpretation —
Medical electrical equipment and medical electrical systems employing a degree of autonomy
[9] IEC/TR 60601-4-1,
Failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA and FMECA)
[10] IEC 60812, Safety requirements for electrical equipment for measurement, control
and laboratory use — Part 2-101: Particular requirements for in vitro diagnostic (IVD) medical
[11] IeEqCu ip6m10e1n0t-2-101:2015,
Fault tree analysis (FTA)
[12] IEC 61025, Electrical equipment for measurement, control and laboratory use — EMC
requirements — Part 2-6: Particular requirements — In vitro diagnostic (IVD) medical equipment
[13] IEC 61326-2-6,
Hazard and operability studies (HAZOP studies) — Application guide
[14] IEC 61882, Medical device software — Software life cycle processes
[15] IEC 62304:2006, Medical devices — Part 1: Application of usability engineering to medical devices
[16] IEC 62366-1:2015M, edical devices — Part 2: Guidance on the application of usability engineering to
medical devices
[17] IEC/TR 62366-2,
Analysis techniques for dependability — Event tree analysis (ETA)
[18] IEC 62502, Application of risk management for IT-networks incorporating medical
devices — Part 1: Roles, responsibilities and activities
[19] IEC 80001-1:2010,
Guide to the development and inclusion of aspects of safety in International
Standards for medical devices
[20] ISO/IEC Guide 63:2019,
Guidance on statistical techniques for ISO 9001:2000
[21] ISO/TR 10017,
PROOF/ÉPREUVE 85
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
Biological evaluation of medical devices — Part 1: Evaluation and testing within
a risk management process
[22] ISO 10993-1:2018,
Needle-based injection systems for medical use — Requirements and test methods —
Part 1: Needle-based injection systems
[23] ISO 11608-1,
Medical devices — Quality management systems — Requirements for regulatory
purposes
[24] ISO 13485:2016,
Medical devices — Quality management systems — Requirements for regulatory
purposes
[25] ISO 13485:2016,
Clinical investigation of medical devices for human subjects — Good clinical practice
[26] ISO 14155, Medical laboratories — Requirements for quality and competence
[27] ISO 15189, In vitro diagnostic test systems — Requirements for blood-glucose monitoring systems
for self-testing in managing diabetes mellitus
[28] ISO 15197,
Medical devices — Recognized essential principles of safety and performance of
medical devices — Part 1: General essential principles and additional specific essential principles for
[29] IaSllO n o1n6-1IV42D- 1m, edical devices and guidance on the selection of standards
Medical devices — Recognized essential principles of safety and performance of
medical devices — Part 2: General essential principles and additional specific essential principles for
[30] IaSllO I V1D6 1m4e2d-2ic,a l devices and guidance on the selection of standards
In vitro diagnostic medical devices — Measurement of quantities in biological samples —
Metrological traceability of values assigned to calibrators and control materials
[31] ISO 17511,
Clinical laboratory testing and in vitro medical devices — Requirements for in vitro
monitoring systems for self-testing of oral anticoagulant therapy
[32] ISO 17593,
In vitro diagnostic test systems — Qualitative nucleic acid-based in vitro
examination procedures for detection and identification of microbial pathogens — Part 1: General
[33] IrSeOqu/iTrSem 1e7n8ts2,2 t-e1r,m s and definitions
In vitro diagnostic medical devices — Information supplied by the
manufacturer (labelling)
[34] ISO 18113 (all parts),
Medical devices — Post-market surveillance for manufacturers
1)
[35] ISO/TR 20416, Clinical laboratory testing and in vitro diagnostic test systems — Susceptibility
testing of infectious agents and evaluation of performance of antimicrobial susceptibility test devices
[36] ISO 20776 (series),
In vitro diagnostic medical devices — Clinical performance studies using specimens
from human subjects — Good study practice
[37] ISO 20916,
Medical laboratories — Application of risk management to medical laboratories
[38] ISO 22367, Medical devices utilizing animal tissues and their derivatives
[39] ISO 22442 (sIenr iveist)r,o diagnostic medical devices — Evaluation of stability of in vitro diagnostic
reagents
[40] ISO 23640,
81)6 Under preparation. Stage at the time of publPicRaOtiOonF:/ IÉSPOR/EPURFV ETR 20416:2019.
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
ISO/TR 24971:2020(E)
ICS 11.040.01
Price based on 86 pages
PROOF/ÉPREUVE
© ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
