TEST A. HYDROLYTIC RESISTANCE OF THE INNER SURFACES OF
GLASS CONTAINERS (SURFACE TEST)
The determination is carried out on unused containers.
The volumes of the test liquid necessary are indicated in
Table 3.2.1.-2.
Table 3.2.1.-2. – Volume of test liquid and number of titrations
Filling volume (mL)
Volume of test liquid
for 1 titration (mL)
Number of titrations
Up to 3
25.0
1
Above 3 and up to 30
50.0
2
Above 30 and up to 100
100.0
2
Above 100
100.0
3
Cleaning. Remove any debris or dust. Shortly before the
test, ﬁll each container to the brim with water R and allow to
stand, ﬁlled with water, for 20 ± 5 min. Empty the containers,
carefully rinse twice with water R and once with water R1 and
allow to drain.
Closed ampoules are not rinsed before testing. Closed
ampoules may be warmed on a water-bath or in an oven at
about 40 °C for approximately 2 min before opening to avoid
underpressure when opening.
Filling. Fill the containers with water R1 up to the ﬁlling
volume.
Loosely cap each container with an inert material, for example
with inverted beakers of such a size that the bottoms of the
beakers ﬁt snugly down on the rims of the sample. Ampoules
and vials capped with clean aluminium foil are further
examples. Place syringes and cartridges in a beaker and cover
the beaker with clean aluminium foil.
Containers of a volume of 2 mL or less, in which the water is
not sufﬁciently retained during the autoclaving process, may
be closed in a suitable way, e.g. with a stopper or plug of inert
material, such as silicone, and ﬁxed using a plunger or a stable
ﬁxing or clamping device.
Place the samples, gathered in groups in glass dishes or in
beakers or other suitable holders, on the rack in the autoclave
containing water R at room temperature. Ensure that they are
held above the level of the water in the autoclave.
Autoclaving process
Reference thermal cycle
The autoclave is run in such a way that the temperature
in the containers to be tested follows a thermal cycle with
the following characteristics: temperature raised from
room temperature to 100 °C within 20-30 min; temperature
maintained at 100 ± 1 °C for 10 ± 1 min; temperature in the
containers raised from 100 °C to 121 °C within 20-22 min;
temperature maintained at 121 ± 1 °C for 60 ± 1 min;
temperature cooled to 100 °C within 40-44 min.
Autoclave calibration
Before being used for the ﬁrst time, the autoclave and the
temperature measuring system are calibrated to ensure that
the autoclave settings are suitable to guarantee that the
temperature inside the containers is 121 ± 1 °C.
NOTE: significant differences may be observed between the
temperature measured in the autoclave chamber and inside
the containers.
Take a set of containers of intermediate capacity (10 mL
for instance) and ﬁll them with water R1. Select a sufﬁcient
number of containers to ﬁll completely the tray within the
autoclave chamber. Insert the end of the calibrated resistance
thermometer or calibrated thermocouple into one of the
containers through a hole in the closure having approximately
the same diameter as the probe and connect it to the external
measuring device. If the container is too small to insert a
thermocouple, place the thermocouple in a similar container
of suitable size ﬁlled with water R1. Close the autoclave door
or lid securely and run the autoclave to achieve the target
thermal cycle in the containers. Where a manual autoclave is
run, leave the vent cock open. Heat the autoclave at a regular
rate so that steam issues vigorously from the vent cock after
20-30 min, and maintain a vigorous evolution of steam for
a further 10 min.
Close the vent cock, follow the temperature increase on the
calibrated thermocouple measuring device by comparison
with readings taken from the autoclave thermometer and
adjust the autoclave settings accordingly in order to match the
target thermal cycle. Keep the temperature ramp as smooth
as possible.
Using the calibrated thermocouple measuring device, ensure
that deviations from the holding temperature of 121 ± 1 °C
are within the tolerance. When cooling down, vent to prevent
the formation of a vacuum. For safety reasons (boiling
retardation) do not open the autoclave before the water in the
containers has reached a temperature of 95 °C. Remove the
hot samples from the autoclave and cool cautiously to room
temperature within 30 min.
Record the autoclave settings used to carry out the thermal
cycle and use these settings for routine autoclave runs.
At regular intervals verify the validation of the calibration.
Establish a re-calibration plan based on quality assurance
criteria, recalibrate as appropriate and keep records.
Routine autoclave runs
Use the autoclave settings established during the calibration
stage and follow the same thermal cycle described above.
Container sets of different capacity can be tested during the
same run. Keep the glass load very similar in size and mass
to the load used during the calibration stage. The use of the
calibrated thermocouple is no longer necessary provided the
calibration is proved to be valid over a deﬁned time span.
At the end of the cycle, remove the hot samples from the
autoclave and cool them cautiously to room temperature
within 30 min.
NOTE: depending on the type or size of the autoclave the heat
transfer and thus the resulting thermal cycle in the containers
may vary with the total load of the autoclave. It may therefore
be necessary to adjust the autoclave load.
Method. Carry out the titration within 1 h of removal of the
containers from the autoclave. Combine the liquids obtained
from the containers and mix. Introduce the prescribed volume
(Table 3.2.1.-2) into a conical ﬂask (test solution). Place the
same volume of water R1 into a 2nd similar ﬂask as a blank.
Add to each ﬂask 0.05 mL of methyl red solution R for each
25 mL of liquid. Titrate the blank with 0.01 M hydrochloric
acid. Titrate the test solution with the same acid until the
colour of the resulting solution is the same as that obtained
for the blank. Subtract the value found for the blank titration
from that found for the test solution and express the results
in millilitres of 0.01 M hydrochloric acid per 100 mL. Express
titration values of less than 1.0 mL to 2 decimal places and
titration values of more than or equal to 1.0 mL to 1 decimal
place.
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
481
3.2.1. Glass containers for pharmaceutical use
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
Limits. The results, or the average of the results if more than
1 titration is performed, is not greater than the values stated
in Table 3.2.1.-3.
Table 3.2.1.-3. – Limit values in the test for surface hydrolytic
resistance
Maximum volume of 0.01 M HCl per
100 mL of test solution (mL)
Filling volume (mL)
Types I and II
glass containers
Type III glass
containers
Up to 0.5
3.0
30.0
Above 0.5 and up to 1
2.0
20.0
Above 1 and up to 2
1.8
17.6
Above 2 and up to 3
1.6
16.1
Above 3 and up to 5
1.3
13.2
Above 5 and up to 10
1.0
10.2
Above 10 and up to 20
0.80
8.1
Above 20 and up to 50
0.60
6.1
Above 50 and up to 100
0.50
4.8
Above 100 and up to 200
0.40
3.8
Above 200 and up to 500
0.30
2.9
Above 500
0.20
2.2
TEST B. HYDROLYTIC RESISTANCE OF GLASS GRAINS (GLASS
GRAINS TEST)
Check that the articles as received have been annealed to a
commercially acceptable quality.
The test may be performed on the canes used for the
manufacture of tubing glass containers or on the containers.
Equipment
– a mortar, pestle (see Figure 3.2.1.-2) and hammer made
of tempered, magnetic steel;
– as an alternative to the mortar, pestle and hammer, a ball
mill can be used; the ball mill is made of agate, zirconia
or stainless steel with a volume of 250 mL; 2 balls with a
diameter of 40 mm or 3 balls with a diameter of 30 mm
are suitable;
– a set of 3 square-mesh sieves of stainless steel, mounted on
frames of the same material and consisting of the following:
(a) sieve no. 710;
(b) sieve no. 425;
(c) sieve no. 300;
– a mechanical sieve-shaker or a sieving machine may be
used to sieve the grains;
– a permanent magnet;
– metal foil (e.g. aluminium, stainless steel);
– a hot-air oven, capable of maintaining a temperature of
140 ± 5 °C;
– a balance, capable of weighing up to 500 g with an accuracy
of 0.005 g;
– a desiccator;
– an ultrasonic bath.
Figure 3.2.1.-2. – Mortar and pestle apparatus for glass grains
method (dimensions in millimetres)
Method. Rinse the containers to be tested with water R and
dry in the oven. Wrap at least 3 of the glass articles in clean
paper and crush to produce 2 samples of about 100 g each, in
pieces not more than 30 mm across.
Where a mortar, pestle and hammer are used, place in the
mortar 30-40 g of the pieces 10-30 mm across taken from
1 of the samples, insert the pestle and strike it heavily, once
only, with the hammer. Transfer the contents of the mortar to
sieve (a), the coarsest of the set. Repeat the operation until
all fragments have been transferred to the sieve. Shake the
set of sieves for a short time by hand and remove the glass
that remains on sieves (a) and (b). Submit these portions to
further fracture, repeating the operation until about 10 g of
glass remains on sieve (a). Reject this portion and the portion
that passes through sieve (c). Reassemble the set of sieves
and shake for 5 min. Transfer to a weighing bottle those glass
grains that pass through sieve (b) and are retained on sieve (c).
Where a ball mill is used, place in the ball mill beaker about
50 g of the pieces 10-30 mm across taken from 1 of the
samples, add the balls and crush thin-walled glass (wall
thickness up to 1.5 mm) for up to 2 min and thick-walled
glass (wall thickness greater than 1.5 mm) for up to 5 min.
Transfer the grains to sieve (a), sieve for about 30 s and collect
482
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
3.2.1. Glass containers for pharmaceutical use
the grains retained on sieve (c). Transfer the glass from
sieves (a) and (b) into the ball mill and crush and sieve again
as indicated above. Combine the grains retained on sieve (c).
Repeat the crushing and sieving procedure with the other
glass sample and thus 2 samples of grains, each of which shall
be in excess of 10 g, are obtained. Spread each sample on a
piece of clean glazed paper and remove any iron particles by
passing the magnet over them. Transfer each sample into a
beaker for cleaning. Add to the grains in each beaker 30 mL
of acetone R and scour the grains by suitable means, such as a
rubber- or plastic-coated glass rod. After scouring the grains,
allow to settle and decant as much acetone as possible. Add
another 30 mL of acetone R, swirl, allow to settle and decant
again, and add 30 mL of acetone R.
Fill the bath of the ultrasonic vessel with water at room
temperature, then place the beaker in the rack and immerse it
until the level of the acetone is at the level of the water; apply
the ultrasound for 1 min. Swirl the beaker, allow to settle
and decant the acetone as completely as possible, add 30 mL
of acetone R and repeat the ultrasonic cleaning operation. If
a ﬁne turbidity persists, repeat the ultrasonic cleaning and
acetone washing until the solution remains clear. Swirl and
decant the acetone then dry the grains, ﬁrst by putting the
beaker on a warm plate to remove excess acetone and then by
heating at 140 °C for 20 min in the drying oven. Transfer the
dried grains from each beaker into separate weighing bottles,
insert the stoppers and cool in the desiccator. Weigh 10.00 g
of the cleaned and dried grains into 2 separate conical ﬂasks.
Add 50 mL of water R1 into each by means of a pipette (test
solutions). Pipette 50 mL of water R1 into a 3rd conical ﬂask
as a blank. Distribute the grains evenly over the ﬂat bases
of the ﬂasks by gentle shaking. Close the ﬂasks with neutral
glass dishes or aluminium foil rinsed with water R, or with
inverted beakers so that the inner surface of the beakers ﬁt
snugly down onto the top rims of the ﬂasks. Place all 3 ﬂasks
in the rack in the autoclave containing the water at room
temperature, and ensure that they are held above the level of
the water in the vessel. Carry out the autoclaving procedure in
a similar manner to that described under test A, but maintain
the temperature of 121 ± 1 °C only for 30 ± 1 min. Do not
open the autoclave until it has cooled to 95 °C. Remove the
hot samples from the autoclave and cool the ﬂasks in running
tap water as soon as possible, avoiding thermal shock. To each
of the 3 ﬂasks add 0.05 mL of methyl red solution R. Titrate
the blank solution immediately with 0.02 M hydrochloric
acid then titrate the test solutions with the same acid until
the colour matches that obtained with the blank solution.
Subtract the titration volume for the blank solution from that
for the test solution.
NOTE: where necessary to obtain a sharp end-point, the clear
solution is to be decanted into a separate 250 mL flask. Rinse
the grains with 3 quantities, each of 15 mL, of water R1 by
swirling and add the washings to the main solution. Add
0.05 mL of methyl red solution R. Titrate and calculate as
described below. In this case also add 45 mL of water R1 and
0.05 mL of methyl red solution R to the blank solution.
Calculate the mean value of the results in millilitres of 0.02 M
hydrochloric acid per gram of the sample and if required its
equivalent in alkali extracted, calculated as micrograms of
sodium oxide per gram of glass grains.
1 mL of 0.02 M hydrochloric acid is equivalent to 620 μg of
sodium oxide.
Repeat the test if the highest and lowest observed values differ
by more than 20 per cent.
Limits. Type I glass containers require not more than 0.1 mL
of 0.02 M hydrochloric acid per gram of glass, type II and
type III glass containers require not more than 0.85 mL of
0.02 M hydrochloric acid per gram of glass.
