TEST C. TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE CONTAINERS HAVE BEEN
SURFACE-TREATED (ETCHING TEST)
If there are uncertainties whether a container has been
surface-treated, and/or to distinguish between type I and
type II glass containers, test C is used in addition to test A.
Alternatively, tests A and B may be used. Test C may be
carried out either on unused samples or on samples previously
used in test A.
Vials and bottles. The volumes of test liquid required are
shown in Table 3.2.1.-2.
Rinse the containers twice with water R, ﬁll to the brimful
point with a mixture of 1 volume of hydrofluoric acid R and
9 volumes of hydrochloric acid R and allow to stand for 10 min.
Empty the containers and rinse carefully 5 times with water R.
Immediately before the test, rinse once again with water R.
Submit the containers thus prepared to the same autoclaving
and determination procedure as described in Test A for surface
hydrolytic resistance. If the results are considerably higher
than those obtained from the original surfaces (by about a
factor of 5 to 10), the samples have been surface-treated.
Ampoules, cartridges and syringes
NOTE: ampoules, cartridges and syringes made from glass
tubing are not normally subjected to internal surface treatment
because their high chemical resistance is dependent upon the
chemical composition of the glass as a material.
Apply the test method as described above for vials and bottles.
If the ampoules are not surface-treated, the new values are
slightly lower than those obtained in previous tests.
Distinction between type I and type II glass containers
The results obtained in Test C are compared to those obtained
in Test A. The interpretation of the result is shown in
Table 3.2.1.-4.
Table 3.2.1.-4. – Distinction between type I and type II glass
containers
Type I
Type II
The values are closely similar
to those found in the test for
surface hydrolytic resistance for
type I glass containers.
The values greatly exceed those found
in the test for surface hydrolytic
resistance and are similar to but not
larger than those for type III glass
containers.
ARSENIC
The test applies to glass containers for aqueous parenteral
preparations.
Hydride generation atomic absorption spectrometry (2.2.23,
Method I).
Test solution. Use the extraction solution obtained from
containers of types I and II, after autoclaving at 121 °C for 1 h
as described under Test A for surface hydrolytic resistance.
Transfer 10.0 mL to a 100 mL volumetric ﬂask. Add 10 mL
of hydrochloric acid R and 5 mL of a 200 g/L solution of
potassium iodide R. Heat on a water-bath at 80 °C for 20 min,
allow to cool and dilute to 100.0 mL with water R.
Reference solutions. Prepare the reference solutions using
arsenic standard solution (1 ppm As) R. Add 10 mL of
hydrochloric acid R and 5 mL of a 200 g/L solution of
potassium iodide R. Heat on a water-bath at 80 °C for 20 min,
allow to cool and dilute to 100.0 mL with water R. The
concentration range of the reference solutions is typically
0.005-0.015 ppm of As.
Acid reservoir. Hydrochloric acid R.
Reducing reservoir. Sodium tetrahydroborate reducing
solution R.
Use a hydride generation device to introduce the test
solution into the cuvette of the spectrometer. Establish and
standardise instrumental operating conditions according to
the manufacturer’s instructions, optimise the uptake rate of
the peristaltic pump, then connect it to the acid reservoir, the
reducing reservoir and the test solution.
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
483
3.2.1. Glass containers for pharmaceutical use
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
Source: hollow-cathode lamp.
Wavelength: 193.7 nm.
Atomisation device: air-acetylene ﬂame.
Limit: maximum 0.1 ppm of As.
SPECTRAL TRANSMISSION FOR COLOURED GLASS
CONTAINERS
Equipment. A UV-Vis spectrophotometer, equipped with a
photodiode detector or equipped with a photomultiplier tube
coupled with an integrating sphere.
Preparation of the specimen. Break the glass container or
cut it with a circular saw ﬁtted with a wet abrasive wheel,
such as a carborundum or a bonded-diamond wheel. Select
sections representative of the wall thickness and trim them as
suitable for mounting in a spectrophotometer. If the specimen
is too small to cover the opening in the specimen holder, mask
the uncovered portion with opaque paper or tape, provided
that the length of the specimen is greater than that of the slit.
Before placing in the holder, wash, dry and wipe the specimen
with a lens tissue. Mount the specimen with the aid of wax,
or by other convenient means, taking care to avoid leaving
ﬁngerprints or other marks.
Method. Place the specimen in the spectrophotometer with
its cylindrical axis parallel to the slit and in such a way that the
light beam is perpendicular to the surface of the section and
that the losses due to reﬂection are at a minimum. Measure
the transmission of the specimen with reference to air in the
spectral region of 290-450 nm, continuously or at intervals
of 20 nm.
Limits. The observed spectral transmission for coloured
glass containers for preparations that are not for parenteral
administration does not exceed 10 per cent at any wavelength
in the range of 290-450 nm, irrespective of the type and
the capacity of the glass container. The observed spectral
transmission in coloured glass containers for parenteral
preparations does not exceed the limits given in Table 3.2.1.-5.
Table 3.2.1.-5. – Limits of spectral transmission for coloured
glass containers for parenteral preparations
Maximum percentage of spectral
transmission at any wavelength between
290 nm and 450 nm
Nominal volume (mL)
Flame-sealed
containers
Containers with
closures
Up to 1
50
25
Above 1 and up to 2
45
20
Above 2 and up to 5
40
15
Above 5 and up to 10
35
13
Above 10 and up to 20
30
12
Above 20
25
10
Annex – test for surface hydrolytic resistance
– determination by ﬂame spectrometry
The surface hydrolytic resistance of glass of types I and II may
be determined by analysis of the leaching solution by flame
spectrometry. A number of elements that, when present as
oxides in glass, contribute to the alkalinity of the solution,
are determined and used to express an alkali equivalent.
The spectrometric method has the advantage of allowing
the use of a much smaller sample of extract so that it can
be applied to small individual containers. This enables an
evaluation of the uniformity of the containers in a given batch
where this is critical. The results of this measurement are not
equivalent to those of titrimetry and the 2 methods cannot be
considered interchangeable. A correlation between the 2 is
dependent on the type of glass and the size and shape of the
container. The titrimetric method is the reference method of
the Pharmacopoeia; the spectrometric method may be used in
justified and authorised cases.
A method suitable for this type of analysis is shown below.
The determination is carried out on unused containers.
The number of containers to be examined is indicated
in Table 3.2.1.-6.
Table 3.2.1.-6. – Number of containers to be examined for the
spectrometric method
Filling volume (mL)
Number of containers
to be measured
separately
Additional
containers for
preliminary
measurements
Up to 2
20
2
Above 2 and up to 5
15
2
Above 5 and up to 30
10
2
Above 30 and up to 100
5
1
Above 100
3
1
Instructions on determination of the ﬁlling volume, cleaning
of the containers, ﬁlling and heating are given above under
Hydrolytic resistance and Test A.
SOLUTIONS
Spectrochemical buffer solution. Dissolve 80 g of caesium
chloride R in about 300 mL of water R1, add 10mL of
6 M hydrochloric acid R, dilute to 1.0 L with water R1 and mix.
Stock solutions:
– sodium oxide, c(Na2O) = 1 mg/mL;
– potassium oxide, c(K2O) = 1 mg/mL;
– calcium oxide, c(CaO) = 1 mg/mL.
Commercially available stock solutions may also be used.
Standard solutions. Prepare standard solutions by diluting the
stock solutions with water R1 to obtain concentrations suitable
for establishing the reference solutions in an appropriate
manner, e.g. with concentrations of 20 μg/mL of sodium
oxide, potassium oxide and calcium oxide, respectively.
Commercially available standard solutions may also be used.
Reference solutions. Prepare the reference solutions for
establishing the calibration graph (set of calibration solutions)
by diluting suitable concentrated standard solutions with
water R1, so that the normal working ranges of the speciﬁc
elements are covered, taking into account the instrument used
for the measurement. Typical concentration ranges of the
reference solutions are:
– for determination by atomic emission spectrometry of
sodium oxide and potassium oxide: up to 10 μg/mL;
– for determination by atomic absorption spectrometry of
sodium oxide and potassium oxide: up to 3 μg/mL;
– for determination by atomic absorption spectrometry of
calcium oxide: up to 7 μg/mL.
Use reference solutions containing 5 per cent V/V of the
spectrochemical buffer solution.
METHOD
Carry out preliminary measurements of the potassium oxide
and calcium oxide concentrations on one of the extraction
solutions. If, for one container type, the concentration of
potassium oxide is less than 0.2 μg/mL and the concentration
of calcium oxide is less than 0.1 μg/mL, the remaining
extraction solutions of this container type need not be
analysed for these ions. Aspirate the extraction solution
from each sample directly into the ﬂame of the atomic
absorption or atomic emission instrument and determine the
approximate concentrations of sodium oxide (and potassium
oxide and calcium oxide, if present) by reference to calibration
graphs produced from the reference solutions of suitable
concentration.
484
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
