3.2.1. GLASS CONTAINERS FOR
PHARMACEUTICAL USE
Glass containers for pharmaceutical use are glass articles
intended to come into direct contact with pharmaceutical
preparations.
Colourless glass is highly transparent in the visible spectrum.
Coloured glass is obtained by the addition of small amounts
of metal oxides, chosen according to the desired spectral
absorbance.
Neutral glass is a borosilicate glass containing signiﬁcant
amounts of boric oxide, aluminium oxide, alkali metal oxides
and/or alkaline earth oxides in the glass network. Due to its
composition, neutral glass has a high hydrolytic resistance and
a high thermal shock resistance.
Soda-lime-silica glass is a silica glass containing alkali metal
oxides, mainly sodium oxide, and alkaline earth oxides,
mainly calcium oxide, in the glass network. Due to its
composition, soda-lime-silica glass has only a moderate
hydrolytic resistance.
The hydrolytic stability of glass containers for pharmaceutical
use is expressed by the resistance to the release of soluble
mineral substances into water under the prescribed conditions
of contact between the inner surface of the container or glass
grains and water. The hydrolytic resistance is evaluated by
titrating released alkali reacting ions. According to their
hydrolytic resistance, glass containers are classiﬁed as follows:
– type I glass containers: neutral glass, with a high hydrolytic
resistance due to the chemical composition of the glass
itself;
– type II glass containers: usually of soda-lime-silica glass
with a high hydrolytic resistance resulting from suitable
treatment of the inner surface;
– type III glass containers: usually of soda-lime-silica glass
with only moderate hydrolytic resistance.
The following italicised statements constitute general
recommendations concerning the type of glass container
that may be used for different types of pharmaceutical
preparations. The manufacturer of a pharmaceutical product
is responsible for ensuring the suitability of the chosen
container.
Type I glass containers are suitable for most preparations
whether or not for parenteral administration.
Type II glass containers are suitable for most acidic and
neutral, aqueous preparations whether or not for parenteral
administration.
Type III glass containers are in general suitable for non-aqueous
preparations for parenteral administration, for powders for
parenteral administration (except for freeze-dried preparations)
and for preparations not for parenteral administration.
Glass containers with a hydrolytic resistance higher than that
recommended above for a particular type of preparation may
generally also be used.
The container chosen for a given preparation shall be such
that the glass material does not release substances in quantities
sufﬁcient to affect the stability of the preparation or to
present a risk of toxicity. In justiﬁed cases, further detailed
information may be necessary to assess the impact on chronic
use and for vulnerable patient groups.
Preparations for parenteral administration are normally
presented in colourless glass, but coloured glass may be
used for substances known to be light-sensitive. Colourless
or coloured glass is used for the other pharmaceutical
preparations. It is recommended that all glass containers
for liquid preparations and for powders for parenteral
administration permit the visual inspection of the contents.
The inner surface of glass containers may be specially treated
to improve hydrolytic resistance, to confer water-repellancy,
etc. The outer surface may also be treated, for example to
reduce friction and to improve resistance to abrasion. The
outer treatment is such that it does not contaminate the inner
surface of the container.
Except for type I glass containers, glass containers for
pharmaceutical preparations are not to be re-used. Containers
for human blood and blood components must not be re-used.
PRODUCTION
When glass containers for pharmaceutical use
are manufactured under stressed conditions
(e.g. temperature-time proﬁle) and/or are placed in
contact with particularly aggressive pharmaceutical
preparations, they may undergo delamination, i.e the
separation of the inner glass surface into thin layers called
lamellae or ﬂakes. Glass delamination may be the result of a
chemical attack that occurs according to well-known glass
corrosion mechanisms, such as dissolution by hydrolysis and
ion exchange (leaching) as a function of the pH. The process of
interaction between the glass surface and the pharmaceutical
preparation requires incubation time, and ﬂaking may only
become visible a number of months after ﬁlling.
Several risk factors are known to increase the propensity
of a glass to delaminate. The chemical composition of the
pharmaceutical preparation, the presence of buffers like
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
479
3.2.1. Glass containers for pharmaceutical use
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
citrate or phosphate, which are known to corrode glass, and
the ionic strength of the liquid medium may all strongly
favour delamination. The manufacturing process of the
container, chemical treatments of the inner surface, and
terminal sterilisation and processing at the pharmaceutical
ﬁlling lines are other important risk factors to be considered.
It is recommended that the user of the container assesses the
compatibility of the glass container and the pharmaceutical
preparation on a case-by-case basis, considering for example
the dosage form, properties of the formulation and glass
quality.
The propensity to delamination of glass containers from
different sources can be assessed and ranked by exposing the
container to accelerated degradation testing, carried out at
speciﬁed temperatures for a short time and using the solutions
associated with the actual pharmaceutical preparation as
extractants. The presence of particles in the extraction
solution, the occurrence of phase separation on the inner
surface, and the steep increase of silica concentration in the
extraction solution are all indicators of a potential propensity
for delamination. Accelerated degradation testing can be used
as a predictive tool to select the most appropriate container
for the intended preparation, but the full compatibility of the
active substance with the glass leachate can only be assessed
by a stability test under normal conditions of use.
TESTS
Glass containers for pharmaceutical use comply with the
relevant test or tests for hydrolytic resistance. When glass
containers have non-glass components, the tests apply only to
the glass part of the container.
To deﬁne the quality of glass containers according to the
intended use, one or more of the following tests are necessary.
Tests for hydrolytic resistance are carried out to deﬁne the type
of glass (I, II or III) and to control its hydrolytic resistance.
In addition, containers for aqueous parenteral preparations
are tested for arsenic release and coloured glass containers are
tested for spectral transmission.
HYDROLYTIC RESISTANCE
Table 3.2.1.-1. – Types of glass
Type of container
Test to be performed
Type I and type II glass containers
(to distinguish from type III glass
containers)
Test A (surface test)
Type I glass containers (to distinguish
from type II and type III glass
containers)
Test B (glass grains test) or test C
(etching test)
Type I and type II glass containers
(if there are doubts whether the
high hydrolytic resistance is due to
the chemical composition or to the
surface treatment)
Tests A and B, or tests A and C
The test is carried out by titration of the extraction solutions
obtained under the conditions described for tests A, B and C.
Test C is performed if there are uncertainties whether the
container is type I or type II.
EQUIPMENT
– An autoclave or steam steriliser capable of withstanding
a pressure of 2.5 × 105 N/m2 (equivalent to
0.25 MPa = 2.5 bar) or more and capable of carrying
out the heating cycle described under Autoclaving
process. Preferably it is equipped with a constant-pressure
regulator or other suitable means in order to maintain the
temperature at 121 ± 1 °C. The autoclave vessel is equipped
with a heating device, a thermometer integrated in the
autoclave, a pressure gauge, a vent cock (for manually
operated autoclaves only) and a tray of sufﬁcient capacity
to accommodate, above the water level, the number of
containers needed to carry out the test. The autoclave
has the possibility to connect a calibrated resistance
thermometer or a calibrated thermocouple from the
inner chamber to an external measuring device to allow a
temperature measurement independent from the autoclave
system.
The autoclave vessel and all ancillary equipment must be
washed thoroughly with water R before use.
– A calibrated resistance thermometer or calibrated
thermocouple connected to a suitable temperature
measuring device.
– Burettes with a suitable capacity.
– One-mark volumetric ﬂasks, with a capacity of 1000 mL.
– Pipettes and beakers.
– Conical ﬂasks with capacities of 100 mL and 250 mL.
– A water-bath.
– Metal foil (e.g. aluminium, stainless steel).
Flasks and beakers must already have been used for the test
or have been ﬁlled with water R and kept in an autoclave at
121 °C for at least 1 h before being used.
DETERMINATION OF THE FILLING VOLUME
The ﬁlling volume is the volume of water to be introduced
into the container for the purpose of the test. For vials and
bottles the ﬁlling volume is 90 per cent of the brimful capacity.
For ampoules it is the volume up to the height of the shoulder.
Vials and bottles. Select, at random, 6 containers from
the sample lot, or 3 if their capacity exceeds 100 mL, and
remove any debris or dust. Weigh the empty containers with
an accuracy of 0.1 g. Place the containers on a horizontal
surface and ﬁll them with water R until about the rim edge,
avoiding overﬂow and introduction of air bubbles. Adjust the
liquid levels to the brimful line. Weigh the ﬁlled containers to
obtain the mass of the water expressed to 2 decimal places
for containers having a nominal volume less than or equal to
30 mL, and expressed to 1 decimal place for containers having
a nominal volume greater than 30 mL. Calculate the mean
value of the brimful capacity in millilitres and multiply it
by 0.9. This volume, expressed to 1 decimal place, is the ﬁlling
volume for the particular container lot.
Ampoules. Place at least 6 dry ampoules on a ﬂat, horizontal
surface and ﬁll them with water R from a burette, until the
water reaches point A, where the body of the ampoule declines
to the shoulder (see Figure 3.2.1.-1). Read the capacities
(expressed to 2 decimal places) and calculate the mean value.
This volume, expressed to 1 decimal place, is the ﬁlling volume
for the particular ampoule lot. The ﬁlling volume may also
be determined by weighing.
Figure 3.2.1.-1. – Filling volume of ampoules (up to point A)
Syringes and cartridges. Select 6 syringes or cartridges.
Close the small opening (mouth of cartridges and needle
and/or Luer cone of syringes) using an inert material (e.g. a
480
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
3.2.1. Glass containers for pharmaceutical use
tip cap) or any other suitable means to prevent water leakage.
Determine the mean brimful volume in accordance with the
procedure described under Vials and bottles and multiply it
by 0.9. This volume, expressed to 1 decimal place, is the ﬁlling
volume for the particular container lot.
