[PAGE 83]
Miss Olga Chung
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 81
Technology Transfer
Table 5.7: Example Gap Assessment – Large Molecule Process
Category
Element/
Process
Parameter
Sending Unit
State
Receiving Unit
State
Gap/Risk
Description
Risk*
Mitigation Plan
Mixing
Buffers
with high
concentration
of reagent
X require
adequate
mixing
Experience
with this type
of buffer
preparation at
smaller scale
No experience
with similar buffer
types
No SOP for
defining mixing
parameters: time/
RPM/pump rate
Medium
Establish SOP
and test during
shakedown
Facility
Room
configuration
for post-
nanofiltration
Segregated
room;
nanofiltrate
collected in
class C room
with a higher air
pressure
No segregated
room available
Ability to maintain
segregation
between pre and
post-nanofiltration
Medium
• Operate as closed
system, make
connections in
biosafety hood
• Consult with QA
Equipment/
Operations
Time critical
addition
and mixing
of chemical
reagent
Small volume,
visual
assessment of
mixing
>10x scale-up to
vessel
Potential for
incomplete
reaction or
reaction “hot
spots”
High
Computational fluid
dynamics modeling
of reaction vessel
to determine
appropriate mixing
conditions
Equipment/
Operations
Tangential
flow filtration
system
holdup
volume
Small system,
minimal holdup
relative to
product volume
Available system
is substantially
larger, 1/3 of
product will be in
holdup volume
Temperature
increase
(extended time
in system piping)
and possible
effect on target
protein
Medium
• Test in
engineering run
• Backup plan to
switch to smaller
portable vessel
Raw
Materials
Disposable
bags
Vendor A
New Vendor B,
limited experience
with this item at
sending unit
• Delay in raw
material,
leaks or other
performance
issues
• Potential risk
from leachables
Medium
Evaluate during
engineering runs
Operations
Available
column
sizes
Column sized
to perform two
operations per
day at 20°C
Three cycles will
be required based
on available
column
• Limited stability
of column
eluates will
require storing
eluates at 8°C
then pooling
and returning to
ambient for next
operation
• Potential effects
on product, and
timing/logistics
Medium
• Evaluate at small
scale
• Schedule realistic
processing times
and evaluate
performance
*Risk (Low/Medium/High) may also be evaluated using other risk management tools such as assessment of severity/occurrence/
detection to generate a Risk Priority Number (RPN).
[PAGE 84]
Miss Olga Chung
[PAGE 85]
Miss Olga Chung
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 83
Technology Transfer
6	 Technology Transfer of Drug Product
6.1
Introduction
As a drug product transitions through each stage of the clinical program and a higher degree of confidence in the
clinical profile of the product materializes, the strategy should shift to focus upon commercialization of the dosage
form. This should include defining process scale-up and transfer plans to the intended commercial manufacturing site.
This activity traditionally occurs between the phase 2 and phase 3 clinical stages, in order to ensure phase 3 clinical
and pivotal stability supplies are produced within a commercial facility. This also can be advantageous in supporting
lifecycle validation activities for the product and helping to build manufacturing experience in a commercial facility.
In addition, there may be a need to transfer a drug product to a new commercial manufacturing site post-registration
and launch. Although more information may be available while transferring a commercial product (filed release
specifications, CPPs, etc.), the general knowledge needed and steps to successfully transfer a product remains the
same.
6.2
Technology Transfer Process
This chapter highlights those aspects of a technology transfer process specific to drug product. Analytical
requirements are covered in Chapter 4. Note that many of the principles of drug substance transfer, covered in
Chapter 5, are applicable to drug products.
Information on forming a technology transfer team, developing a charter, consolidating knowledge for transfer, and
agreeing on a high level technology transfer proposal is presented within Chapters 2 and 3.
In general, a technology transfer can be described by answering the following questions:
•
What is the current process/product?
•
What is the desired final product/process, based on any constraints/criteria related to the new site?
•
What needs to be done to prove that the final product is correct and the process is robust?
The technology transfer is defined by how these questions are answered.
6.2.1
Identify Risks, Conduct Risk Assessments, and Develop Technology Transfer Plan
An initial risk assessment should be conducted to determine whether the technology transfer of the process and
product to the receiving unit is feasible. This high level risk assessment may be challenging to complete if the
product is being transferred to or from an external company and information is difficult to share due to confidentiality
agreements.
A cross-functional team consisting of, at minimum, process, analytical, supply chain, operations, HSE, and quality
should evaluate the data available to determine feasibility. Items for consideration include:
•
Projected volume and plant capacity
•
Target markets
•
Safety hazards
•
Special equipment, PAT, and analytical needs
[PAGE 86]
Miss Olga Chung
Page 84
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Technology Transfer
For aseptic processes, additional consideration should be given to facility capabilities to maintain an aseptic area.
The assumption is that the receiving facility will have the appropriate controls in place to produce aseptic products
(e.g., HEPA filtration, air classification, gowning procedures, etc.).
Based on a positive outcome from this analysis, conducting an in depth risk assessment with technical experts from
both the sending and receiving units is highly recommended. This is an opportunity to dive into the technical details of
the manufacturing process and understand the product and the relationship between manufacturing steps and critical
attributes (if known). It is highly advisable, if possible, to conduct this assessment in a face-to-face environment,
to better facilitate the transfer of knowledge. The risk assessment should also capture gaps in product knowledge/
process understanding, or highlight the additional information needed from the external site to guide the technology
transfer plan.
Information on identifying risks, conducting risk assessments, and establishing the technology transfer plan is
presented in Chapter 2.
6.2.2
Consolidate Knowledge for Technology Transfer Package
•
Block Flow Diagrams (BFDs) are a Lean tool used to improve processes. For technology transfers, they ensure
that the process steps are understood, in the correct order, and identify all process streams including waste and
by-products. They can also serve the same function as the PFDs and since they are typically easier to develop,
can be used to quickly compare processing options. Simple and detailed examples of BFDs are provided in
Figures 6.1 and 6.2.
Figure 6.1: Example of Simple Block Flow Diagram – Direct Compression Coated Tablet
[PAGE 87]
Miss Olga Chung
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 85
Technology Transfer
Figure 6.2: Example of Detailed Block Flow Diagram – Direct Compression Coated Tablet
•
Process Flow Diagrams (PFDs) aid visualization of key data, e.g., processing times, in-process testing,
etc. PFDs from all previous installations of the process (different sites or scales) can be helpful, especially for
supporting updates to regulatory filings. An example PFD is shown in Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Example Process Flow Diagram – Dry Granulation Product
Depending on which stage of the product lifecycle is being transferred, there may be a substantial amount of current
and historical information available from the sending unit. The following list of points indicate useful information about
the current process being transferred and can be used when requesting documentation:
•
Manufacturing batch records (blank and/or examples of executed documents where relevant) can be the
starting point for the receiving unit to generate their internal batch records. For sites that operate with paperless
fully automated systems, it can sometimes be difficult to extract this information into a human-readable format to
be passed along to a receiving unit. Alternative ways of information sharing may be required such as generating
screenshots.
•
Drug product/process control strategy and the link between drug product CQAs, CPPs, potential CPPs,
critical aspects, and drug product manufacturing requirements.
•
Risk Assessments that may have been conducted, including any excipient analysis work or packaging analysis.
[PAGE 88]
Miss Olga Chung
Page 86
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Technology Transfer
•
Process observation for transfer of the often tacit process knowledge that arises from hands-on operating
experience. It can be a worthwhile exercise to observe the process operations with the existing manufacturing
instruction documents (batch records, SOPs, etc.) and look for any additional elements that may not be well
documented (e.g., addition of excipient #3 always causes the solution temperature to drop). Alternatively, on-site
support at the receiving unit by SMEs from the sending unit can facilitate sharing of this knowledge.
•
PAT tools, as relevant.
•
Storage and shipping conditions for drug product to include container type, packaging requirements, freeze/
thaw cycle data, and any specific transportation requirements or validation.
•
Process intermediate stability information to identify stability constraints that affect hold times between steps
(e.g., blend hold time prior to tableting, suspension hold time prior to filling).
•
Extractables/leachables/elemental impurities/materials compatibility knowledge (risk assessments or
testing data relevant to the product/process) and to clarify which equipment is suitable for use in the process
(e.g., product compatibility with silicon tubing used to transfer solution from bulk tank to filling nozzle).
•
Spreadsheet-based process models are important tools, if available, to facilitate process fit at the receiving
unit. These can be used to identify suitable equipment parameters, e.g., for predicting cycle time for secondary
drying in a lyophilized product.
•
Product safety documentation detailing any hazard concerns (in terms of operator handling) and cleanability
issues.
•
Equipment cleaning procedures or cleaning validation information.
•
Historical process and analytical data – this may be formatted in a number of ways including statistical
process control trend charts, tabulated means and ranges of KPIs, as well as in-process trends for continuous
data (such as compression force data, pH control, temperature profiles, etc.). Examples of visual data (such
as chromatograms, pictures of phase separation, etc.) should be included where relevant. This should also
capture a process baseline including process settings and maintenance routines such as scheduled elastomer
replacements.
•
QA documentation – if available, this may include deviation reports, laboratory investigations, and incident
reports. For a commercial product, this could include annual reports to regulatory agencies.
•
Process development reports – especially for transfers from process development to manufacturing. These
reports can be helpful for technical support staff at the receiving unit to understand how the process evolved and
where its sensitivities may lie.
•
Setup/operating instructions and data from all scales of the process (small/laboratory scale models of the
process through to any intermediate/large scales available).
•
Process characterization reports – these present results from Design of Experiment studies or other studies
evaluating the design space around process parameters and resulting CQAs. Such assessments provide the
basis for defining CPPs and Proven Acceptable Ranges. This informs the process control strategy, guides the
establishment of Normal Operating Ranges for the process, and provides further understanding of where process
sensitivities exist.
•
Product characterization reports – these present results from Design of Experiment studies or other studies
evaluating the product characteristics and how they are impacted by processing parameters (e.g., % of
amorphous/crystalline material in a lyophilized product, droplet size in an ointment, membrane thickness for a
functionally coated tablet).
[PAGE 89]
Miss Olga Chung
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 87
Technology Transfer
•
Process validation reports – demonstrating the acceptable ranges and robustness of the process at the
sending unit. This is usually not available early in product lifecycle. There may also be information around areas
where heightened monitoring would be recommended. While the receiving unit needs to do their own validation,
this can be useful baseline information.
•
Reports from prior transfers of this process, especially where they may contain significant lessons learned.
•
Regulatory license documents (relevant sections) and existing commitments for the process that may have
resulted from previous regulatory inspections.
6.2.3
Technology Transfer Execution/Pilot Scale Batches
Scale-up or pilot batches are often used to gather initial information using the new equipment train while minimizing
use of raw materials and API. It is important to design these batches with the final scale/equipment in mind.
Depending on the lifecycle phase of the product being transferred, these batches are an opportunity for building and
improving upon batch records, control strategies, etc. (if not already established). These can also be an opportunity
to characterize the product attributes with a new process, so it is important to have a thorough sampling plan in place
before starting manufacture.
For example, for a direct compression tablet process, it would be advisable to collect stratified tablet core samples
across the run to determine if there is a tendency toward segregation or a lack of uniformity. For a liquid product, it
may be desirable to collect multiple samples during API dissolution to gain an understanding of the dissolution profile.
Alternately, PAT can be used if applicable. A statistician can help determine how many samples need to be tested to
gain understanding of each unit operation. It is helpful to work with the analytical team/sample testing laboratory so
that there is awareness of the scope of work required and can trigger a resources/prioritization discussion if needed.
The team should work together to produce a document containing the sampling plan, what tests are desired from
each sample, and where those samples should be sent.
Pilot batches are also useful in addressing gaps that were identified in the transfer risk assessments. For example,
process understanding Design of Experiments that may not be practical on a large scale may yield product
understanding across a range of conditions, e.g. impact of coating parameters (spray rate, gun-to-bed distance, pan
speed) on the permeability of a functional membrane coating.
If the commercial equipment is not available, a similar equipment train should be used. The results from this type of
experimental work can be confirmed with a smaller number of runs on the commercial equipment/at the commercial
scale, saving time and resources while generating appropriate data to support regulatory filings. Key criteria (release
specifications and in-process controls) should be matched across scales (e.g, target water content in a lyophilized
product or hardness of a tablet core).
Modeling should be evaluated for help with scale transfer, and appropriate characterization work should be done,
including in-process tests (e.g., keeping the dwell time constant in a tablet press across scales/equipment, testing
tablet thickness). For aseptic processes, consider using these batches to aid in filter validation, container/closure
integrity testing, and developing protocols for inspection processes.
Depending on the phase of the product being transferred, it may be worthwhile to conduct another risk assessment or
gap evaluation once the pilot lots are complete, in preparation for moving to the full scale work.
6.2.4
Engineering Runs/Pre-Process Qualification Runs
Where an engineering run is processed, the data should be reviewed prior to proceeding to batches to be released
to identify any potential issues. An engineering run provides opportunity to ensure the data generated will meet
acceptance criteria if performing process validation (or is comparable to previous campaign data.) Depending on the
nature of the transfer, it may be appropriate to have specific acceptance criteria agreed upon prior to the engineering
[PAGE 90]
Miss Olga Chung
Page 88
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Technology Transfer
run. Schedules to proceed to qualification runs may be constrained and if the data looks borderline acceptable, a
clear decision-making process will be necessary.
If there is further need to scale-up, proceeding to full scale runs may require approval from key stakeholders via stage
gate reviews to demonstrate the required preparation has been completed. Where these runs are intended to be fully
GMP and released for use (clinical or commercial), it is considered good practice to document the decision making
leading to the conclusion of readiness. The initial run(s) at full scale may be designated as engineering runs or may
be full GMP runs intended for release, depending on the perceived risk and mitigation strategies. Engineering runs
are defined here as full scale trial runs performed in the same equipment to be used for GMP manufacturing using
the intended procedures and without the intent to be released for use. Either an engineering run or a GMP run can
be considered relevant as part of demonstrating the appropriate performance of the process. At this point, the basic
control strategy should be known and implemented (e.g., tablet weight control, ointment tube seal integrity testing).
Developed manufacturing instructions should be used during the engineering run and updated with necessary
changes if applicable.
In-process sampling can be used for testing, including evaluating the status of assay procedures to be used. Samples
may also be used for any further studies identified, i.e., prototype stability studies.
A development report should be compiled to document the process, parameters, findings from development work
(edge of failure, sensitive processes), control strategy, etc. prior to moving into qualification runs.
6.2.5
Process (Procedure) Qualification
Pre-requisites for qualification activities in terms of facility, equipment, skill capability, and documentation should be
established. The timing of qualification activities may be dependent on the completion of these pre-requisites. Pilot
batches are frequently a pre-requisite that is used to increase process and product understanding, as described above.
Qualification of Technology Transfer/Process Qualification Runs
Prior to validation activities, a plan should be generated by the receiving unit to determine the validation strategy.
Process validation protocols should be approved prior to initiation of validation/qualification runs. The protocols
should summarize specific parameters and tests that need to be monitored and compared to the acceptance criteria.
The following points should be addressed by the completion of validation:
•
Control strategy
•
Master and executed batch records
•
Cleaning validation
•
Training and SOPs
•
Sampling requirements to build product and process understanding
•
Stability protocol
•
Analytical methods
•
Acceptance criteria for in-process controls and finished product testing
•
Storage and packaging conditions
Information on finalizing the transfer and performing a review is presented within Chapter 2.
[PAGE 91]
Miss Olga Chung
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 89
Technology Transfer
7	 Quality Aspects of Technology Transfer
7.1
Introduction
This chapter provides guidance on quality aspects to consider for technology transfer, including:
•
Quality representation on the technology transfer team
•
QbD and control strategy
•
QRM
•
Analytical method comparability and stability strategies
•
Process validation strategies
•
Change management
•
Execution
This chapter is intended to be relevant to all technology transfers; therefore, some aspects may not be applicable to
specific transfer programs. For example, early stage transfers (clinical versus commercial), may not require all the
elements presented. Technology transfer teams should review the information provided and determine which are
appropriate for their situation.
7.2
Quality Representation on the Technology Transfer Team
Quality needs to be considered throughout the technology transfer process; therefore, it is essential to ensure
quality is represented in the core technology transfer team. The core team should include representation from QA
and analytical/QC as well as SMEs to address technical aspects of product quality, analytical comparability, and
stability requirements with sufficient product knowledge to participate in quality risk assessments. It is important to
ensure close communication with the quality unit throughout planning and execution phases to ensure alignment on
strategies, timelines, and resource allocations.
7.3
Quality by Design and Control Strategy
QbD principles should be considered when the control strategy is developed; these include QTPP, CQAs, CPPs
and design space (as applicable). For more information on these principles, refer to the following ICH [36] quality
guidelines:
•
ICH Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical Development [3] states:
“demonstration of greater understanding of pharmaceutical and manufacturing sciences can create a basis for
flexible regulatory approaches”
•
ICH Q9 Quality Risk Management [4] – QRM can be used to justify a control strategy for technology transfer and
to identify and control potential quality issues during development and manufacturing. Effective QRM provides
regulators with greater assurance of a company’s ability to deal with potential risks.
[PAGE 92]
Miss Olga Chung
Page 90
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Technology Transfer
•
ICH Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System [1] – Technology transfer is specifically called out as a lifecycle stage
goal. It states:
“The goal of technology transfer activities is to to transfer product and process knowledge… This knowledge
forms the basis for the manufacturing process, control strategy, process validation approach and ongoing
continual improvement.”
•
ICH Q11 Development and Manufacture of Drug Substance (Chemical Entities and Biotechnological/Biological
Entities) [5] provides further clarification on Q8(R2), Q9 and Q10 [3, 4, 1] as they pertain to drug substance.
Note: It is recognized that there are ongoing developments with industry guidelines and this Guide reflects an
understanding of them as of the publication date. It is also recognized that draft ICH Q12 Technical and Regulatory
Considerations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle Management [37] was endorsed by members of the ICH [36]
Assembly and released as a draft on 16 November 17. The draft addresses the commercial phase of the product
lifecycle with respect to ICH Q8(R2), Q9, Q10 and Q11 [3, 4, 1, 5], and describes how increased product and process
knowledge can be used to justify less extensive regulatory oversight.
CQAs are the basis of the control strategy and should be available to the receiving unit to provide the scientific
rationale for manufacturing process controls and supporting analytical methods. In combination with product quality
risk assessments, CQAs ensure adequate controls are in place to produce consistent product quality.
To increase the likelihood of successful technology transfer, changes should be minimized as follows:
•
Materials (including raw materials, starting materials, intermediates, reagents, primary packaging materials for
the drug substance, resins, disposables, etc.) should be well understood and, ideally, as similar to the materials
used at the sending unit as possible to minimize any differences in drug substance/drug product quality.
•
Differences in the design of the manufacturing process (e.g., sequence of purification steps for large molecules,
order of addition of reagents, etc.) should be limited to differences in scale to minimize any potential product
quality impact between manufacturing sites.
•
Any changes to in-process controls (including in-process tests and process parameters) and release testing
should be limited to enable comparison of data to the sending unit.
•
Analytical methods should be consistent between sites. If analytical methods need to change, then ensure
equivalency studies are performed so results can be compared between sending and receiving units.
•
Consider the various levels of controls within the manufacturing process, specifications, in-process controls,
batch records, and automation controls. Any differences need to be clearly documented and justified.
7.4
Quality Risk Management
As described in Chapter 1, QRM per ICH Q9 [4] is an extremely important part of a technology transfer project.
Successful technology transfer should ensure all high risk areas have been considered, appropriate mitigation has
been put in place, and that any residual risks are assessed and agreed as acceptable between sites. The QRM
process should be documented.
•
A detailed risk assessment (e.g., using tools such as cause effect matrices, Ishikawa (fishbone) diagrams,
FMEA, gap analysis, etc.) should be put in place so that risks are reduced to an acceptable level and controlled
through a defined risk mitigation plan. This could involve experimentation and/or facility/equipment modifications
and, when successfully implemented, will help to minimize risk and negative factors in the transfer process.
[PAGE 93]
Miss Olga Chung
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 91
Technology Transfer
•
Most technology transfer projects require various risk assessments. Existing risk assessments may need to be
adapted to acknowledge changes in risk during the technology transfer.
•
Introduction of new technology to replace obsolete systems or equipment is a common challenge during
technology transfers. A risk assessment evaluating new risks caused by new technologies is recommended.
•
Transfers frequently need to be made into existing equipment and facilities. The assessment of fit-for-use when
the receiving unit equipment is not identical to the sending unit is required to ensure all significant risks are
mitigated. The fit-for-use assessment would include any process scale-up or scale-down required to complete
the transfer.
•
Segregation risks assessments are needed to confirm that proper segregation measures have been
incorporated into the facility design (e.g., layouts, process and product flows, etc.) or via procedural controls.
The requirements are mostly driven by the type of product or system; for example, sterile, low bioburden, closed
processing, etc. In the case of a multi-product facility, a cross-contamination risk assessment is recommended.
Refer to the ISPE Baseline® Guide: Risk-Based Manufacture of Pharmaceutical Products (Second Edition) [20]
for more information.
•
Contamination risk assessment (in alignment with EU GMP Annex 1 [38]) should be conducted. Controls are
implemented to ensure risk of contamination is low for the transfer.
•
Consider use of a consolidated risk register to track mitigation of each high risk item.
7.5
Analytical Comparability/Similarity and Stability Strategy
Analytical comparability is a consideration at any point after the first toxicology lot, when there is a change in the
manufacturing process which may potentially impact product quality. During technology transfer, it is advantageous
to minimize process changes as much as possible to ensure analytical comparability is maintained. Analytical
comparability is reported in the clinical trial amendment for clinical programs and is reported in the marketing
application. Comparability should be demonstrated according to ICH Q5E [39] for biotechnological/biological
products.
Analytical comparability strategies are tailored to each product and each change. The comparability strategy
incorporates the existing knowledge of the product and process as well as the risks associated with the change itself
(such as a major process change or a change to a single unit operation). In general, products in the early lifecycle
stage have limited non-clinical and clinical data associated with the pre-change product and the safety or efficacy
profile of the product have not yet been defined. In these situations, comparability testing is generally not as extensive
as for a late stage or approved products. In many cases, the analytical comparability data is sufficient justification to
not require clinical trials on the post-change for changes made at later lifecycle stages (post-pivotal and commercial).
Therefore, the expectations and requirements for comparability increase as the product matures throughout the
lifecycle stages.
The analytical comparability strategy depends on the significance of the process changes and their potential to impact
product quality, safety, and efficacy. Considerations for potential impact at the following manufacturing stages include:
•
Cell culture changes – consider attributes that may be influenced by cell bank, cell growth, media composition,
etc., (e.g., primary sequence, glycans, size, and charge heterogeneity)
•
Purification changes – consider attributes that may be influenced by the performance of the unit operation and
processing conditions (e.g., impurity clearance, shear forces, light exposure, temperature changes, etc.)
[PAGE 94]
Miss Olga Chung
Page 92
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Technology Transfer
•
Drug product changes – consider attributes that may be influenced by process conditions and product handling,
including primary and secondary containers, shear forces, light exposure, or temperature changes (e.g.,
aggregates, oxidation, deamidation, leachables, extractables, or other process or product impurities due to
formulation degradation, processing conditions, or primary containers)
•
Combination products (devices) – consider changes that may impact device functionality and the interface with
the drug product
•
Synthetics – consider process changes that may impact lot release testing
In cases where drug substance is being transferred, the impact to drug product quality should also be assessed.
Minimally, it should be determined whether the resulting drug product should be assessed at lot release and placed
on stability. Regulatory requirements should also be considered when determining the comparability and stability
strategy.
Stability studies at the recommended storage condition confirm the integrity of the product through expiry. Studies
at accelerated stability conditions and/or stress stability conditions are often conducted to satisfy regional filing
requirements as well as to support product impact outside of the recommended storage condition. While stability
at accelerated and/or stress stability conditions are not useful indicators of product expiry due to the uncertainty
associated with analytical models, the evaluation of accelerated and/or stress stability condition degradation rates
and profiles is useful for comparability purposes; the conditions may elicit differences in the post-change product
which are not evident at lot release or on stability at the recommended storage condition. The comparability strategy
should be endorsed by appropriate levels of governance for the technology transfer.
The comparability assessment criteria should be established prospectively. The product quality risk assessment and
the QTPP should be utilized to provide additional information for establishing a comparability strategy based on the
product CQAs. Analytical testing can include lot release tests as well as characterization tests depending on the
change and potentially impacted CQA. The number of lots required to establish comparability is largely determined by
the lifecycle stage. Earlier stages should be able to justify fewer lots and later stages (i.e., commercial) may require
more to demonstrate consistency.
It is important to determine the sample type and account for any differences between analytical methods and testing
sites when setting the comparability assessment criteria. Sampling handling can also significantly impact results, such
as shipment of samples for sub-visible particle testing. Analytical methods should be qualified and/or validated for all
sample types, keeping in mind that new sample types may be a requirement of the technology transfer control plan
In the event a comparability test result yields an abnormal result, teams will need to determine if there is an impact of
the aberrant product quality attribute on patient safety and/or product efficacy. There are a variety of factors that may
contribute to an abnormal comparability result and the approach for the subsequent evaluation needs to be tailored
to the situation. At a minimum, the abnormal result should be evaluated for practical significance using scientific
judgment and considerations for the product safety and efficacy profile. The standard guidance for investigations
involving comparability lots are the same guidance provided for any manufactured lot. A lot selected for comparability
may be a lot rejected for clinical or human use. Based on the reason for lot rejection, the technology transfer team
can assess the suitability of the results generated and determine if they are still adequate for the intended purpose of
process comparability with appropriate justification and quality function approval.
7.6
Process Validation/Process Performance Qualification Strategy
Process validation for technology transfer should align with the process validation concepts and lifecycle approach
as described in, e.g., ICH Q7 [2], FDA Guidance on process validation [6], EU GMP Annex 15 [8], EMA Guideline on
process validation for finished products [7], and EMA Guideline on process validation for biologics [10].
