[PAGE 104]
Miss Olga Chung
Page 102
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 2
Technology Transfer
9.5.1
Biologics Case Study #1: Transfer of a Phase 2 mAb Drug Substance with Significant Clinical
Potential
The first two case studies are interrelated in that they involve two products, one CMO company, and three CMO sites.
The first case study describes a product in early phase 2 development that held significant clinical potential to move
to a pivotal study. With the advent of breakthrough therapy designation and accelerated product development, the
timelines for process optimization and the timeframe for gaining manufacturing experience to achieve a robust and
reproducible manufacturing process is significantly reduced. Therefore, the process was transferred from the client’s
internal early phase manufacturing site to a US-based commercial CMO (site A) fairly early in clinical development.
This CMO was selected for the following reasons:
•
Commercial experience
•
Appropriate scale – 2000 L single-use bioreactors (SUB)
•
Available capacity – manufacturing slots available with ~12 months lead time
•
Good compliance history – FDA inspected as well as multiple other regulatory agency inspections
•
Technical skill/capability
•
Cost competitive
The client’s internal manufacturing train was 250 L and 1,000 L, so transfer and scale-up to a 2,000 L scale
was deemed low risk. However, manufacturing at the client site was performed with a low productivity cell line.
Development of a new higher productivity cell line and establishment of a new Master Cell Bank (MCB) was nearing
completion at the start of the technology transfer. Limited development work was performed at the client site and
technology transfer was initiated prior to having completed full process development. Utilization of a Research Cell
Bank (RCB) for initiation of technology transfer was also required since the MCB was not available yet.
Changes were made to the downstream process to enable facility fit and to improve process efficiency. A focused
development and optimization approach leveraging CMO expertise and experience was taken for the downstream
process to enable timely transfer of the process to GMP manufacturing. Changes in the downstream process
included addition of a pH treatment step, change in depth filters, change in sequence of operations (Sartoclear® P
filtration step moved from post to pre-SP-Sepharose® column chromatography), change in viral filter, and removal
of a dilution step prior to loading the SP-Sepharose® column. An engineering run was performed to shake down the
process and ensure process changes were effective and successfully scaled up to the manufacturing scale (2,000 L).
The technical challenges and the corresponding resolutions for this technology transfer are summarized in Table 9.1.
[PAGE 105]
Miss Olga Chung
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 103
Technology Transfer
Appendix 2
Table 9.1: Biologics Case Study #1 – Technical Challenges and Resolutions
Result: Successful transfer and scale-up of manufacturing process to 2,000 L, resulting in comparable product
quality and process performance.
Since this was the first time the client had worked with this CMO, there was the learning curve associated with
gaining knowledge of the facility, the equipment available, any equipment limitations, and the CMO’s quality and risk
management procedures. Release testing for both drug substance and drug product was performed at the CMO,
thereby reducing time and cost associated with transferring qualified methods to the drug product CMO at this stage
of development. The operational challenges and resolutions for this technology transfer are summarized in Table 9.2.
Table 9.2: Biologics Case Study #1 – Operational Challenges and Resolutions
Challenge
Resolution
New, higher producing cell line that was not
immediately available; no prior in-house manufacturing
experience with new cell line
Started development work with RCB, then switched to
MCB for confirmation runs; agreed on enhanced RCB
testing to allow shipment to CMO
Limited process optimization performed prior to
technology transfer
Performed focused process optimization work at CMO
in parallel, utilizing the Ambr® system for upstream
process; Downstream process optimization included
filter sizing studies, column load/cycling studies, etc.
Analytical changes, including:
•	 Addition of Polysorbate 80 test method
•	 Transition from sodium dodecyl sulfate-
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) to
capillary gel electrophoresis (CGE)
•	 Incorporation of in-process buffer matrices into
method qualification
Leveraged platform assays when possible and utilized
bridging studies to incorporate method changes
Viral clearance study issues – gaps in EU compliance
at CMO and testing laboratory
Limited certification of EU compliance (testing but
not manufacturing EU certification) was available for
regulatory submission. Follow up Qualified Person
certification required to ensure EU compliance
Challenge
Resolution
Manufacturing process changes requested by client
based on manufacturing experience; client needed
a specific filter with low filter load to reduce host cell
proteins
Incorporated facility fit and manufacturing process
changes into process optimization studies
Change in culture bags/filter trains; CMO had different
culture bags and the timeline for introducing the client
culture bag was lengthy and required a change to meet
timelines
Technical teams performed studies to support the
change to the CMO’s preferred culture bag/filter train
Managing deviations during manufacture and testing
Fully engaged client and CMO QA organizations
worked to resolve deviations/CAPAs in a timely manner
Client’s lack of understanding of CMO’s batch
disposition/review process
CMO flexibility permitted on time disposition of batch
by real time reviews/resolution and frequent meetings;
accelerated release documentation transfer to drug
product CMO permitted a smooth transition
[PAGE 106]
Miss Olga Chung
Page 104
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 2
Technology Transfer
Result: Operational challenges were readily and effectively managed, permitting successful manufacture of drug
substance and on time release testing of drug product and submission of regulatory filing.
Effective project management is critical for timely project success; communication and flexibility are key aspects
of a successful partnership. The project management challenges and resolutions for this technology transfer are
summarized in Table 9.3.
Table 9.3: Biologics Case Study #1 – Project Management Challenges and Resolutions
Result: Streamlined communication channels and conflict resolution pathways; adjustment of expectations and
improved planning/scheduling
What Worked:
•
Technical competence and experience of CMO’s process development/analytical development groups with
technology transfer and scale-up to speed development
•
Defining changes required up front and implementing changes during initial development to monitor product
quality
•
Coordination of analytical development/QC activities to complement product development activities
•
Dedicated project management and regular face-to-face and web-based meetings/updates – core team and sub-
team (upstream process, downstream process, and analytical) meetings
•
Effective project management processes; document tracker with deliverables and utilization of online
collaboration website for document sharing
•
Spirit of partnership and flexibility; commitment to improve and resolve issues
•
Studies co-completed during transfer to generate required data to sufficiently reduce manufacturing risk
•
Timeline achieved – ~15 months from project initiation to release of bulk drug substance; slight delay, but
acceleration of drug product release testing permitted meeting regulatory filing goals
Challenge
Resolution
Managing unexpected events and subsequent timeline
changes at CMO during technology transfer:
•	 CMO informed client that a new suite was being built
to improve flexibility late into technology transfer—
the required suite construction, certification, and
equipment qualification resulted in a timeline delay
•	 Addition of process development/optimization work
and expanded in-process testing was required to
enable rapid transfer
•	 Regular meetings of core team and SME sub-teams
to ensure timelines were adjusted and technical
issues were addressed
•	 Readjustment of scope to prioritize and manage
costs/timeline
Lack of a joint steering committee to address issues
early in technology transfer
•	 Engagement with senior site management to
address issues
•	 Establishment of a formal joint steering committee
structure to facilitate issue resolution
[PAGE 107]
Miss Olga Chung
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 105
Technology Transfer
Appendix 2
9.5.2
Biologics Case Study #2: Transfer of a Late Clinical Phase mAb from One CMO to Another
CMO in Preparation for PPQ and Future Commercial Manufacture
The second case study involves the mAb intermediate component of an antibody-drug conjugate in late stage clinical
development. Technology transfer was driven by the need to move the mAb manufacture from the originally intended
commercial CMO because of that company’s decision to decommission the bioreactors that were planned for
commercial manufacture of the product. In addition, there was no viable alternative available at the original CMO, so
identification and selection of a new CMO was required. Based on the prior experience with the CMO (site A) described
in Biologics Case Study #1, another site in that CMO’s network (site B) was selected for the following reasons:
•
Although site A was originally approached for this project based on the prior positive experience, capacity
constraints indicated that they could not meet the required ~12 month timeline. The client was then directed to
site B, a new facility in the CMO’s network that had capacity and could accommodate the timeline.
•
Although the distance to site B, which was outside the US, was considered a potential challenge, the proximity of
a CMO development site in the US (site C) was deemed a compensating attribute. This CMO development site
was where supporting optimization and small scale studies would be performed.
•
CMO site B’s host country offered financial incentive to perform pharmaceutical R&D activities in country.
•
Having multiple products with a single CMO was anticipated to provide efficiencies from a contractual, quality,
and overall management perspective. However, there is also an associated risk with depending on a single
CMO; this risk was mitigated by the fact that the CMO had a global footprint with multiple manufacturing sites in
different countries that could potentially serve as alternate sources.
At the time of initiating the technology transfer activities, the client was still in the process of establishing a new cell
line suitable to meet regulatory expectations for commercialization. Utilization of a RCB for initiation of technology
transfer was required because the MCB was unavailable due to delays in testing and challenges from differences
in requirements for the receipt of new cell lines at the various CMO sites. Implementation of a modified filtration
step following low pH viral inactivation was also required. However, due to time constraints, optimization prior to
manufacturing was not possible. Based on the CMO’s experience with the filter, it was considered low risk, and it was
agreed that optimization could occur at a later date. Finally, a new bulk drug substance container was introduced
to accommodate a change in storage temperature from 2–8°C to ≤ -65°C. The technical challenges and the
corresponding resolutions for this technology transfer are summarized in Table 9.4.
Table 9.4: Biologics Case Study #2 – Technical Challenges and Resolutions
Challenge
Resolution
Cell line issues:
•
New cell line still in development at the time of
transfer
•
Manufacturing and testing delays at third party cell
bank manufacturer impacted schedule
•
Inconsistent requirements between CMO sites for
the receipt of new cell banks
Established criteria for receipt of RCB for development
purposes versus MCB for GMP purposes; allowed
flexibility to begin small scale work with RCB and
transition to MCB once available
Implementation of alternate filtration step identified prior
to transfer
Agreed that optimization would be performed at a later
date due to CMO’s technical experience with the new
filter
Change in bulk drug substance container and storage
temperature
Risk assessment determined risk to be low based on
vendor white paper demonstrating compatibility with
aqueous based solutions and performance of a short-
term stability study to demonstrate compatibility with
the new container closure system
[PAGE 108]
Miss Olga Chung
Page 106
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 2
Technology Transfer
Result: Successful transfer and scaling of manufacturing process at 2,000 L, resulting in comparable product quality
and process performance
While the client had experience working within this CMO’s network, this was the first time working with this specific
site location. There were site specific requirements as well as regional government regulations that posed additional
operational challenges. The CMO site change required both a process scale change and various process changes
to accommodate facility fit. The operational challenges and the corresponding resolutions for this technology transfer
are summarized in Table 9.5.
Table 9.5: Biologics Case Study #2 – Operational Challenges and Resolutions
Result: Implementation of process modifications resulting in successful transfer of manufacturing process and
production of analytically comparable mAb intermediate
Result: Identification of alternative raw material sources within the region, mitigating supply chain risk and improving
purchasing lead times
In recent years, CMOs have been promoting the idea of a full-service provider (or one stop shop) whereby clients can
seamlessly progress a molecule from development through full commercialization within one established network.
While attractive in principle, it is important to understand that many of these networks have been established through
merger and acquisition. While the business side of the merger and acquisition activities may progress quickly, it
often takes time to fully integrate sites across different geographies, cultures, and corporate experience. The more
knowledgeable a client is about each of the sites they plan to utilize within the network, the higher the probability
of success. Communication and effective project management are the keys to success. The project management
challenges and the corresponding resolutions for this technology transfer are summarized in Table 9.6.
Challenge
Resolution
Facility fit:
•
Scale and process changes required for facility fit
•
Equipment constraints required process changes
(harvest vessels, single-use chromatography skid,
no centrifuge, etc.)
Performed small scale modeling exercise followed
by focused small scale upstream and downstream
confirmation run at CMO site C
Optimization of the cell expansion process, reducing
the number of media required from four to one
Evaluated process change in process development
at CMO site C and transferred optimized process for
manufacturing to CMO site B
Media feed component transportation hazard
classifications – a simple media feed component with
no restrictions for transport within the US was now
considered hazardous goods with strict requirements
and restrictions on international shipping
Evaluated raw material supply chain for potential
regional sourcing options and adjusted raw material
lead times based upon transportation, safety, and
importation requirements
[PAGE 109]
Miss Olga Chung
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 107
Technology Transfer
Appendix 2
Table 9.6: Biologics Case Study #2 – Project Management Challenges and Resolutions
Result: Individual site requirements necessitated additional time to complete site specific paperwork; however, all
CMO sites agreed to expedited document reviews which allowed all processing to remain on schedule.
Result: Streamlined communication, accountability, and responsibility established over time as an effective
partnership developed.
What Worked:
•
Technical competence and experience in technology transfer with well-defined process documentation
•
Small scale modeling and feasibility studies confirmed process operations; full scale engineering run confirmed
small scale process and provided manufacturing with operational experience
•
Productive and appropriately scheduled meetings, including face-to-face kickoff, regular sub-team, and regular
project management preparation and follow up meetings (proper communication and alignment is key)
•
Person-in-place on-site at CMO site B helped develop relationship and allowed sponsor to gain first-hand
experience in how the facility operates; person-in-place also clearly aided in the transfer of information,
clarification, and understanding of all unit operations with the CMO
•
Client QA involvement early in the process provided opportunity to gain process knowledge prior to moving into
GMP manufacturing
•
Achieved timeline goal – ~12 months from project initiation to bulk drug substance fill
9.5.3
Biologics Case Study #3: Transfer to a CMO for Evaluation at Laboratory Scale, Prior to
Transfer to Pilot and GMP Scale
An mAb purification process was developed at a small biotechnology company and transferred to a CMO for
evaluation at laboratory scale, prior to scale-up to a non-GMP pilot and first GMP clinical batch. The process
consisted of a Protein A chromatography step, low pH virus inactivation, and pH adjustment followed by cation
exchange and anion exchange chromatography steps.
At the sending unit, the product was eluted from Protein A with acetate buffer pH 3.2 and the product eluted from the
column within the required range for the viral inactivation step. The eluate was pH adjusted to pH 5.0 for the cation
exchange step using 1 part product to 4 parts titrant. Prior to manufacture of the first GMP batch, a laboratory scale
and pilot scale evaluation was performed at the receiving unit. During the laboratory scale evaluation at the receiving
unit, two issues arose with the Protein A step in the purification process.
Challenge
Resolution
Ensuring effective project team organization and
structure between CMO sites A, B, and C
Established sub-teams in addition to the core project
team
Ensuring effective communication between three CMO
sites and multiple client sites
Regular meetings (online and face-to-face) for both
core and sub-teams with documented minutes and
action items; additional regular project management
meetings to prepare as well as to respond to open
items
Integration of legacy procedures from prior CMO
mergers into unified CMO procedures across three
sites is a work in progress
Integration and harmonization are corporate priority for
CMO
[PAGE 110]
Miss Olga Chung
Page 108
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 2
Technology Transfer
A root cause analysis (Ishikawa diagram) was performed on the Protein A step. A number of items were highlighted
for further investigation between the two units, relating to elution buffer and titrant preparation. During the transfer,
only the names of the buffers were shared and not the preparation details. Two key differences were identified:
•
At the sending unit, the elution buffer and the titrant were prepared using the trihydrate salt, compared to use of
the anhydrous salt at the receiving unit.
•
At the sending unit, the elution buffer was titrated with hydrochloric acid, compared to titration with acetate acid at
the receiving unit which resulted in much higher buffering capacity.
The challenges and the corresponding solutions for this technology transfer are summarized in Table 9.6. Table 9.7
summarizes the challenges and resolutions prior to the pilot scale batch.
Table 9.7: Biologics Case Study #3 – Challenges and Resolutions
Challenge
Resolution
The pH of the Protein A eluate, although in the viral
inactivation range, was much lower than expected
The two issues were linked.
Elution buffer was formulated at the receiving unit using
trihydrate salt and acetic acid to achieve the required
acetate concentration. The titrant buffer was prepared
at the receiving unit using trihydrate salt.
The new formulations and the original formulations
were compared side by side on two Protein A cycles.
With the new formulations, the pH of the eluted product
was now above the required viral inactivation range.
Further evaluation of the step was performed at the
receiving unit resulting in adjustments to the acetate
concentration in the elution buffer and titrant.
Approximately double the volume of titrant was required
to adjust the pH of the Protein A eluate to pH 5.0
Result: Formulation of the elution buffer with the trihydrate salt and adjustment of the acetate concentration resulted
in the eluted product pH achieving the required pH range for viral inactivation. Preparation of the titrant with the
trihydrate salt and adjustment of the acetate concentration resulted in the expected volume of titrant being added for
pH adjustment to pH 5.0.
What Worked:
•
Good communication between technical SMEs at sending and receiving units: the unexpected performance
of the Protein A step and potential causes were flagged for the receiving unit, so details of buffer and titrant
preparation could be compared quickly and adjusted as the laboratory scale evaluation was ongoing
•
Formulation of the elution buffer facilitated preparation at scale in the GMP facility
9.5.4
Biologics Case Study #4: Transfer to CMO for Evaluation at Laboratory Scale, Prior to
Transfer to non-GMP Pilot Scale
This case study relates to transferring a process from a small biotechnology company with process development
capabilities to a CMO with process development, scale-up, and GMP capabilities. A good relationship had been
established between the two parties from collaborations on previous process transfers, process development, and
GMP batch manufacture.
In this case study, the product was a very large, challenging antibody molecule (immunoglobulin M) which could not
be purified using resins already available at the CMO. The plan was to evaluate the process at laboratory scale and
scale-up to non-GMP pilot scale before manufacturing a GMP batch.
[PAGE 111]
Miss Olga Chung
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 109
Technology Transfer
Appendix 2
As there were no batch records or development reports available from the sending unit, the process was transferred
from the sending unit using a transfer document developed at the CMO. In addition to process details, this transfer
document included a request for information from the sending unit on product stability at high or low pH, any tendency
to aggregate, evidence of instability in particular buffers, solubility issues at high or low conductivity, and highest
concentration that the product has been demonstrated to be stable. In addition, SOPs at the CMO were outlined in
this transfer document, including flow rate ranges (based on equipment available), resin cleaning conditions, and
generic hold times. This helped to align procedures at both sites.
The process transferred to the CMO included a Protein A step, anion exchange (AEX) chromatography, and
ultraviolet (UV) treatment. Final formulation development was ongoing during the transfer. Initially, the process was
evaluated at 10 L bioreactor scale at the CMO, then scaled up and evaluated in two non-GMP pilot batches. SMEs
from the sending unit were present during key processing steps at the receiving unit to be able to discuss, advise,
and help resolve technical issues real time. As more data was generated at the CMO site, the sending unit was
making changes in parallel to address arising issues. Table 9.8 summarizes the challenges and resolutions for this
technology transfer as both units worked to establish a purification process suitable for scale-up.
Table 9.8: Biologics Case Study #4 – Challenges and Resolutions
Challenge
Resolution
New Protein A resin for CMO which required a new
(vibrational) packing method
CMO evaluated the vibrational method with on-site
input from the vendor.
Much lower than expected recovery on Protein A
column during laboratory scale evaluation at CMO
Reduced loading capacity and flow rates at CMO.
Sending unit performed further evaluation to align with
CMO data. Further evaluation on scale-up at CMO to
define final loading capacity.
Higher than expected conductivity on elution from the
Protein A column during laboratory scale evaluation at
CMO, which would impact performance of AEX step
Introduced ultrafiltration step at CMO to reduce
conductivity. Subsequently, an alternative Protein A
elution buffer was evaluated at sending unit, which
eliminated the requirement for an ultrafiltration step.
New AEX column type for CMO, no flow rates
transferred from sending unit
CMO used manufacturer’s recommendations, with on-
site support from vendor on scale-up.
AEX column gave inconsistent process performance
results on scale-up and poor impurity removal at CMO
Sending unit developed alternate AEX step (traditional
resin), which increased throughput and improved
impurity removal.
Molecule was too large for 20 nm nanofiltration;
sending unit recommended UV treatment, but no
experimental work had been performed prior to transfer
to CMO
CMO hired UV equipment; this required evaluation
at non-GMP pilot scale due to material quantities
required. Developed step, but resulted in increased %
aggregates.
On scale-up at CMO, product concentration post-AEX
step was too low for UV treatment
Introduced a concentration step prior to UV treatment,
using CMO platform conditions.
Unknown impact of UV treatment on virus reduction
GMP virus reduction study was performed by the CMO
to define operating conditions.
No third step was initially developed for aggregate
removal at the sending unit
CMO and sending unit evaluated two options in
parallel, third chromatography step further established
at sending unit and evaluated on scale-up at CMO.
Limited analytical data at sending unit as impurity
methods had not been established
Use of CMO platform methods for impurities.
Limited analytical data at CMO as product quality
methods had not been transferred from sending unit
Samples sent from CMO to sending unit for product
quality analysis.
[PAGE 112]
Miss Olga Chung
Page 110
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 2
Technology Transfer
Result: The purification process was evaluated over a 12-month timeframe, at laboratory and non-GMP pilot scale.
The final batch was manufactured with the revised, three chromatography step process. However, although product
quality and impurity levels in drug substance were acceptable, the cumulative recovery was <10%. Consequently,
cost of goods was excessive. At this point, the program was placed on hold by the client, due to other more promising
molecules in their pipeline and the process was never transferred to GMP manufacturing.
What Worked:
•
Throughout the technology transfer process, both the sending and receiving units gained a huge amount of
experience and maintained a good working relationship
•
Technical competence at both units – data compiled real time for sharing and discussing, SMEs worked together
to resolve issues real time
•
New technologies were implemented which required support from vendors
9.5.5
Biologics Case Study #5: Transfer Involving a Small Biotechnology Company who Owned the
Product (Fusion Protein), from One CMO (Early Clinical Phase) to Another CMO for Scale-up
and Commercialization
For the final case study, the process was transferred from one CMO where the process had been developed and
manufactured to a second CMO with the intent of scaling up the process, due to increased material requirements
beyond the equipment capabilities of the first CMO.
A SharePoint site was set up between the biotech company and the second CMO as a way of exchanging
confidential information, including process development reports, executed batch records, in-process testing, drug
substance testing, and trend analysis of the GMP batches for upstream and downstream processes. During the
laboratory scale evaluation at the receiving unit, an issue arose on the second chromatography step in the purification
process. Table 9.9 summarizes the challenges and resolutions.
Table 9.9: Biologics Case Study #5 – Challenges and Resolutions
Challenge
Resolution
Tight timeframe – 10 L laboratory scale evaluation
being initiated only one month after receipt of
technology transfer information package, a non-GMP
400 L pilot scale batch was initiated 10 weeks later,
with the first GMP engineering batch in the larger CMO
manufacturing facility seven months later.
Experimental work was initiated under a “Letter
of Intent” and the formal Amendment was signed
approximately two months later detailing the stages of
work
Increased number of teleconferences
Process data was shared in multiple documents,
including batch records from the CMO and a summary
development report generated by the biotechnology
company
Development laboratory at the second CMO prepared
process descriptions based on the data available,
which were reviewed by SMEs from the biotechnology
company before proceeding with laboratory work
Product did not elute as expected from the second
chromatography column, breakthrough was observed
during a post-load wash, which significantly impacted
the % recovery
Investigation resulted in an error in chromatography
resin type used
An initial investigation was performed. Process step details were compared between the batch records from the
sending unit, the process description generated at the receiving unit, and data recorded in the laboratory notebook.
Initial root causes considered were related to buffer pH and conductivity specifications as the ranges transferred were
broad. However, all buffers prepared at the second CMO were within the required ranges.
