=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-May-2024
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-5C58E1A2-6BE7-4011-9776-64687B306810_6_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99560_06_01
DOI Ref:
8s4jq
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈771〉 OPHTHALMIC PRODUCTS—QUALITY TESTS
Change to read:
INTRODUCTION
Ophthalmic products are sterile products that are intended for application to any ocular structure, including any space adjacent to an
ocular structure and its immediate surrounding spaces.
The routes of administration of ophthalmic products fall into three general categories: topical, intraocular injections, and extraocular
injections. Topical drug products are intended to be administered to an ocular surface component, such as the eyelid, conjunctiva, or cornea,
and can produce local or systemic effects. Intraocular and extraocular injections are administered through external boundary tissue. Due to
the potential sensitivity of some ocular tissues, injections have additional requirements for subvisible par ticulate matter content (see
Par ticulate and Foreign Matter, ▲
Subvisible Par ticulate Matter in Intraocular Solutions 〈789〉▲ (CN 1-May-2024)
, and Visible Par ticulates in
Injections 〈790〉). The ophthalmic routes of administration include, but are not limited to: topical, subconjunctival, sub-Tenons, subretinal,
subchoroidal, intracorneal, intrascleral, suprachoroidal, intravitreal, intracameral, juxtascleral, and retrobulbar routes (see Figure 1).
Ophthalmic products are administered to the eye in a wide variety of dosage forms, including but not restricted to: solutions, suspensions,
ointments, gels, emulsions, strips, injections, inser ts, and implants.
Figure 1. Examples of ocular routes of administration.
This chapter provides lists of consolidated common product quality test requirements in a concise and coherent fashion. This chapter
applies, in par t or in its entirety, when referenced in a drug product monograph (see General Notices, 3.10 Applicability of Standards). This
chapter includes the quality tests for the speci«c route of administration. The quality tests listed can be used, as appropriate, by
manufacturers toward the development of new drug product monographs for submission to the USP–NF.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:20 PM
USP-NF 〈771〉 Ophthalmic Products—Quality Tests


=== PAGE 2 ===
OPHTHALMIC DOSAGE FORMS
This chapter discusses the speci«c characteristics of dosage forms that are administered to any structure in the eye. See Pharmaceutical
Dosage Forms 〈1151〉 for additional information per taining to the description and manufacturing of pharmaceutical dosage forms.
Ophthalmic products have the same or similar requirements as injectables and implants. For more information on the requirements for
these dosage forms, see Injections and Implanted Drug Products 〈1〉.
Degradation and/or morphological changes of the drug product can occur during the sterilization step of the manufacturing process
depending on the formulation, container-closure system, and sterilization process. These changes should be minimized. Temperatures
required for autoclaving can cause irreversible damage to cer tain dosage forms such as suspensions, semisolids, emulsions, and others,
whereas «ltration is applicable only to formulations containing par ticulates with par ticle sizes <0.2 µm. An alternative approach is to
manufacture the drug product from sterile ingredients maintained within an aseptic environment.
Multi-dose products shall contain a suitable antimicrobial preservative, and the effectiveness of the preservative over the shelf life of the
product must be veri«ed. Alternatively, preservative-free multi-dose products require a packaging system that has been demonstrated to
maintain sterility over the shelf-life of the product.
Solutions
[Note—Included in this section are solutions and those solid products that, when reconstituted according to the instructions in the labeling,
result in a solution.]
The corneal contact time of topical ophthalmic solutions increases with the viscosity of the formulations. Several synthetic polymers,
including but not limited to polyvinyl alcohol, polyvinylpyrrolidone, polyethylene glycol, poly(acrylic acid), and cellulose derivatives such as
hypromellose and hydroxyethyl cellulose, are commonly used as viscosity enhancers because of their physiologic compatibility and desirable
physicochemical proper ties.
Another approach to increase the corneal contact time involves the use of polymers that provide the liquid formulation with semisolid
consistency only when the liquid formulation is placed in the conjunctival or corneal area. In this way, instillation of the solution is followed
by prolonged permanence as a result of the viscoelastic proper ties of the formed hydrogel. “Hydrogel”, or “water-based gels”, are three-
dimensional networks of polymer chains containing water within the network. The structure of the polymer network can be physically
crosslinked (e.g., via ionic or hydrogen bonds) or chemically crosslinked (via a covalent bond). The water content of hydrogels can be
adjusted by modulating the composition and conformation of polymers, such as the hydrophilic/hydrophobic balance of polymer chains and
pendant groups, and the degree of cross-linking. The in-situ gelling phenomenon is caused upon delivery to the eye by a change in the
conformation of the polymer(s) that can be triggered by external stimuli such as temperature, pH, ionic content, and lacrimal ¬uid.
Additionally, some polymers can interact, via noncovalent bonds, with conjunctival mucin and maintain the formulation in contact with
corneal tissues.
Solutions can be injected not only by the intravitreal route but also by other routes, such as subconjunctival, sub-Tenons, retrobulbar,
suprachoroidal, and subretinal routes.
Suspensions
[Note—Included in this section are suspensions and those solid products that, when reconstituted according to the instructions in the
labeling, result in a suspension.]
Use of aqueous or oily suspensions may be considered for a number of reasons such as the following: 1) a drug is poorly soluble in water,
2) a drug has poor stability in water, and 3) in cases where there is a need to increase contact time with the eye and to increase wetting of
the eye. A drug par ticle size of <10 µm is desirable to reduce irritation.
After topical instillation, par ticles are expected to be retained in the cul-de-sac, and the drug slowly dissolves or is released from the
polymeric structures by diffusion, dissolution, polymer degradation, or ion-exchange.
Suspensions can be injected not only by the intravitreal route but also through other routes, such as subconjunctival, sub-Tenons,
retrobulbar, suprachoroidal, and subretinal.
Ointments
Eye ointments are semisolid products usually intended for application to the conjunctiva, cornea, or eyelid. They have longer contact time
when compared to many solutions. A suitable ophthalmic ointment base is nonirritating to the eye and permits diffusion of the drug
substance throughout the secretions bathing the eye.
The majority of water-free, oleaginous eye ointment bases are composed of white petrolatum and liquid petrolatum (mineral oil), or the eye
ointment base is a modi«cation of the petrolatum-based formula. They are designed to melt at body temperature. Other types of lipophilic
ointment bases can also be used. An anhydrous vehicle can be advantageous for moisture-sensitive drugs.
Gels
Semisolid gel products are an alternative to traditional ointments and are based on the effect of increasing the viscosity to prolong the
retention of the drug in the eye. Several types of gelling agents can be used, such as poly(acrylic acid) derivatives (e.g., carbomer) or
hypromellose.
Emulsions
Topical ophthalmic emulsions are generally prepared by dissolving or dispersing the drug substance into an oil phase, adding suitable
emulsifying and suspending agents, and vigorously mixing these components with water to form a uniform oil-in-water emulsion. Each
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:20 PM
USP-NF 〈771〉 Ophthalmic Products—Quality Tests


=== PAGE 3 ===
phase is typically sterilized before or during charging into the mixing vessel. High-shear homogenization may be used to reduce oil droplet
size to submicron size, which may improve the physical stability of the oil micelles so that they do not coalesce. The resulting dosage form
should contain small oil droplets, uniformly suspended.
Limited aqueous solubility of the drug substance(s) is the most common rationale for developing an ophthalmic emulsion. The drug
substance(s) can be added to the phase in which it is soluble at the beginning of the manufacturing process, or the drug substance can be
added after the emulsion is prepared by a suitable dispersion process.
The physical stability of the emulsion can be measured by light-scattering techniques that characterize oil-phase, globule-size distribution.
Suitable surfactants may be added to improve emulsion stability.
Strips
Ophthalmic strips can have different ophthalmic uses including, but not limited to, use as a diagnostic tool to visualize defects or
aberrations in the corneal epithelium or to measure the amount of tear production. They are made of «lter paper, and they can contain
compounds such as ¬uorescein sodium. They are individually packed to preserve sterility until the moment of use.
Injections
Although injections are considered a dosage form for nomenclature purposes, they are referred to in this chapter by other dosage forms
such as solution, suspension, emulsion, and other appropriate terminology based on physical form.
Inser ts
Ophthalmic inser ts and ocular systems are solid dosage forms of appropriate size and shape that are placed in the conjunctival fornix, in
the lacrimal punctum (Figure 2), or on the cornea. Inser ts can usually be removed, if adverse effects develop, and can provide extended
release of the drug over a cer tain period of time. Inser ts can be classi«ed as bioabsorbable (soluble) or non-bioabsorbable (insoluble). Drug
release from soluble inser ts involves two steps: 1) fast release of a por tion of the drug as the tear ¬uid penetrates into the system and 2)
slow release as a gel layer is formed on the surface of the inser t. Collagen shields made from porcine sclera collagen or bovine corium
tissue—and devices obtained by molding, extrusion, or compression (minitablets) of gelling polymers—belong to this category of soluble
inser ts. Bioabsorbable polymers (e.g., cross-linked gelatin derivatives and polyesters) can be used to prepare bioabsorbable inser ts; these
matrices act as reservoirs or interact with the drug molecules through labile bonds.
Figure 2. Lacrimal punctum.
Soluble inser ts can have the drug incorporated into a bioabsorbable matrix, such as hydroxypropyl cellulose, hyaluronic acid, or poly(acrylic
acid) matrices. Soluble inser ts may be placed in the lower cul-de-sac and generally dissolve within 12–24 h. Bioabsorbable polymeric
products undergo gradual dissolution while releasing the drug, and the patient does not have to remove the bioabsorbable polymeric inser t
after use.
Insoluble inser ts can have a reservoir or matrix structure. Their mechanism of action is based on diffusion of a ¬uid from the eye into the
device, dissolution of the drug, and the creation of a saturated solution released to the medium by diffusion out of the inser t. Insoluble
inser ts need to be removed after a cer tain period of time.
Implants
Implants are injected or implanted into the anterior segment (intracameral, subconjunctival, sub-Tenon, or other par ts of the anterior
segment) or intravitreal cavities, and the implants can be in different shapes, such as a disk or a thin rod. Implants can be made of non-
bioabsorbable or bioabsorbable polymers.
Among the types of non-bioabsorbable solid (polymer) implants are reservoir-type implants anchored to the sclera, in which the drug is
released across a non-bioabsorbable, semipermeable polymer. The reservoir-type implants can be made of a variety of materials, including
poly(vinyl alcohol–ethylene vinyl acetate). Bioabsorbable polymers can be used to form injectable solid implants.
Drug–Device Combination Products
An ophthalmic drug–device combination product is constituted, in most cases, of two components. One is a pharmaceutical dosage form
containing the drug substance(s), and the other is a device that will activate or facilitate the penetration of the drug substance(s) from the
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:20 PM
USP-NF 〈771〉 Ophthalmic Products—Quality Tests


=== PAGE 4 ===
dosage form into a par ticular region of the eye. Some examples of the devices are those that generate waveforms (heat or light). Light
sources can activate photoresponsive drugs.
This chapter is applicable only to the pharmaceutical dosage form component of the ophthalmic drug–device combination product. The
appropriate FDA regulations regarding medical devices should be used for the device component.
Change to read:
DRUG PRODUCT QUALITY
Procedures and acceptance criteria for testing ophthalmic products are divided into two categories: 1) those that assess general quality
attributes, e.g., identi«cation, potency, purity (and impurities), sterility, and par ticulate matter; and 2) those that assess in vitro product
performance, i.e., dissolution or drug release of the drug substance from the drug product. Quality tests assess the integrity of the dosage
form, whereas the performance tests assess drug release and other attributes that relate to in vivo drug performance. Taken together, quality
and performance tests ensure the identity, strength, quality, purity, and e­cacy of the drug product. This chapter addresses the quality tests
for ophthalmic products. The performance tests (dissolution/drug release) are addressed by Ophthalmic Products—Performance Tests
〈1771〉.
Universal Tests
In this chapter, the division of the product quality tests into universal and speci«c tests does not strictly follow the ICH guidance Q6A
Speci«cations: Test Procedures and Acceptance Criteria for New Drug Substances and New Drug Products: Chemical Substances (available at
www.ich.org). Universal tests in this chapter mean the tests that are applicable to all ophthalmic products, regardless of the dosage form
type.
description
A qualitative description of the drug product should be provided. The acceptance criteria should contain the «nal acceptable appearance,
including clarity and color, of the dosage form and packaging. If the color changes during storage, a quantitative procedure may be
appropriate. This is not a compendial test but is par t of the manufacturer's speci«cation of the drug product.
identification
Identi«cation tests are discussed in General Notices, 5.40 Identi«cation. Identi«cation tests should establish the identity of the drug or
drugs present in the ar ticle and should discriminate between compounds of closely related structures that are likely to be present. Identity
tests should be speci«c for the drug substance(s). If the test is nonspeci«c, at least two or thogonal nonspeci«c tests should be used.
Identi«cation by use of a single chromatographic retention time does not constitute a speci«c test.
assay
A speci«c and stability-indicating test should be used to determine the strength (content) of the drug product. In cases where the use of a
nonspeci«c assay test is justi«ed, other suppor ting analytical procedures should be used to achieve overall speci«city. A speci«c procedure
should be used when there is evidence of excipient interference with the nonspeci«c assay test. Additional information on speci«c assays
may be found in Antibiotics—Microbial Assays 〈81〉, Chromatography 〈621〉, and Ion Chromatography 〈1065〉.
impurities
Process impurities, synthetic byproducts, and other inorganic and organic impurities may be present in the drug substance and excipients
used in the manufacture of the drug product. These impurities are controlled by the drug substance and excipient monographs. Organic
impurities arising from the degradation of the drug substance in the drug product and those impurities arising during the manufacturing
process of the drug product should be monitored. All ar ticles meet the requirements in Elemental Impurities—Limits 〈232〉 and Residual
Solvents 〈467〉.
pH
See pH 〈791〉. Normal tears have a pH of about 7.4. The eye can tolerate products over a range of pH values from about 3.0 to about 8.6,
depending on the buffering capacity of the formulation. The pH value of the formulation should be the one where the drug product is the
most stable. Formulations that target the extremes of the acceptable pH range will have better patient acceptability if the formulations have
a low buffering capacity.
osmolarity
See Osmolality and Osmolarity 〈785〉. Ophthalmic products may be tolerated over a wide range of tonicity (0.5%–5% sodium chloride,
equivalent to about 171–1711 mOsm/kg). Hypotonic solutions are better tolerated than hyper tonic solutions. Precautions should be taken
to ensure that the product maintains its osmolarity during shelf life. Any possible contributions or interferences from the packaging system
should be considered.
particulate and foreign matter
As described in Visual Inspection of Injections 〈1790〉, 4.1 Extrinsic, Intrinsic, or Inherent Par ticles, unwanted par ticulate matter is
categorized as extrinsic (foreign matter) and intrinsic (formulation-, process-, or container-related matter or par ticulate matter due to
product instability or product package interactions). A third category, inherent, describes a physical state that is an expected attribute of the
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:20 PM
USP-NF 〈771〉 Ophthalmic Products—Quality Tests


=== PAGE 5 ===
product, such as a suspension or emulsion. It is expected that the manufacturer has established an acceptable control level for any inherent
attribute, such as solution color, haze, or drug/excipient-related par ticle content.
The term 100% unit inspection is de«ned in 〈1790〉, 3.1 100% Inspection as the complete nondestructive inspection of the container–
closure system and its contents. Therefore, evaluation of package and «ll acceptability is shown by using the methodology in Visible
Par ticulates in Injections 〈790〉, and this methodology is applied to all ophthalmic products: topical, intraocular injections or ophthalmic
products used in association with a surgical procedure, and extraocular injections.
Intraocular administration includes all ophthalmic products that cross (penetrate) boundary tissue such as the cornea and sclera.
Extraocular administration of ophthalmic products includes all the other ocular components and spaces.
For all intraocular solutions, conformance to 〈790〉 and ▲
Subvisible Par ticulate Matter in Intraocular Solutions 〈789〉▲ (CN 1-May-2024)
is
required. Additionally, for extraocular (nontopical) solution products, conformance to 〈790〉 and evaluation by Par ticulate Matter in Injections
〈788〉 is required. For topical products, conformance to 〈790〉 is required. See the summary of this information in Table 1.
T
able 1. Par ticulate and Foreign Matter Requirements for Ophthalmic Solutions
Route of Administration
(See Figure 1)
Must comply with
a
Topical
〈790〉
Peribulbar
〈790〉, 〈788〉
Superior rectus
〈790〉, 〈788〉
Sub-Tenon
〈790〉, 〈788〉
Subconjunctival
〈790〉, 〈788〉
Inferior rectus
〈790〉, 〈788〉
Retrobulbar
〈790〉, 〈788〉
Suprachoroidal
〈790〉, 〈789〉
Juxtascleral
〈790〉, 〈788〉
Intrascleral
〈790〉, 〈789〉
Intracorneal
〈790〉, 〈789〉
Subchoroidal
〈790〉, 〈789〉
Subretinal
〈790〉, 〈789〉
Intracameral
〈790〉, 〈789〉
Intravitreal
〈790〉, 〈789〉
a
Chapter 〈787〉 may be used instead of 〈788〉 for protein biotherapeutic formulas. For fur ther information on di­cult-to-inspect
products, see 〈1790〉.
For nonsolution dosage forms (e.g., ointments, gels, suspensions, and emulsions) and dosage forms packaged in opaque containers
(e.g., opaque bottles, metal tubes), the approach must be modi«ed because these products are not directly amenable to the tests listed in
Table 1. It is recommended to use 100% unit inspection per 〈790〉 for package acceptability (including but not limited to integrity, form,
dimensions, cleanliness, label); whereas, an alternate testing strategy may be used for foreign par ticles where the dosage form hinders or
precludes the use of these tests. For these products, a statistically relevant sample, examined by a destructive or other alternative method,
will determine batch acceptability for visible par ticles as required by 〈790〉 and fur ther described in 〈1790〉.
All ophthalmic products will bene«t from evaluation of unwanted par ticulate matter content through the control strategy discussed in
〈1790〉 and in the FDA's current good manufacturing practices guidance. The «nal product, therefore, bene«ts from a control strategy
including comprehensive evaluation of excipient and active ingredient quality, processing effects, package quality, and «ll control. These
concepts are discussed in 〈1790〉.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:20 PM
USP-NF 〈771〉 Ophthalmic Products—Quality Tests


=== PAGE 6 ===
sterility
Ophthalmic dosage forms must meet the requirements of Sterility Tests 〈71〉. If the speci«c ingredients used in the formulation do not
lend themselves to routine sterilization techniques, ingredients that meet the sterility requirements described in 〈71〉, along with aseptic
manufacture, may be used. The immediate container for ophthalmic products shall be sterile at the time of «lling and closing. See also
Universal Tests, Container–Closure Integrity.
antimicrobial preservatives
Antimicrobial agents must be added to products that are packaged in containers that allow for the withdrawal or administration of
multiple doses, unless one of the following conditions prevails: 1) there are different directions in the individual monograph; 2) the
radiopharmaceutical drug product contains a radionuclide with a physical half-life of <24 h; 3) the drug product, without additional agents, is
su­ciently microbicidal to meet the requirements of Antimicrobial Effectiveness Testing 〈51〉, or 4) the container–closure system is capable
of maintaining sterility of the product throughout its shelf life until opened or accessed. Once opened or accessed, it must maintain
antimicrobial effectiveness during the intended use period. Antimicrobial agents must meet the requirements of 〈51〉 and Antimicrobial
Agents—Content 〈341〉. Acceptance criteria for antimicrobial preservative content in multi-dose products should be established.
bacterial endotoxins
All injected ophthalmic drug products shall be prepared in a manner designed to minimize bacterial endotoxins as de«ned in Bacterial
Endotoxins Test 〈85〉. The limits are not more than 0.5 EU/mL for ophthalmic irrigation products and not more than 2.0 EU/dose/eye for
injected or implanted drug products. Typically, this test is not required for topically applied ophthalmic products. This chapter does not
address the endotoxin limits for devices that are injected or implanted.
uniformity of dosage units
This test is applicable to dosage forms packaged in single-unit containers. It includes both the mass of the dosage form and the content
of the drug substance(s) in the dosage form. The test can be performed by either content uniformity or weight variation (see Uniformity of
Dosage Units 〈905〉).
container contents
Container contents of ophthalmic products should be determined (see Minimum Fill 〈755〉).
leachables and extractables
The packaging system should not interact physically or chemically with the product in any manner to alter the strength, quality, or purity
of the drug product. The packaging system should meet the requirements in Elastomeric Components in Injectable Pharmaceutical Product
Packaging/Delivery Systems 〈381〉, Containers—Glass 〈660〉, and, depending on which standards the manufacturer has implemented, Plastic
Packaging Systems and Their Materials of Construction 〈661〉 or Plastic Materials of Construction 〈661.1〉 and Plastic Packaging Systems for
Pharmaceutical Use 〈661.2〉. Fur ther information regarding packaging systems testing can be found in Assessment of Extractables
Associated with Pharmaceutical Packaging/Delivery Systems 〈1663〉 and Assessment of Drug Product Leachables Associated with
Pharmaceutical Packaging/Delivery Systems 〈1664〉. The assessment of possible leachables and/or extractables and the establishment of
any acceptance criteria for these compounds should consider the risk assessment of the product, its indication, and its packaging system.
This assessment is done in a case-by-case approach during product development and re-evaluated when any changes are made to the
product including, but not restricted to, changes in manufacturing process, formulation, and packaging material.
Fur thermore, it should be noted that a risk assessment of extractable/leachable impact on the topical or intraocular route of
administration is a challenging under taking. Toxicological or safety assessments of primary or secondary packaging component
extractables and leachables are not typically available for ophthalmic routes of administration. A risk assessment may include evaluation of
toxicology and safety from other routes of administration and an assessment of the total daily intake of the extractable/leachable being
evaluated. The preponderance of such assessments leads to an estimate of extractable/leachable risk via ocular delivery to the patient.
container–closure integrity
The packaging system should be closed or sealed in such a manner as to prevent contamination or loss of contents and should
incorporate a tamper-evident design. Validation of container integrity must demonstrate no penetration of microbial contamination or of
chemical or physical impurities (see Package Integrity Evaluation—Sterile Products 〈1207〉).
Speci«c Tests
viscosity
An increase in viscosity increases the residence time of ocular formulations. However, drug diffusion out of these formulations into the
ocular tissue may be modi«ed due to high product viscosity. Ophthalmic ointments are designed to be of very high viscosity to prolong the
residence time of the formulation in the eye. The inclusion of viscosity evaluation in the speci«cation of the product should be based on the
type of dosage form and whether changes in product viscosity will affect its performance. This is not a compendial test but is par t of the
manufacturer’s speci«cation of the drug product. See Viscosity—Capillary Methods 〈911〉, Viscosity—Rotational Methods 〈912〉, and Viscosity
—Rolling Ball Method 〈913〉.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:20 PM
USP-NF 〈771〉 Ophthalmic Products—Quality Tests


=== PAGE 7 ===
antioxidant content
If antioxidants are present in the drug product, tests of their content should be established, unless oxidative degradation can be detected
by another test method such as impurity testing. Acceptance criteria for antioxidant content should be established. They should be based
on the levels of antioxidant necessary to maintain the product’s stability at all stages throughout its proposed usage and shelf life.
resuspendability/redispersibility
Consideration must be given to establishing good physical stability of a suspension. If the par ticles settle and eventually produce a cake
at the bottom of the container, they must redisperse readily at the time of use to achieve dosage uniformity. Quantitative demonstration of
the active ingredient's resuspendability/redispersibility during product development is also recommended.
particle size and particle size distribution
The potential for any changes in the par ticle size of ophthalmic suspensions and emulsions needs to be evaluated through stability
testing (see Light Diffraction Measurement of Par ticle Size 〈429〉).
drop size
For ophthalmic drug products dispensed as drops, drop sizes may typically range from 20–70 µL. Drop size can be controlled by weight
or by volume, and it is typically evaluated during product development. Drop size can be determined by any appropriate validated procedure.
added substances
Suitable substances may be added to ophthalmic products to increase stability, unless proscribed in the individual monograph, provided
they are harmless in the amounts administered and do not interfere with therapeutic e­cacy or with responses to the speci«ed assays and
tests. Typically, these substances should be evaluated during product development. The use of ingredients solely to impar t an odor or ¬avor
is prohibited. The use of ingredients solely to impar t a color is prohibited unless coloring is needed to visualize the administration location
of the product.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<771> OPHTHALMIC PRODUCTS - QUALITY
TESTS
Margareth R.C. Marques
Principal Scienti«c Liaison
GCDF2020
General Chapters - Dosage Forms
2020
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. 47(3)
Current DocID: GUID-5C58E1A2-6BE7-4011-9776-64687B306810_6_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99560_06_01
DOI ref: 8s4jq
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:20 PM
USP-NF 〈771〉 Ophthalmic Products—Quality Tests
