EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
2.6.1. Sterility
Table 2.6.1.-2. – Minimum quantity to be used for each medium
Quantity per container
Minimum quantity to be used for each medium unless
otherwise justiﬁed and authorised
Liquids
– less than 1 mL
The whole contents of each container
– 1-40 mL
Half the contents of each container but not less than 1 mL
– greater than 40 mL and not greater than 100 mL
20 mL
– greater than 100 mL
10 per cent of the contents of the container but not less than 20 mL
Antibiotic liquids
1 mL
Insoluble preparations, creams and ointments to be suspended or emulsified
Use the contents of each container to provide not less than 200 mg
Solids
– less than 50 mg
The whole contents of each container
– 50 mg or more but less than 300 mg
Half the contents of each container but not less than 50 mg
– 300 mg to 5 g
150 mg
– greater than 5 g
500 mg
Catgut and other surgical sutures for veterinary use
3 sections of a strand (each 30 cm long)
isopropyl myristate shown not to have antimicrobial activity
in the conditions of the test. Allow the oil to penetrate the
membrane by its own weight then ﬁlter, applying the pressure
or suction gradually. Wash the membrane at least 3 times
by ﬁltering through it each time about 100 mL of a suitable
sterile solution such as 1 g/L neutral meat or casein peptone
containing a suitable emulsifying agent at a concentration
shown to be appropriate in the method suitability test, for
example polysorbate 80 at a concentration of 10 g/L. Transfer
the membrane or membranes to the culture medium or media
or vice versa as described above for aqueous solutions, and
incubate at the same temperatures and for the same times.
Ointments and creams. Use for each medium not less than
the quantities of the product prescribed in Table 2.6.1.-2.
Ointments in a fatty base and emulsions of the water-in-oil
type may be diluted to 1 per cent in isopropyl myristate as
described above, by heating, if necessary, to not more than
40 °C. In exceptional cases it may be necessary to heat to not
more than 44 °C. Filter as rapidly as possible and proceed as
described above for oils and oily solutions.
Direct inoculation of the culture medium. Transfer the
quantity of the preparation to be examined prescribed in
Table 2.6.1.-2 directly into the culture medium so that the
volume of the product is not more than 10 per cent of the
volume of the medium, unless otherwise prescribed.
If the product to be examined has antimicrobial activity, carry
out the test after neutralising this with a suitable neutralising
substance or by dilution in a sufﬁcient quantity of culture
medium. When it is necessary to use a large volume of the
product it may be preferable to use a concentrated culture
medium prepared in such a way that it takes account of the
subsequent dilution. Where appropriate, the concentrated
medium may be added directly to the product in its container.
Oily liquids. Use media to which have been added a suitable
emulsifying agent at a concentration shown to be appropriate
in the method suitability test, for example polysorbate 80 at a
concentration of 10 g/L.
Ointments and creams. Prepare by diluting to about 1 in 10
by emulsifying with the chosen emulsifying agent in a suitable
sterile diluent such as a 1 g/L neutral solution of meat or
casein peptone. Transfer the diluted product to a medium not
containing an emulsifying agent.
Incubate the inoculated media for not less than 14 days.
Observe the cultures several times during the incubation
period. Shake cultures containing oily products gently each
day. However when ﬂuid thioglycollate medium is used for
the detection of anaerobic micro-organisms keep shaking
or mixing to a minimum in order to maintain anaerobic
conditions.
Catgut and other surgical sutures for veterinary use. Use for
each medium not less than the quantities of the product
prescribed in Table 2.6.1.-2. Open the sealed package using
aseptic precautions and remove 3 sections of the strand for
each culture medium. Carry out the test on 3 sections, each
30 cm long, cut off from the beginning, the centre and the
end of the strand. Use whole strands from freshly opened
cassette packs. Transfer each section of the strand to the
selected medium. Use sufﬁcient medium to cover adequately
the material to be tested (20 mL to 150 mL).
OBSERVATION AND INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS
At intervals during the incubation period and at its conclusion,
examine the media for macroscopic evidence of microbial
growth. If the material being tested renders the medium
turbid so that the presence or absence of microbial growth
cannot be readily determined by visual examination, 14 days
after the beginning of incubation transfer portions (each not
less than 1 mL) of the medium to fresh vessels of the same
medium and then incubate the original and transfer vessels
for not less than 4 days.
If no evidence of microbial growth is found, the product to be
examined complies with the test for sterility. If evidence of
microbial growth is found the product to be examined does
not comply with the test for sterility, unless it can be clearly
demonstrated that the test was invalid for causes unrelated
to the product to be examined. The test may be considered
invalid only if one or more of the following conditions are
fulﬁlled:
a) the data of the microbiological monitoring of the sterility
testing facility show a fault;
b) a review of the testing procedure used during the test in
question reveals a fault;
c) microbial growth is found in the negative controls;
d) after determination of the identity of the micro-organisms
isolated from the test, the growth of this species or these
species may be ascribed unequivocally to faults with respect
to the material and/or the technique used in conducting the
sterility test procedure.
If the test is declared to be invalid it is repeated with the same
number of units as in the original test.
If no evidence of microbial growth is found in the repeat
test the product examined complies with the test for sterility.
If microbial growth is found in the repeat test the product
examined does not comply with the test for sterility.
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
209
2.6.2. Mycobacteria
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
Table 2.6.1.-3. – Minimum number of items to be tested
Number of items in the batch*
Minimum number of items to be tested for each medium, unless
otherwise justiﬁed and authorised**
Parenteral preparations
– Not more than 100 containers
10 per cent or 4 containers, whichever is the greater
– More than 100 but not more than 500 containers
10 containers
– More than 500 containers
2 per cent or 20 containers (10 containers for large-volume parenterals)
whichever is less
Ophthalmic and other non-injectable preparations
– Not more than 200 containers
5 per cent or 2 containers, whichever is the greater
– More than 200 containers
10 containers
– If the product is presented in the form of single-dose containers, apply
the scheme shown above for preparations for parenteral administration
Catgut and other surgical sutures for veterinary use
2 per cent or 5 packages whichever is the greater, up to a maximum total of
20 packages
Bulk solid products
– Up to 4 containers
Each container
– More than 4 containers but not more than 50 containers
20 per cent or 4 containers, whichever is the greater
– More than 50 containers
2 per cent or 10 containers, whichever is the greater
* If the batch size is not known, use the maximum number of items prescribed.
**If the contents of one container are enough to inoculate the 2 media, this column gives the number of containers needed for both the media
together.
APPLICATION OF THE TEST TO PARENTERAL
PREPARATIONS, OPHTHALMIC AND OTHER
NON-INJECTABLE PREPARATIONS REQUIRED TO
COMPLY WITH THE TEST FOR STERILITY
When using the technique of membrane ﬁltration, use,
whenever possible, the whole contents of the container, but
not less than the quantities indicated in Table 2.6.1.-2, diluting
where necessary to about 100 mL with a suitable sterile
solution, such as 1 g/L neutral meat or casein peptone.
When using the technique of direct inoculation of media,
use the quantities shown in Table 2.6.1.-2, unless otherwise
justiﬁed and authorised. The tests for bacterial and fungal
sterility are carried out on the same sample of the product to
be examined. When the volume or the quantity in a single
container is insufﬁcient to carry out the tests, the contents of 2
or more containers are used to inoculate the different media.
MINIMUM NUMBER OF ITEMS TO BE TESTED
The minimum number of items to be tested in relation to the
size of the batch is given in Table 2.6.1.-3.
Guidelines on the test for sterility are given in general
chapter 5.1.9.
