EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
2.6.1. Sterility
2.6. BIOLOGICAL TESTS
04/2011:20601
corrected 7.7
2.6.1. STERILITY(1)
The test is applied to substances, preparations or articles
which, according to the Pharmacopoeia, are required to be
sterile. However, a satisfactory result only indicates that no
contaminating micro-organism has been found in the sample
examined in the conditions of the test.
PRECAUTIONS AGAINST MICROBIAL
CONTAMINATION
The test for sterility is carried out under aseptic conditions.
In order to achieve such conditions, the test environment
has to be adapted to the way in which the sterility test is
performed. The precautions taken to avoid contamination are
such that they do not affect any micro-organisms which are to
be revealed in the test. The working conditions in which the
tests are performed are monitored regularly by appropriate
sampling of the working area and by carrying out appropriate
controls.
CULTURE MEDIA AND INCUBATION TEMPERATURES
Media for the test may be prepared as described below, or
equivalent commercial media may be used provided that they
comply with the growth promotion test.
The following culture media have been found to be suitable for
the test for sterility. Fluid thioglycollate medium is primarily
intended for the culture of anaerobic bacteria; however, it will
also detect aerobic bacteria. Soya-bean casein digest medium
is suitable for the culture of both fungi and aerobic bacteria.
Fluid thioglycollate medium
L-Cystine
0.5 g
Agar
0.75 g
Sodium chloride
2.5 g
Glucose monohydrate/Glucose
5.5 g/5.0 g
Yeast extract (water-soluble)
5.0 g
Pancreatic digest of casein
15.0 g
Sodium thioglycollate or
0.5 g
Thioglycollic acid
0.3 mL
Resazurin sodium solution (1 g/L of resazurin
sodium), freshly prepared
1.0 mL
Water R
1000 mL
pH after sterilisation 7.1 ± 0.2
Mix the L-cystine, agar, sodium chloride, glucose,
water-soluble yeast extract and pancreatic digest of casein
with the water R and heat until solution is effected. Dissolve
the sodium thioglycollate or thioglycollic acid in the solution
and, if necessary, add 1 M sodium hydroxide so that, after
sterilisation, the solution will have a pH of 7.1 ± 0.2. If
ﬁltration is necessary, heat the solution again without boiling
and ﬁlter while hot through moistened ﬁlter paper. Add the
resazurin sodium solution, mix and place the medium in
suitable vessels which provide a ratio of surface to depth of
medium such that not more than the upper half of the medium
has undergone a colour change indicative of oxygen uptake at
the end of the incubation period. Sterilise using a validated
process. If the medium is stored, store at a temperature
between 2 °C and 25 °C in a sterile, airtight container. If
more than the upper one-third of the medium has acquired
a pink colour, the medium may be restored once by heating
the containers in a water-bath or in free-ﬂowing steam until
the pink colour disappears and cooling quickly, taking care to
prevent the introduction of non-sterile air into the container.
Do not use the medium for a longer storage period than has
been validated.
Fluid thioglycollate medium is to be incubated at 30-35 °C.
For products containing a mercurial preservative that
cannot be tested by the membrane-ﬁltration method, ﬂuid
thioglycollate medium incubated at 20-25 °C may be used
instead of soya-bean casein digest medium provided that it
has been validated as described in growth promotion test.
Where prescribed or justiﬁed and authorised, the following
alternative thioglycollate medium may be used. Prepare a
mixture having the same composition as that of the ﬂuid
thioglycollate medium, but omitting the agar and the resazurin
sodium solution, sterilise as directed above. The pH after
sterilisation is 7.1 ± 0.2. Heat in a water-bath prior to use and
incubate at 30-35 °C under anaerobic conditions.
Soya-bean casein digest medium
Pancreatic digest of casein
17.0 g
Papaic digest of soya-bean meal
3.0 g
Sodium chloride
5.0 g
Dipotassium hydrogen phosphate
2.5 g
Glucose monohydrate/Glucose
2.5 g/2.3 g
Water R
1000 mL
pH after sterilisation 7.3 ± 0.2
Dissolve the solids in water R, warming slightly to effect
solution. Cool the solution to room temperature. Add 1 M
sodium hydroxide, if necessary, so that after sterilisation the
solution will have a pH of 7.3 ± 0.2. Filter, if necessary, to
clarify, distribute into suitable vessels and sterilise using a
validated process. Store at a temperature between 2 °C and
25 °C in a sterile well-closed container, unless it is intended for
immediate use. Do not use the medium for a longer storage
period than has been validated.
Soya-bean casein digest medium is to be incubated at 20-25 °C.
The media used comply with the following tests, carried
out before or in parallel with the test on the product to be
examined.
Sterility. Incubate portions of the media for 14 days. No
growth of micro-organisms occurs.
Growth promotion test of aerobes, anaerobes and fungi.
Test each batch of ready-prepared medium and each batch of
medium prepared either from dehydrated medium or from
ingredients. Suitable strains of micro-organisms are indicated
in Table 2.6.1.-1.
Inoculate portions of ﬂuid thioglycollate medium with a
small number (not more than 100 CFU) of the following
micro-organisms, using a separate portion of medium for
each of the following species of micro-organism: Clostridium
sporogenes, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus.
Inoculate portions of soya-bean casein digest medium with
a small number (not more than 100 CFU) of the following
micro-organisms, using a separate portion of medium for
each of the following species of micro-organism: Aspergillus
brasiliensis, Bacillus subtilis, Candida albicans. Incubate for
not more than 3 days in the case of bacteria and not more
than 5 days in the case of fungi.
(1)
This chapter has undergone pharmacopoeial harmonisation. See chapter 5.8. Pharmacopoeial harmonisation.
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
207
2.6.1. Sterility
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
Table 2.6.1.-1. – Strains of the test micro-organisms suitable for use in the growth promotion test and the method suitability test
Aerobic bacteria
Staphylococcus aureus
ATCC 6538, CIP 4.83, NCTC 10788, NCIMB 9518, NBRC 13276
Bacillus subtilis
ATCC 6633, CIP 52.62, NCIMB 8054, NBRC 3134
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
ATCC 9027, NCIMB 8626, CIP 82.118, NBRC 13275
Anaerobic bacterium
Clostridium sporogenes
ATCC 19404, CIP 79.3, NCTC 532, ATCC 11437, NBRC 14293
Fungi
Candida albicans
ATCC 10231, IP 48.72, NCPF 3179, NBRC 1594
Aspergillus brasiliensis
ATCC 16404, IP 1431.83, IMI 149007, NBRC 9455
Seed lot culture maintenance techniques (seed-lot systems) are
used so that the viable micro-organisms used for inoculation
are not more than 5 passages removed from the original
master seed-lot.
The media are suitable if a clearly visible growth of the
micro-organisms occurs.
METHOD SUITABILITY TEST
Carry out a test as described below under Test for sterility of
the product to be examined using exactly the same methods
except for the following modiﬁcations.
Membrane ﬁltration. After transferring the contents of the
container or containers to be tested to the membrane add an
inoculum of a small number of viable micro-organisms (not
more than 100 CFU) to the ﬁnal portion of sterile diluent
used to rinse the ﬁlter.
Direct inoculation. After transferring the content of the
container or containers to be tested (for catgut and other
surgical sutures for veterinary use: strands) to the culture
medium add an inoculum of a small number of viable
micro-organisms (not more than 100 CFU) to the medium.
In both cases use the same micro-organisms as those described
above under Growth promotion test of aerobes, anaerobes and
fungi. Perform a growth promotion test as a positive control.
Incubate all the containers containing medium for not more
than 5 days.
If clearly visible growth of micro-organisms is obtained after
the incubation, visually comparable to that in the control
vessel without product, either the product possesses no
antimicrobial activity under the conditions of the test or such
activity has been satisfactorily eliminated. The test for sterility
may then be carried out without further modiﬁcation.
If clearly visible growth is not obtained in the presence of the
product to be tested, visually comparable to that in the control
vessels without product, the product possesses antimicrobial
activity that has not been satisfactorily eliminated under the
conditions of the test. Modify the conditions in order to
eliminate the antimicrobial activity and repeat the method
suitability test.
This method suitability test is performed:
a) when the test for sterility has to be carried out on a new
product;
b) whenever there is a change in the experimental conditions
of the test.
The method suitability test may be performed simultaneously
with the test for sterility of the product to be examined.
TEST FOR STERILITY OF THE PRODUCT TO BE
EXAMINED
The test may be carried out using the technique of membrane
ﬁltration or by direct inoculation of the culture media
with the product to be examined. Appropriate negative
controls are included. The technique of membrane ﬁltration
is used whenever the nature of the product permits, that
is, for ﬁlterable aqueous preparations, for alcoholic or oily
preparations and for preparations miscible with or soluble in
aqueous or oily solvents provided these solvents do not have
an antimicrobial effect in the conditions of the test.
Membrane ﬁltration. Use membrane ﬁlters having a nominal
pore size not greater than 0.45 μm whose effectiveness to
retain micro-organisms has been established. Cellulose nitrate
ﬁlters, for example, are used for aqueous, oily and weakly
alcoholic solutions and cellulose acetate ﬁlters, for example,
for strongly alcoholic solutions. Specially adapted ﬁlters may
be needed for certain products, e.g. for antibiotics.
The technique described below assumes that membranes
about 50 mm in diameter will be used. If ﬁlters of a different
diameter are used the volumes of the dilutions and the
washings should be adjusted accordingly. The ﬁltration
apparatus and membrane are sterilised by appropriate means.
The apparatus is designed so that the solution to be examined
can be introduced and ﬁltered under aseptic conditions; it
permits the aseptic removal of the membrane for transfer to
the medium or it is suitable for carrying out the incubation
after adding the medium to the apparatus itself.
Aqueous solutions. If appropriate, transfer a small quantity
of a suitable, sterile diluent such as a 1 g/L neutral solution
of meat or casein peptone pH 7.1 ± 0.2 onto the membrane
in the apparatus and ﬁlter. The diluent may contain suitable
neutralising substances and/or appropriate inactivating
substances for example in the case of antibiotics.
Transfer the contents of the container or containers to be
tested to the membrane or membranes, if necessary after
diluting to the volume used in the method suitability test
with the chosen sterile diluent but in any case using not less
than the quantities of the product to be examined prescribed
in Table 2.6.1.-2. Filter immediately. If the product has
antimicrobial properties, wash the membrane not less than
3 times by ﬁltering through it each time the volume of the
chosen sterile diluent used in the method suitability test. Do
not exceed a washing cycle of 5 times 100 mL per ﬁlter, even
if during the method suitability test it has been demonstrated
that such a cycle does not fully eliminate the antimicrobial
activity. Transfer the whole membrane to the culture medium
or cut it aseptically into 2 equal parts and transfer one half
to each of 2 suitable media. Use the same volume of each
medium as in the method suitability test. Alternatively,
transfer the medium onto the membrane in the apparatus.
Incubate the media for not less than 14 days.
Soluble solids. Use for each medium not less than the quantity
prescribed in Table 2.6.1.-2 of the product dissolved in
a suitable solvent such as the solvent provided with the
preparation, water for injections, saline or a 1 g/L neutral
solution of meat or casein peptone and proceed with the test
as described above for aqueous solutions using a membrane
appropriate to the chosen solvent.
Oils and oily solutions. Use for each medium not less than
the quantity of the product prescribed in Table 2.6.1.-2. Oils
and oily solutions of sufﬁciently low viscosity may be ﬁltered
without dilution through a dry membrane. Viscous oils may
be diluted as necessary with a suitable sterile diluent such as
208
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
