01/2018:20614
corrected 11.0
2.6.14. BACTERIAL ENDOTOXINS(4)
The test for bacterial endotoxins (BET) is used to detect
or quantify endotoxins from gram-negative bacteria using
amoebocyte lysate from the horseshoe crab (Limulus
polyphemus or Tachypleus tridentatus). There are 3 techniques
for this test: the gel-clot technique, which is based on
gel formation; the turbidimetric technique, based on the
development of turbidity after cleavage of an endogenous
substrate; and the chromogenic technique, based on
the development of colour after cleavage of a synthetic
peptide-chromogen complex.
The following 6 methods are described in the present chapter:
Method A.
Gel-clot method: limit test
Method B.
Gel-clot method: quantitative test
Method C.
Turbidimetric kinetic method
Method D.
Chromogenic kinetic method
Method E.
Chromogenic end-point method
Method F.
Turbidimetric end-point method
Proceed by any of the 6 methods for the test. In the event
of doubt or dispute, the ﬁnal decision is made based upon
method A unless otherwise indicated in the monograph.
The test is carried out in a manner that avoids endotoxin
contamination.
1. APPARATUS
Depyrogenate all glassware and other heat-stable apparatus
in a hot-air oven using a validated process. A commonly
used minimum time and temperature is 30 min at 250 °C. If
employing plastic apparatus, such as microplates and pipette
tips for automatic pipetters, use apparatus shown to be free of
detectable endotoxin and which does not interfere in the test.
NOTE: in this chapter, the term ‘tube’ includes all types of
receptacles, for example microplate wells.
2. REAGENTS, TEST SOLUTIONS
(1) Amoebocyte lysate
Amoebocyte lysate is a lyophilised product obtained from
amoebocyte lysate from the horseshoe crab (Limulus
polyphemus or Tachypleus tridentatus). This reagent refers
only to a product manufactured in accordance with the
regulations of the competent authority.
NOTE: amoebocyte lysate reacts with some β-glucans in
addition to endotoxins. Amoebocyte lysate preparations which
do not react with glucans are available; they are prepared by
removing from amoebocyte lysate the G factor, which reacts
with glucans, or by inhibiting the G factor reacting system
of amoebocyte lysate. These preparations may be used for
endotoxin testing in the presence of glucans.
(2) Lysate solution
Dissolve amoebocyte lysate in water for BET or in a buffer, as
recommended by the lysate manufacturer, by gentle stirring.
Store the reconstituted lysate, refrigerated or frozen, as
indicated by the manufacturer.
(3) Water for BET (water for bacterial endotoxins test)
Water for injections R or water produced by other procedures
that shows no reaction with the lysate employed at the
detection limit of the reagent.
3. PREPARATION OF THE STANDARD ENDOTOXIN
STOCK SOLUTION
The standard endotoxin stock solution is prepared from
an endotoxin reference standard that has been calibrated
against the International Standard, for example endotoxin
standard BRP.
Endotoxin is expressed in International Units (IU). The
equivalence in IU of the International Standard is stated by
the World Health Organization.
NOTE: one International Unit (IU) of endotoxin is equal to
one Endotoxin Unit (E.U.).
Follow the speciﬁcations in the package leaﬂet and on the
label for preparation and storage of the standard endotoxin
stock solution.
4. PREPARATION OF THE STANDARD ENDOTOXIN
SOLUTIONS
After vigorously mixing the standard endotoxin stock solution,
prepare appropriate serial dilutions of this solution using
water for BET.
Use the solutions as soon as possible to avoid loss of activity
by adsorption.
5. PREPARATION OF THE TEST SOLUTIONS
Prepare the test solutions by dissolving or diluting active
substances or medicinal products using water for BET.
Some substances or preparations may be more appropriately
dissolved or diluted in other aqueous solutions. If necessary,
adjust the pH of the test solution (or dilution thereof) so that
the pH of the mixture of the lysate and test solution falls within
the pH range speciﬁed by the lysate manufacturer, usually
6.0 to 8.0. The pH may be adjusted by the use of acid, base or
a suitable buffer, as recommended by the lysate manufacturer.
Acids and bases may be prepared from concentrates or solids
with water for BET in containers free of detectable endotoxin.
Buffers must be validated to be free of detectable endotoxin
and interfering factors.
6. DETERMINATION OF THE MAXIMUM VALID
DILUTION
The Maximum Valid Dilution (MVD) is the maximum
allowable dilution of a sample at which the endotoxin limit
can be determined. Determine the MVD using the following
formulae:
λ
MVD
endotoxin limit×concentration of test solution
=
(4)
This chapter has undergone pharmacopoeial harmonisation. See chapter 5.8. Pharmacopoeial harmonisation.
226
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
2.6.14. Bacterial endotoxins
Endotoxin limit: the endotoxin limit for active substances
administered parenterally, deﬁned on the basis of dose, is
equal to:
K
M
K
 = 
threshold pyrogenic dose of endotoxin per
kilogram of body mass,
M
 = 
maximum recommended bolus dose of product
per kilogram of body mass.
When the product is to be injected at frequent intervals
or infused continuously, M is the maximum total dose
administered in a single hour period.
The endotoxin limit for active substances administered pa-
renterally is speciﬁed in units such as IU/mL, IU/mg, IU/Unit
of biological activity, etc., in monographs.
Concentration of test solution:
– mg/mL if the endotoxin limit is speciﬁed by mass (IU/mg),
– Units/mL if the endotoxin limit is speciﬁed by unit of
biological activity (IU/Unit),
– mL/mL if the endotoxin limit is speciﬁed by volume
(IU/mL).
λ
 = 
the labelled lysate sensitivity in the gel-clot
technique (IU/mL) or the lowest concentration
used in the standard curve of the turbidimetric or
chromogenic techniques.
