8. PHOTOMETRIC QUANTITATIVE TECHNIQUES
(METHODS C, D, E AND F)
1. TURBIDIMETRIC TECHNIQUE (METHODS C AND F)
This technique is a photometric test to measure the increase in
turbidity. Based on the test principle employed, this technique
may be classiﬁed as being either the end-point-turbidimetric
test or the kinetic-turbidimetric test.
The end-point-turbidimetric test (Method F) is based on the
quantitative relationship between the endotoxin concentration
and the turbidity (absorbance or transmission) of the reaction
mixture at the end of an incubation period.
The kinetic-turbidimetric test (Method C) is a method to
measure either the time (onset time) needed for the reaction
mixture to reach a predetermined absorbance or transmission,
or the rate of turbidity development.
The test is carried out at the incubation temperature
recommended by the lysate manufacturer (usually 37 ± 1 °C).
2. CHROMOGENIC TECHNIQUE (METHODS D AND E)
This technique is used to measure the chromophore released
from a suitable chromogenic peptide by the reaction of
endotoxins with the lysate. Depending on the test principle
employed, this technique may be classiﬁed as being either the
end-point-chromogenic test or the kinetic-chromogenic test.
The end-point-chromogenic test (Method E) is based on the
quantitative relationship between the endotoxin concentration
and the quantity of chromophore released at the end of an
incubation period.
The kinetic-chromogenic test (Method D) measures either the
time (onset time) needed for the reaction mixture to reach a
predetermined absorbance, or the rate of colour development.
The test is carried out at the incubation temperature
recommended by the lysate manufacturer (usually 37 ± 1 °C).
3. PREPARATORY TESTING
To assure the precision or validity of the turbidimetric and
chromogenic techniques, preparatory tests are conducted to
show that the criteria for the standard curve are satisﬁed and
that the test solution does not interfere with the test.
Validation of the test method is required when any changes
are made to the experimental conditions that are likely to
inﬂuence the result of the test.
(i) Assurance of criteria for the standard curve
The test must be carried out for each lot of lysate reagent.
Using the standard endotoxin solution, prepare at least
3 endotoxin concentrations within the range indicated by the
lysate manufacturer to generate the standard curve. Perform
the test using at least 3 replicates of each standard endotoxin
solution as recommended by the lysate manufacturer (volume
ratios, incubation time, temperature, pH, etc.).
If the desired range is greater than 2 log10 in the kinetic
methods, additional standards must be included to bracket
each log10 increase in the range of the standard curve.
The absolute value of the correlation coefﬁcient, | r |, must
be greater than or equal to 0.980, for the range of endotoxin
concentrations set up.
(ii) Test for interfering factors
Select an endotoxin concentration at or near the middle of
the endotoxin standard curve.
Prepare solutions A, B, C and D as shown in Table 2.6.14.-4.
Perform the test on at least 2 replicates of these solutions as
recommended by the lysate manufacturer (volume of test
solution and lysate solution, volume ratio of test solution to
lysate solution, incubation time, etc.).
Table 2.6.14.-4
Solution
Endotoxin
concentration
Solution to which
endotoxin is added
Number of
replicates
A
None
Test solution
Not less than 2
B
Middle concentration
of the standard curve
Test solution
Not less than 2
C
At least 3 concentra-
tions (lowest concen-
tration is designated λ)
Water for BET
Each concentration
not less than 2
D
None
Water for BET
Not less than 2
Solution A =  test solution, that may be diluted not to exceed the MVD.
Solution B =  preparation to be examined at the same dilution as
solution A, containing added endotoxin at a concentration equal to or
near the middle of the standard curve.
Solution C =  standard endotoxin solution at the concentrations used in
the validation of the method as described under 3. Preparatory testing,
(i) Assurance of criteria for the standard curve (positive controls).
Solution D =  water for BET (negative control).
The test is considered valid when the following conditions
are met:
– the absolute value of the correlation coefﬁcient of the
standard curve generated using solution C is greater than
or equal to 0.980;
– the result with solution D does not exceed the limit of the
blank value required in the description of the lysate reagent
employed, or it is less than the endotoxin detection limit of
the lysate reagent employed.
Calculate the mean recovery of the added endotoxin by
subtracting the mean endotoxin concentration in the solution
(if any) (solution A, Table 2.6.14.-4) from that in the solution
containing the added endotoxin (solution B, Table 2.6.14.-4).
The test solution is considered free of interfering factors if
under the conditions of the test, the measured concentration
of the endotoxin added to the test solution is within 50-200 per
cent of the known added endotoxin concentration, after
subtraction of any endotoxin detected in the solution without
added endotoxin.
When the endotoxin recovery is out of the speciﬁed range,
the test solution is considered to contain interfering factors.
Repeat the test using a greater dilution, not exceeding
the MVD. Furthermore, interference of the test solution
or diluted test solution not to exceed the MVD may be
eliminated by suitable validated treatment, such as ﬁltration,
neutralisation, dialysis or heat treatment. To establish that the
treatment chosen effectively eliminates interference without
loss of endotoxins, repeat the test for interfering factors
using the preparation being examined to which the standard
endotoxin has been added and which has then been submitted
to the chosen treatment.
4. TEST
(i) Procedure
Follow the procedure described in 3. Preparatory testing,
(ii) Test for interfering factors.
(ii) Calculation
Calculate the endotoxin concentration of each replicate of
solution A using the standard curve generated by the positive
control solution C.
The test is considered valid when the following 3 requirements
are met:
(1) the results obtained with solution C comply with the
requirements for validation deﬁned under 3. Preparatory
testing, (i) Assurance of criteria for the standard curve,
(2) the endotoxin recovery, calculated from the endotoxin
concentration found in solution B after subtracting the
endotoxin concentration found in solution A, is within the
range of 50-200 per cent,
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
229
2.6.15. Prekallikrein activator
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
(3) the result obtained with solution D (negative control)
does not exceed the limit of the blank value required in
the description of the lysate employed, or it is less than the
endotoxin detection limit of the lysate reagent employed.
(iii) Interpretation
The preparation being examined complies with the test if the
mean endotoxin concentration of the replicates of solution A,
after correction for dilution and concentration, is less than the
endotoxin limit for the product.
Guidelines on the test for bacterial endotoxins are given in
general chapter 5.1.10.
