01/2020:20920
2.9.20. PARTICULATE
CONTAMINATION: VISIBLE
PARTICLES
Particulate contamination consists of mobile undissolved
substances, other than gas bubbles, unintentionally present
in liquid preparations.
The test is intended to provide a simple procedure for the
visual assessment of the quality of liquid preparations, if
applicable after reconstitution, as regards visible particles.
EQUIPMENT
The equipment (see Figure 2.9.20.-1) consists of a viewing
station comprising:
– a matt black panel (A) of appropriate size held in a vertical
position;
– a non-glare white panel (B) of appropriate size held in a
vertical position next to the black panel;
– a non-glare white panel (C) of appropriate size held in a
horizontal position next to (A) and (B);
– a lampholder (D) ﬁtted with a suitable, shaded, white-light
source and with a suitable light diffuser (e.g. a viewing
illuminator containing two 13 W ﬂuorescent tubes, each
525 mm in length, or an appropriate light-emitting diode
(LED) light source). The intensity of illumination at
the viewing point is maintained between 2000 lux and
3750 lux, although higher values may be required for
coloured glass or plastic containers and for coloured or
turbid preparations.
A
B
C
D
Figure 2.9.20.-1. – Equipment for visible particles
METHOD
Adequate visual inspection of the container and contents is
necessary, which may require the removal of any adherent
labels from the container. Gently swirl or invert the container,
ensuring that air bubbles are not introduced, and observe
without magniﬁcation for about 5 s in front of the white
panel (B), although longer observation times may be required
for coloured glass or plastic containers and for coloured
or turbid preparations. Where inspection in the primary
container is not possible, the contents may be transferred for
inspection into a sample container that is free from visible
particles, taking precautions to prevent contamination during
transfer. Repeat the inspection in front of the black panel (A).
Record the presence of any visible particles.
