rectified. Rejected units or sealing issues should be recorded and investigated.



8.104 Appropriate maintenance procedures should be established based on risk, and include

maintenance and inspection plans for tooling critical to the effectiveness of unit sealing. Any issues

identified that indicate a potential product quality concern should be documented and investigated.



Blow-Fill-Seal



8.105 Blow-Fill-Seal equipment used for the manufacture of products which are terminally sterilised

should be installed in at least a grade D environment. The conditions at the point of fill should comply

with the environmental requirements of paragraphs 8.3 and 8.4.



8.106 BFS used for aseptic processing:



      i. For shuttle type equipment used for aseptic filling, the parison is open to the environment and

           therefore the areas where parison extrusion, blow-moulding and sealing take place should

           meet grade A conditions at the critical zones. The filling environment should be designed and

           maintained to meet grade A conditions for viable and total particle limits both at rest and when

           in operation.



     ii. For rotary-type equipment used for aseptic filling, the parison is generally closed to the

           environment once formed, the filling environment within the parison should be designed and

           maintained to meet grade A conditions for viable and total particle limits both at rest and when

           in operation.



    iii. The equipment should be installed in at least a grade C environment, provided that grade A/B

           clothing is used. The microbiological monitoring of operators wearing grade A/B clothing in

           a grade C area, should be performed in accordance with risk management principles, and the

           limits and monitoring frequencies applied with consideration of the activities performed by

           these operators.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  36 of 58  9 September 2022

8.107 Due to the generation of particles from polymer extrusion and cutting during operation, and the

restrictive size of critical filling zones of BFS equipment, in operation monitoring of total particle for

BFS equipment is not expected. However, data should be available to demonstrate that the design of

the equipment ensures that critical zones of the filling process environment would meet grade A

conditions in operation.



8.108 Viable environmental monitoring of BFS processes should be risk-based, and designed in

accordance with section 9 of this Annex. In operation viable monitoring should be undertaken for the

full duration of critical processing, including equipment assembly. For rotary-type BFS equipment, it

is acknowledged that monitoring of the critical filling zone may not be possible.



8.109 The environmental control and monitoring programme should take into consideration the

moving parts and complex airflow paths generated by the BFS process and the effect of the high heat

outputs of the process, (e.g. through the use of airflow visualization studies and/or other equivalent

studies). Environmental monitoring programmes should also consider factors such as air-filter

configuration, air-filter integrity, cooling systems integrity (see paragraph 6.21), equipment design and

qualification.



8.110 Air or other gases that make contact with critical surfaces of the container during extrusion,

formation or sealing of the moulded container should undergo appropriate filtration. The quality of gas

used and the effectiveness of gas filtration systems should be verified periodically in accordance with

paragraphs 6.18 and 6.19.



8.111 Particulate and microbial contamination of the polymer granulate should be prevented by

appropriate design, control, and maintenance of the polymer granulate storage, sampling and

distribution systems.



8.112 The capability of the extrusion system to provide appropriate sterility assurance for the moulded

container should be understood and validated. The sampling frequency, the bioburden and, where

applicable, endotoxin/pyrogen levels of the raw polymer should be defined and controlled within the

PQS and considered in the CCS.



8.113 Interventions requiring cessation of filling and/or extrusion, moulding and sealing and, where

required, re-sterilisation of the filling machine should be clearly defined and described in the filling

procedure, and included in the APS as relevant (see paragraphs 9.34, 9.35 and 9.36).



8.114 The controls identified during qualification of BFS should be in alignment with the site's CCS.

Aspects to be considered include but are not limited to:



        i. determination of the boundaries of the critical zone,



       ii. environmental control and monitoring, both of the machine and the background in which it is

           placed,



      iii. personnel gowning requirements,



      iv. integrity testing of the product filling lines and filtration systems (as relevant),



       v. duration of the batch or filling campaign,



      vi. control of polymer granulate, including distribution systems and critical extrusion

           temperatures,



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  37 of 58  9 September 2022

     vii. cleaning-in-place and sterilisation-in-place of equipment as necessary,



    viii. machine operation, settings and alarm management (as relevant).



8.115 Critical process parameters for BFS should be determined during equipment qualification and

should include, but are not limited to:



      i. clean-in-place and sterilisation-in-place of product pipelines and filling needles (mandrels);



     ii. setting, maintenance and monitoring of extrusion parameters, including temperature, speed and

         extruder throat settings for parison thickness;



    iii. setting, maintenance and monitoring of mould temperatures, including rate of cooling where

         necessary for product stability;



    iv. preparation and sterilisation of ancillary components added to the moulded unit, e.g. bottle caps;



     v. environmental control, cleaning, sterilisation and monitoring of the critical extrusion, transfer

         and filling areas as relevant;



    vi. batch-specific testing of package wall-thickness at critical points of the container;



   vii. settings for correct filling volumes, speeds and uniformity;



  viii. settings for any additional printing (batch coding), embossing or debossing to ensure that unit

         integrity and quality is not compromised;



    ix. methods and parameters for integrity testing of 100% of all filled containers (see paragraph

         8.22);



     x. settings for cutters or punches used to remove waste plastic surrounding filled units (flash

         removal).



8.116 Appropriate procedures for the verification, monitoring and recording of BFS critical process

parameters and equipment operation should be applied during production.



8.117 Operational procedures should describe how blowing, forming and sealing issues are detected

and rectified. Rejected units or sealing issues should be recorded and investigated.



8.118 Where the BFS process includes the addition of components to moulded containers (e.g.

addition of caps to LVP bottles), these components should be appropriately decontaminated and added

to the process using a clean, controlled process.



      i. For aseptic processes, the addition of components should be performed under grade A

         conditions, to ensure the sterility of critical surfaces, using pre-sterilised components.



     ii. For terminally sterilised products, the validation of terminal sterilisation processes should

         ensure the sterility of all critical product pathways between the component and moulded

         container, including areas that are not wetted during sterilisation.



    iii. Testing procedures should be established and validated to ensure the effective sealing of

         components and moulded containers.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  38 of 58  9 September 2022

8.119 Appropriate maintenance procedures should be established based on risk, and include

maintenance and inspection plans for items critical to unit sealing, integrity and sterility.



8.120 The moulds used to form containers are considered critical equipment and any changes or

modification to moulds should result in an assessment of finished product container integrity, and where

the assessment indicates, should be supported by validation. Any issues identified that indicate a

potential product quality concern should be documented and investigated.



Lyophilization



8.121 Lyophilization is a critical process step and all activities that can affect the sterility of the

product or material need to be regarded as extensions of the aseptic processing of the sterilised product.

The lyophilization equipment and its processes should be designed to ensure that product or material

sterility is maintained during lyophilization by preventing microbial and particle contamination between

the filling of products for lyophilization, and completion of lyophilization process. All control measures

in place should be determined by the site's CCS.



8.122 The sterilisation of the lyophilizer and associated equipment (e.g. trays, vial support rings)

should be validated and the holding time between the sterilisation cycle and use appropriately

challenged during APS (see paragraph 9.33). The lyophilizer should be sterilised regularly, based on

system design. Re-sterilisation should be performed following maintenance or cleaning. Sterilised

lyophilizers and associated equipment should be protected from contamination after sterilisation.



8.123 Lyophilizers and associated product transfer and loading/unloading areas should be designed

to minimize operator intervention as far as possible. The frequency of lyophilizer sterilisation should

be determined based on the design and risks related to system contamination during use. Lyophilizers

that are manually loaded or unloaded with no barrier technology separation should be sterilised before

each load. For lyophilizers loaded and unloaded by automated systems or protected by closed barrier

systems, the frequency of sterilisation should be justified and documented as part of the CCS.



8.124 The integrity of the lyophilizer should be maintained following sterilisation and during

lyophilization. The filter used to maintain lyophilizer integrity should be sterilised before each use of

the system and its integrity testing results should be part of the batch certification/release. The frequency

of vacuum/leak integrity testing of the chamber should be documented and the maximum permitted

leakage of air into the lyophilizer should be specified and checked at the start of every cycle.



8.125 Lyophilization trays should be checked regularly to ensure that they are not misshapen or

damaged.



8.126 Points to consider for the design of loading (and unloading, where the lyophilized material is

still unsealed and exposed), include but are not limited to:



      i. The loading pattern within the lyophilizer should be specified and documented.



     ii. The transfer of partially closed containers to a lyophilizer should be undertaken under grade A

         conditions at all times and handled in a manner designed to minimize direct operator

         intervention. Technologies such as conveyor systems or portable transfer systems (e.g. clean

         air transfer carts, portable unidirectional airflow workstations) should be used to ensure that the

         cleanliness of the system used to transfer the partially closed containers is maintained.

         Alternatively, where supported by validation, trays closed in grade A and not reopened whilst

         in the grade B area may be used to protect partially stoppered vials (e.g. appropriately closed

         boxes).



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  39 of 58  9 September 2022

    iii. Airflow patterns should not be adversely affected by transport devices and venting of the

         loading zone.



    iv. Unsealed containers (such as partially stoppered vials) should be maintained under grade A

         conditions and should normally be separated from operators by physical barrier technology or

         any other appropriate measures.



     v. Where seating of the stoppers is not completed prior to opening the lyophilizer chamber,

         product removed from the lyophilizer should remain under grade A conditions during

         subsequent handling.



    vi. Utensils used during loading and unloading of the lyophilizer (e.g. trays, bags, placing devices,

         tweezers) should be sterile.



Closed systems



8.127 The use of closed systems can reduce the risk of microbial, particle and chemical contamination

from the adjacent environment. Closed systems should always be designed to reduce the need for

manual manipulations and the associated risks.



8.128 It is critical to ensure the sterility of all product contact surfaces of closed systems used for

aseptic processing. The design and selection of any closed system used for aseptic processing should

ensure maintenance of sterility. Connection of sterile equipment (e.g. tubing/pipework) to the sterilised

product pathway after the final sterilising grade filter should be designed to be connected aseptically

(e.g. by intrinsic sterile connection devices).



8.129 Appropriate measures should be in place to ensure the integrity of components used in aseptic

connections. The means by which this is achieved should be determined and captured in the CCS.

Appropriate system integrity tests should be considered when there is a risk of compromising product

sterility. Supplier assessment should include the collation of data in relation to potential failure modes

that may lead to a loss of system sterility.



8.130 The background environment in which closed systems are located should be based on their

design and the processes undertaken. For aseptic processing and where there are any risks that system

integrity may be compromised, the system should be located in grade A. If the system can be shown to

remain integral at every usage (e.g. via pressure testing and/or monitoring) then a lower classified area

may be used. Any transfer between classified areas should be thoroughly assessed (see paragraph 4.10).

If the closed system is opened (e.g. for maintenance of a bulk manufacturing line) then this should be

performed in a classified area appropriate to the materials (e.g. grade C for terminal sterilisation

processes, or grade A for aseptic processing) or be subject to further cleaning and disinfection (and

sterilisation in case of aseptic processes).



Single use systems (SUS)



8.131 SUS are those technologies used in manufacture of sterile products which are used as an

alternative to reusable equipment. SUS can be individual components or made up of multiple

components such as bags, filters, tubing, connectors, valves, storage bottles and sensors. Single use

systems should be designed to reduce the need for manipulations and complexity of manual

interventions.



8.132 There are some specific risks associated with SUS which should be assessed as part of the CCS.

These risks include but are not limited to:



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  40 of 58  9 September 2022

      i. the interaction between the product and product contact surface (such as adsorption, or

           leachables and extractables),



     ii. the fragile nature of the system compared with fixed reusable systems,



    iii. the increase in the number and complexity of manual operations (including inspection and

           handling of the system) and connections made,



    iv. the complexity of the assembly,



     v. the performance of the pre- and post-use integrity testing for sterilising grade filters (see

           paragraph 8.87),



    vi. the risk of holes and leakage,



   vii. the potential for compromising the system at the point of opening the outer packaging,



  viii. the risk of particle contamination.



8.133 Sterilisation processes for SUS should be validated and shown to have no adverse impact on

system performance.



8.134 Assessment of suppliers of disposable systems including sterilisation is critical to the selection

and use of these systems. For sterile SUS, verification of sterility assurance should be performed as part

of the supplier qualification and evidence of sterilisation of each unit should be checked on receipt.



8.135 The adsorption and reactivity of the product with product contact surfaces should be evaluated

under process conditions.



8.136 The extractable and leachable profiles of the SUS and any impact on the quality of the product

especially where the system is made from polymer-based materials should be evaluated. An assessment

should be carried out for each component to evaluate the applicability of the extractable profile data.

For components considered to be at high risk from leachables, including those that may absorb

processed materials or those with extended material contact times, an assessment of leachable profile

studies, including safety concerns, should be taken into consideration. If applying simulated processing

conditions, these should accurately reflect the actual processing conditions and be based on a scientific

rationale.



8.137 SUS should be designed to maintain integrity throughout processing under the intended

operational conditions. Attention to the structural integrity of the single use components is necessary

where these may be exposed to more extreme conditions (e.g. freezing and thawing processes) either

during routine processing or transportation. This should include verification that intrinsic sterile

connection devices (both heat sealed and mechanically sealed) remain integral under these conditions.



8.138 Acceptance criteria should be established and implemented for SUS corresponding to the risks

or criticality of the products and its processes. On receipt, each piece of SUS should be checked to

ensure that they have been manufactured, supplied and delivered in accordance with the approved

specification. A visual inspection of the outer packaging (e.g. appearance of exterior carton, product

pouches), label printing, and review of attached documents (e.g. certificate of conformance and proof

of sterilisation) should be carried out and documented prior to use.



8.139 Critical manual handling operations of SUS such as assembly and connections should be

subject to appropriate controls and verified during APS.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  41 of 58  9 September 2022

9    Environmental & process monitoring



General



9.1 The site's environmental and process monitoring programme forms part of the overall CCS and

is used to monitor the controls designed to minimize the risk of microbial and particle contamination.

It should be noted that the reliability of each of the elements of the monitoring system (viable, non-

viable and APS) when taken in isolation is limited and should not be considered individually to be an

indicator of asepsis. When considered together, the results help confirm the reliability of the design,

validation and operation of the system that they are monitoring.



9.2 This programme is typically comprised of the following elements:



     i. environmental monitoring ­ total particle;



   ii. environmental and personnel monitoring ­ viable particle;



   iii. temperature, relative humidity and other specific characteristics;



   iv. APS (aseptically manufactured product only).



9.3      The information from these systems should be used for routine batch certification/release and



for periodic assessment during process review or investigation. This applies for both terminal



sterilisation and aseptic processes, however, the criticality of the impact may differ depending upon the



product and process type.



