5 Equipment



5.1 A written, detailed description of the equipment design should be available (including process

and instrumentation diagrams as appropriate). This should form part of the initial qualification package

and be kept up to date.



5.2 Equipment monitoring requirements should be defined in "user requirements specifications"

during early stages of development, and confirmed during qualification. Process and equipment alarm

events should be acknowledged and evaluated for trends. The frequency at which alarms are assessed

should be based on their criticality (with critical alarms reviewed immediately).



5.3 As far as practicable, equipment, fittings and services should be designed and installed so that

operations, maintenance, and repairs can be performed outside the cleanroom. If maintenance has to

be performed in the cleanroom, and the required standards of cleanliness and/or asepsis cannot be

maintained, then precautions such as restricting access to the work area to specified personnel,

generation of clearly defined work protocols and maintenance procedures should be considered.

Additional cleaning, disinfection and environmental monitoring should also be considered. If

sterilisation of equipment is required, it should be carried out, wherever possible, after complete

reassembly.



5.4 The cleaning process should be validated to be able to:



    i. remove any residue or debris that would detrimentally impact the effectiveness of the

         disinfecting agent used,



   ii. minimize chemical, microbial and particulate contamination of the product during the process

         and prior to disinfection.



5.5 For aseptic processes, direct and indirect product contact parts should be sterilised. Direct

product contact parts are those that the product passes through, such as filling needles or pumps.

Indirect product contact parts are equipment parts that do not contact the product, but may come into

contact with other sterilised surfaces, the sterility of which is critical to the overall product sterility

(e.g. sterilised items such as stopper bowls and guides, and sterilised components).



5.6 All equipment such as sterilisers, air handling systems (including air filtration) and water

systems should be subject to qualification, monitoring and planned maintenance. Upon completion of

maintenance, their return to use should be approved.



5.7 Where unplanned maintenance of equipment critical to the sterility of the product is to be

carried out, an assessment of the potential impact to the sterility of the product should be performed

and recorded.



5.8 A conveyor belt should not pass through a partition between a grade A or B area and a

processing area of lower air cleanliness, unless the belt itself is continually sterilised (e.g. in a



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  15 of 58  9 September 2022

sterilising tunnel).



5.9 Particle counters, including sampling tubing, should be qualified. The manufacturer's

recommended specifications should be considered for tube diameter and bend radii. Tube length

should typically be no longer than 1m unless justified and the number of bends should be minimized.

Portable particle counters with a short length of sample tubing should be used for classification

purposes. Isokinetic sampling heads should be used in unidirectional airflow systems. They should be

oriented appropriately and positioned as close as possible to the critical location to ensure that samples

are representative.



