4  Premises



4.1 The manufacture of sterile products should be carried out in appropriate cleanrooms, entry to

which should be through change rooms that act as airlocks for personnel and airlocks for equipment

and materials. Cleanrooms and change rooms should be maintained to an appropriate cleanliness

standard and supplied with air which has passed through filters of an appropriate efficiency. Controls

and monitoring should be scientifically justified and should effectively evaluate the state of

environmental conditions of cleanrooms, airlocks and pass-through hatches.



4.2 The various operations of component preparation, product preparation and filling should be

carried out with appropriate technical and operational separation measures within the cleanroom or

facility to prevent mix up and contamination.



4.3 Restricted Access Barrier Systems (RABS) or isolators are beneficial in assuring required

conditions and minimizing microbial contamination associated with direct human interventions in the

critical zone. Their use should be considered in the CCS. Any alternative approaches to the use of

RABS or isolators should be justified.



4.4 For the manufacture of sterile products there are four grades of cleanroom/zone.



   Grade A: The critical zone for high-risk operations (e.g. aseptic processing line, filling zone,

   stopper bowl, open primary packaging or for making aseptic connections under the protection

   of first air). Normally, such conditions are provided by a localised airflow protection, such as

   unidirectional airflow workstations within RABS or isolators. The maintenance of

   unidirectional airflow should be demonstrated and qualified across the whole of the grade A

   area. Direct intervention (e.g. without the protection of barrier and glove port technology) into

   the grade A area by operators should be minimized by premises, equipment, process and

   procedural design.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  6 of 58  9 September 2022

   Grade B: For aseptic preparation and filling, this is the background cleanroom for grade A

   (where it is not an isolator). Air pressure differences should be continuously monitored.

   Cleanrooms of lower grade than grade B can be considered where isolator technology is used

   (see paragraph 4.20).



   Grade C and D: These are cleanrooms used for carrying out less critical stages in the

   manufacture of aseptically filled sterile products or as a background for isolators. They can

   also be used for the preparation/filling of terminally sterilised products. (See section 8 for the

   specific details on terminal sterilisation activities).



4.5 In cleanrooms and critical zones, all exposed surfaces should be smooth, impervious and

unbroken in order to minimize the shedding or accumulation of particles or micro-organisms.



4.6 To reduce accumulation of dust and to facilitate cleaning there should be no recesses that are

difficult to clean effectively, therefore projecting ledges, shelves, cupboards and equipment should be

kept to a minimum. Doors should be designed to avoid recesses that cannot be cleaned. Sliding doors

may be undesirable for this reason.



4.7 Materials used in cleanrooms, both in the construction of the room and for items used within

the room, should be selected to minimize generation of particles and to permit the repeated application

of cleaning, disinfectant and sporicidal agents where used.



4.8 Ceilings should be designed and sealed to prevent contamination from the space above them.



4.9 Sinks and drains should be prohibited in the grade A and grade B areas. In other cleanrooms,

air breaks should be fitted between the machine or sink and the drains. Floor drains in lower grade

cleanrooms should be fitted with traps or water seals designed to prevent back flow and should be

regularly cleaned, disinfected and maintained.



4.10 The transfer of equipment and materials into and out of the cleanrooms and critical zones is

one of the greatest potential sources of contamination. Any activities with the potential to compromise

the cleanliness of cleanrooms or the critical zone should be assessed and if they cannot be eliminated,

appropriate controls should be implemented.



4.11 The transfer of materials, equipment, and components into the grade A or B areas should be

carried out via a unidirectional process. Where possible, items should be sterilised and passed into

these areas through double-ended sterilisers (e.g. through a double-door autoclave or depyrogenation

oven/tunnel) sealed into the wall. Where sterilisation upon transfer of the items is not possible, a

procedure which achieves the same objective of not introducing contamination should be validated

and implemented, (e.g. using an effective transfer disinfection process, rapid transfer systems for

isolators or, for gaseous or liquid materials, a bacteria-retentive filter). The removal of items from the

grade A and B areas (e.g. materials, waste, environmental samples) should be carried out via a separate

unidirectional process. If this is not possible, time-based separation of movement (incoming/exiting

material) by procedure should be considered and controls applied to avoid potential contamination of

incoming items.



4.12 Airlocks should be designed and used to provide physical separation and to minimize

microbial and particle contamination of the different areas and should be present for material and

personnel moving between different grades. Wherever possible, airlocks used for personnel movement

should be separated from those used for material movement. Where this is not practical, time-based

separation of movement (personnel/material) by procedure should be considered. Airlocks should be

flushed effectively with filtered air to ensure that the grade of the cleanroom is maintained. The final

stage of the airlock should, in the "at rest" state, be of the same cleanliness grade (viable and total

particle) as the cleanroom into which it leads. The use of separate change rooms for entering and



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  7 of 58  9 September 2022

leaving the grade B area is desirable. Where this is not practical, time-based separation of activities

(ingress/egress) by procedure should be considered. Where the CCS indicates that the risk of

contamination is high, separate change rooms for entering and leaving production areas should be

used. Airlocks should be designed as follows:



    i. Personnel airlocks: Areas of increasing cleanliness used for entry of personnel (e.g. from the

           grade D area to the grade C area to the grade B area). In general hand washing facilities

           should be provided only in the first stage of the changing room and not be present in changing

           rooms directly accessing the grade B area.



   ii. Material airlocks: used for materials and equipment transfer.



            Only materials and equipment that have been included on an approved list and assessed

                 during validation of the transfer process, should be transferred into the grade A or grade

                 B areas via an airlock or pass-through hatches. Equipment and materials (intended for

                 use in the grade A area) should be protected when transiting through the grade B area.

                 Any unapproved items that require transfer should be pre-approved as an exception.

                 Appropriate risk assessment and mitigation measures should be applied and recorded

                 as per the manufacturer's CCS and should include a specific disinfection and monitoring

                 programme approved by quality assurance.



            Pass-through hatches should be designed to protect the higher-grade environment, for

                 example by effective flushing with an active filtered air supply.



            The movement of material or equipment from lower grade or unclassified area to higher

                 grade clean areas should be subject to cleaning and disinfection commensurate with the

                 risk and in line with the CCS.



4.13 For pass-through hatches and airlocks (for material and personnel), the entry and exit doors

should not be opened simultaneously. For airlocks leading to the grade A and grade B areas, an

interlocking system should be used. For airlocks leading to grade C and D areas, a visual and/or audible

warning system should be operated as a minimum. Where required to maintain area segregation, a

time delay between the closing and opening of interlocked doors should be established.



4.14 Cleanrooms should be supplied with a filtered air supply that maintains a positive pressure

and/or an airflow relative to the background environment of a lower grade under all operational

conditions and should flush the area effectively. Adjacent rooms of different grades should have an

air pressure difference of a minimum of 10 Pascals (guidance value). Particular attention should be

paid to the protection of the critical zone. The recommendations regarding air supplies and pressures

may need to be modified where it is necessary to contain certain materials (e.g. pathogenic, highly

toxic or radioactive products or live viral or bacterial materials). The modification may include

positively or negatively pressurized airlocks that prevent the hazardous material from contaminating

surrounding areas. Decontamination of facilities (e.g. the cleanrooms and the heating, ventilation, and

air conditioning (HVAC) systems) and the treatment of air leaving a clean area, may be necessary for

some operations. Where containment requires air to flow into a critical zone, the source of the air

should be from an area of the same or higher grade.



4.15 Airflow patterns within cleanrooms and zones should be visualised to demonstrate that there

is no ingress from lower grade to higher grade areas and that air does not travel from less clean areas

(such as the floor) or over operators or equipment that may transfer contamination to the higher-grade

areas. Where unidirectional airflow is required, visualisation studies should be performed to determine

compliance, (see paragraphs 4.4 & 4.19). When filled, closed products are transferred to an adjacent

cleanroom of a lower grade via a small egress point, airflow visualization studies should demonstrate

that air does not ingress from the lower grade cleanrooms to the grade B area. Where air movement is



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  8 of 58  9 September 2022

shown to be a contamination risk to the clean area or critical zone, corrective actions, such as design

improvement, should be implemented. Airflow pattern studies should be performed both at rest and in

operation (e.g. simulating operator interventions). Video recordings of the airflow patterns should be

retained. The outcome of the air visualisation studies should be documented and considered when

establishing the facility's environmental monitoring programme.



4.16 Indicators of air pressure differences should be fitted between cleanrooms and/or between

isolators and their background. Set-points and the criticality of air pressure differences should be

considered within the CCS. Air pressure differences identified as critical should be continuously

monitored and recorded. A warning system should be in place to instantly indicate and warn operators

of any failure in the air supply or reduction of air pressure differences (below set limits for those

identified as critical). The warning signal should not be overridden without assessment and a procedure

should be available to outline the steps to be taken when a warning signal is given. Where alarm delays

are set, these should be assessed and justified within the CCS. Other air pressure differences should

be monitored and recorded at regular intervals.



4.17 Facilities should be designed to permit observation of production activities from outside the

grade A and B areas (e.g. through the provision of windows or remote cameras with a full view of the

area and processes to allow observation and supervision without entry). This requirement should be

considered when designing new facilities or during refurbishment of existing facilities.



Barrier Technologies



4.18 Isolators or RABS, which are different technologies, and the associated processes, should be

designed to provide protection through separation of the grade A environment from the environment of

the surrounding room. The hazards introduced from entry or removal of items during processing should

be minimized and supported by high capability transfer technologies or validated systems that robustly

prevent contamination and are appropriate for the respective technology.



4.19 The design of the technology and processes used should ensure appropriate conditions are

maintained in the critical zone to protect the exposed product during operations.



      i. Isolators:



         a. The design of open isolators should ensure grade A conditions with first air protection in

              the critical zone and unidirectional airflow that sweeps over and away from exposed

              products during processing.



         b. The design of closed isolators should ensure grade A conditions with adequate protection

              for exposed products during processing. Airflow may not be fully unidirectional in closed

              isolators where simple operations are conducted. However, any turbulent airflow should

              not increase risk of contamination of the exposed product. Where processing lines are

              included in closed isolators, grade A conditions should be ensured with first air protection

              in the critical zone and unidirectional airflow that sweeps over and away from exposed

              products during processing.



         c. Negative pressure isolators should only be used when containment of the product is

              considered essential (e.g. radiopharmaceutical products) and specialized risk control

              measures should be applied to ensure the critical zone is not compromised.



     ii. RABS:



           The design of RABS should ensure grade A conditions with unidirectional airflow and first

           air protection in the critical zone. A positive airflow from the critical zone to the supporting

           background environment should be maintained.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  9 of 58  9 September 2022

4.20 The background environment for isolators or RABS should ensure the risk of transfer of

contamination is minimized.



      i. Isolators:



           a. The background environment for open isolators should generally correspond to a

                minimum of grade C. The background for closed isolators should correspond to a

                minimum of grade D. The decision on the background classification should be based on

                risk assessment and justified in the CCS.



           b. Key considerations when performing the risk assessment for the CCS of an isolator should

                include (but are not limited to); the bio-decontamination programme, the extent of

                automation, the impact of glove manipulations that may potentially compromise `first air'

                protection of critical process points, the impact of potential loss of barrier/glove integrity,

                transfer mechanisms used and activities such as set-up or maintenance that may require

                the doors to be opened prior to the final bio-decontamination of the isolator. Where

                additional process risks are identified, a higher grade of background should be considered

                unless appropriately justified in the CCS.



           c. Airflow pattern studies should be performed at the interfaces of open isolators to

                demonstrate the absence of air ingress.



     ii. RABS:



           The background environment for RABS used for aseptic processing, should correspond to a

           minimum of grade B and airflow pattern studies should be performed to demonstrate the

           absence of air ingress during interventions, including door openings if applicable.



4.21 The materials used for glove systems (for both isolators and RABS) should be demonstrated to

have appropriate mechanical and chemical resistance. The frequency of glove replacement should be

defined within the CCS.



      i. Isolators:



         a. For isolators, leak testing of the glove system should be performed using a methodology

              demonstrated to be suitable for the task and criticality. The testing should be performed at

              defined intervals. Generally glove integrity testing should be performed at a minimum

              frequency of the beginning and end of each batch or campaign. Additional glove integrity

              testing may be necessary depending on the validated campaign length.

              Glove integrity monitoring should include a visual inspection associated with each use and

              following any manipulation that may affect the integrity of the system.

              For manual aseptic processing activities where single unit or small batch sizes are

              produced, the frequency of integrity verification may be based on other criteria, such as the

              beginning and end of each manufacturing session.



         b. Integrity / leak testing of isolator systems should be performed at defined intervals.



     ii. RABS:



           For RABS, gloves used in the grade A area should be sterilised before installation and

           sterilised or effectively bio-decontaminated by a validated method prior to each

           manufacturing campaign. If exposed to the background environment during operation,

           disinfection using an approved methodology following each exposure should be completed.

           Gloves should be visually examined with each use, and integrity testing should be performed

           at periodic intervals.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  10 of 58  9 September 2022

4.22 Decontamination methods (cleaning and bio-decontamination, and where applicable

inactivation for biological materials) should be appropriately defined and controlled. The cleaning

process prior to the bio-decontamination step is essential; any residues that remain may inhibit the

effectiveness of the decontamination process. Evidence should also be available to demonstrate that the

cleaning and bio-decontamination agents used do not have adverse impact on the product produced

within the RABS or isolator.



    i. For isolators



           The bio-decontamination process of the interior should be automated, validated and controlled

           within defined cycle parameters and should include a sporicidal agent in a suitable form (e.g.

           gaseous or vaporized form). Gloves should be appropriately extended with fingers separated

           to ensure contact with the agent. Methods used (cleaning and sporicidal bio-decontamination)

           should render the interior surfaces and critical zone of the isolator free from viable

           microorganisms.



   ii. For RABS



           The sporicidal disinfection should include the routine application of a sporicidal agent using

           a method that has been validated and demonstrated to robustly include all areas of the interior

           surfaces and ensure a suitable environment for aseptic processing.



Cleanroom and clean air equipment qualification



4.23 Cleanrooms and clean air equipment such as unidirectional airflow units (UDAFs), RABS and

isolators, used for the manufacture of sterile products, should be qualified according to the required

characteristics of the environment. Each manufacturing operation requires an appropriate

environmental cleanliness level in the operational state in order to minimize the risk of contamination

of the product or materials being handled. Appropriate cleanliness levels in the "at rest" and

"operational" states should be maintained.



4.24 Cleanrooms and clean air equipment should be qualified using methodology in accordance with

the requirements of Annex 15. Cleanroom qualification (including classification) should be clearly

differentiated from operational environmental monitoring.



4.25 Cleanroom and clean air equipment qualification is the overall process of assessing the level of

compliance of a classified cleanroom or clean air equipment with its intended use. As part of the

qualification requirements of Annex 15, the qualification of cleanrooms and clean air equipment should

include (where relevant to the design/operation of the installation):



    i. installed filter system leakage and integrity testing,



   ii. airflow tests - volume and velocity,



  iii. air pressure difference test,



  iv. airflow direction test and visualisation,



   v. microbial airborne and surface contamination,



  vi. temperature measurement test,



 vii. relative humidity test,



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  11 of 58  9 September 2022

 viii. recovery test,



  ix. containment leak test.



Reference for the qualification of the cleanrooms and clean air equipment can be found in the ISO 14644

series of standards.



4.26 Cleanroom classification is part of the cleanroom qualification and is a method of assessing the

level of air cleanliness against a specification for a cleanroom or clean air equipment by measuring the

total particle concentration. Classification activities should be scheduled and performed in order to

avoid any impact on process or product quality. For example, initial classification should be performed

during simulated operations and reclassification performed during simulated operations or during

aseptic process simulation (APS).



4.27 For cleanroom classification, the total of particles equal to or greater than 0.5 and 5 µm should

be measured. This measurement should be performed both at rest and in simulated operations in

accordance with the limits specified in Table 1.



Table 1: Maximum permitted total particle concentration for classification



       Maximum limits for total particle       Maximum limits for total particle



Grade                     0.5 µm/m3                      5 µm/m3



    A  at rest           in operation          at rest                      in operation

    B

    C  3 520                         3 520     Not specified (a) Not specified (a)

    D

       3 520             352 000               Not specified (a)            2 930



       352 000           3 520 000             2 930                        29 300



       3 520 000                Not            29 300                    Not

                         predetermined (b)                        predetermined (b)



(a) Classification including 5µm particles may be considered where indicated by the CCS or

historical trends.

(b) For grade D, in operation limits are not predetermined. The manufacturer should establish in

operation limits based on a risk assessment and routine data where applicable.



4.28 For classification of the cleanroom, the minimum number of sampling locations and their

positioning can be found in ISO 14644 Part 1. For the aseptic processing area and the background

environment (the grade A and grade B areas, respectively), additional sample locations should be

considered and all critical processing areas such as the point of fill and container closure feeder bowls

should be evaluated. Critical processing locations should be determined by documented risk

assessment and knowledge of the process and operations to be performed in the area.



4.29 Cleanroom classification should be carried out in the "at rest" and "in operation" states.



      i. The definition of "at rest" state is the condition whereby the installation of all the utilities is

         complete including any functioning HVAC, with the main manufacturing equipment installed

         as specified but not operating and without personnel present in the room.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)              12 of 58                     9 September 2022

ii. The definition of "in operation" state is the condition where the installation of the cleanroom is

    complete, the HVAC system fully operational, equipment installed and functioning in the

    manufacturer's defined operating mode with the maximum number of personnel present

    performing or simulating routine operational work.



iii. The total particle limits given in Table 1 above for the "at rest" state should be achieved after a

     "clean up" period on completion of operations and line clearance/cleaning activities. The "clean

     up" period (guidance value of less than 20 minutes) should be determined during the

     qualification of the rooms, documented and adhered to in procedures to reinstate a qualified

     state of cleanliness if disrupted during operation.



4.30 The speed of air supplied by unidirectional airflow systems should be clearly justified in the

qualification protocol including the location for air speed measurement. Air speed should be designed,

measured and maintained to ensure that appropriate unidirectional air movement provides protection

of the product and open components at the working position (e.g. where high-risk operations occur

and where product and/or components are exposed). Unidirectional airflow systems should provide a

homogeneous air speed in a range of 0.36 ­ 0.54 m/s (guidance value) at the working position, unless

otherwise scientifically justified in the CCS. Airflow visualization studies should correlate with the air

speed measurement.



4.31 The microbial contamination level of the cleanrooms should be determined as part of the

cleanroom qualification. The number of sampling locations should be based on a documented risk

assessment and the results obtained from room classification, air visualization studies and knowledge

of the process and operations to be performed in the area. The maximum limits for microbial

contamination during qualification for each grade are given in Table 2. Qualification should include

both "at rest" and "in operation" states.



Table 2: Maximum permitted microbial contamination level during qualification



Grade  Air sample                          Settle plates  Contact plates

   A    CFU/m3                          (diameter 90 mm)   (diameter 55

                                                          mm) CFU/plate

                                         CFU/4 hours (a)



                                        No growth



B                        10             5                                      5



C                        100            50                                     25



D                        200            100                                    50



(a) Settle plates should be exposed for the duration of operations and changed as required after a maximum

of 4 hours. Exposure time should be based on recovery studies and should not allow desiccation of the media

used.



Note 1: All methods indicated for a specific grade in the table should be used for qualifying the area of

that specific grade. If one of the methods tabulated is not used, or alternative methods are used, the

approach taken should be appropriately justified.



Note 2: Limits are applied using CFU throughout the document. If different or new technologies are

used that present results in a manner different from CFU, the manufacturer should scientifically justify

the limits applied and where possible correlate them to CFU.



Note 3: For the qualification of personnel gowning, the limits given for contact plates and glove prints in

Table 6 should apply.



Note 4: Sampling methods should not pose a risk of contamination to the manufacturing operations.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)       13 of 58                    9 September 2022

4.32 The requalification of cleanrooms and clean air equipment should be carried out periodically

following defined procedures. The requalification should include at a minimum the following:



    i. cleanroom classification (total particle concentration),



   ii. integrity test of final filters,



   iii. airflow volume measurement,



   iv. verification of air pressure difference between rooms, and



   v. air velocity test



         (Note: For grade B, C and D the air velocity test should be performed according to a risk

         assessment documented as part of the CCS. However, it is required for filling zones supplied

         with unidirectional airflow (e.g. when filling terminally sterilised products or background to

         grade A and RABS). For grades with non-unidirectional airflow, a measurement of recovery

         testing should replace velocity testing).



The maximum time interval for requalification of grade A & B areas, is 6 months.

The maximum time interval for requalification of grade C & D areas, is 12 months.



Appropriate requalification consisting of at least the above tests should also be carried out following

completion of remedial action implemented to rectify an out of compliance equipment or facility

condition or after changes to equipment, facility or processes as appropriate. The significance of a

change should be determined through the change management process. Examples of changes to be

considered include but are not limited to the following:



    i. interruption of air movement which affects the operation of the installation,



   ii. change in the design of the cleanroom or of the operational setting parameters of the HVAC

         system,



  iii. special maintenance which affects the operation of the installation (e.g. change of final

         filters).



Disinfection



4.33 The disinfection of cleanrooms is particularly important. They should be cleaned and

disinfected thoroughly in accordance with a written programme. For disinfection to be effective, prior

cleaning to remove surface contamination should be performed. Cleaning programmes should

effectively remove disinfectant residues. More than one type of disinfecting agent should be employed

to ensure that where they have different modes of action, their combined usage is effective against

bacteria and fungi. Disinfection should include the periodic use of a sporicidal agent. Monitoring should

be undertaken regularly in order to assess the effectiveness of the disinfection programme and to detect

changes in types of microbial flora (e.g. organisms resistant to the disinfection regime currently in use).



4.34 The disinfection process should be validated. Validation studies should demonstrate the

suitability and effectiveness of disinfectants in the specific manner in which they are used and on the

type of surface material, or representative material if justified, and should support the in-use expiry

periods of prepared solutions.



4.35 Disinfectants and detergents used in grade A and grade B areas should be sterile prior to use.

Disinfectants used in grade C and D may also be required to be sterile where determined in the CCS.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  14 of 58  9 September 2022

Where the disinfectants and detergents are diluted / prepared by the sterile product manufacturer, this

should be done in a manner to prevent contamination and they should be monitored for microbial

contamination. Dilutions should be kept in previously cleaned containers (and sterilized where

applicable) and should only be stored for the defined period. If the disinfectants and detergents are

supplied "ready-made" then results from certificates of analysis or conformance can be accepted subject

to successful completion of the appropriate vendor qualification.



4.36 Where fumigation or vapour disinfection (e.g. Vapour-phase Hydrogen Peroxide) of

cleanrooms and associated surfaces are used, the effectiveness of any fumigation agent and dispersion

system should be understood and validated.



