2  Principle



2.1 The manufacture of sterile products is subject to special requirements in order to minimize risks

of microbial, particulate and endotoxin/pyrogen contamination. The following key areas should be

considered:



   i. Facility, equipment and process should be appropriately designed, qualified and/or validated

          and where applicable, subjected to ongoing verification according to the relevant sections of

          the Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) guide. The use of appropriate technologies (e.g.

          Restricted Access Barriers Systems (RABS), isolators, robotic systems, rapid/alternative

          methods and continuous monitoring systems) should be considered to increase the protection

          of the product from potential extraneous sources of endotoxin/pyrogen, particulate and

          microbial contamination such as personnel, materials and the surrounding environment, and

          assist in the rapid detection of potential contaminants in the environment and the product.



   ii. Personnel should have adequate qualifications and experience, training and behaviour with a

           specific focus on the principles involved in the protection of sterile product during the

           manufacturing, packaging and distribution processes.



   iii. Processes and monitoring systems for sterile product manufacture should be designed,

            commissioned, qualified, monitored and regularly reviewed by personnel with appropriate

            process, engineering and microbiological knowledge.



   iv. Raw materials and packaging materials should be adequately controlled and tested to ensure

            that level of bioburden and endotoxin/pyrogen are suitable for use.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  3 of 58  9 September 2022

2.2 Processes, equipment, facilities and manufacturing activities should be managed in accordance

with QRM principles to provide a proactive means of identifying, scientifically evaluating and

controlling potential risks to quality. Where alternative approaches are used, these should be supported

by appropriate rationale, risk assessment and mitigation, and should meet the intent of this Annex.



In the first instance, QRM priorities should include appropriate design of the facility, equipment and

processes, followed by the implementation of well-designed procedures, and finally application of

monitoring systems as the element that demonstrates that the design and procedures have been correctly

implemented and continue to perform in line with expectations. Monitoring or testing alone does not

give assurance of sterility.



2.3 A Contamination Control Strategy (CCS) should be implemented across the facility in order to

define all critical control points and assess the effectiveness of all the controls (design, procedural,

technical and organisational) and monitoring measures employed to manage risks to medicinal product

quality and safety. The combined strategy of the CCS should establish robust assurance of

contamination prevention. The CCS should be actively reviewed and, where appropriate, updated and

should drive continual improvement of the manufacturing and control methods. Its effectiveness should

form part of the periodic management review. Where existing control systems are in place and are

appropriately managed, these may not require replacement but should be referenced in the CCS and the

associated interactions between systems should be understood.



2.4 Contamination control and steps taken to minimize the risk of contamination from microbial,

endotoxin/pyrogen and particle sources includes a series of interrelated events and measures. These are

typically assessed, controlled and monitored individually but their collective effectiveness should be

considered together.



2.5 The development of the CCS requires detailed technical and process knowledge. Potential

sources of contamination are attributable to microbial and cellular debris (e.g. pyrogen, endotoxin) as

well as particulate (e.g. glass and other visible and sub-visible particles).



Elements to be considered within a CCS should include (but are not limited to):



   i. design of both the plant and processes including the associated documentation;



  ii. premises and equipment;



 iii. personnel;



 iv. utilities;



  v. raw material controls ­ including in-process controls;



 vi. product containers and closures;



vii. vendor approval ­ such as key component suppliers, sterilisation of components and single

           use systems (SUS), and critical service providers;



viii. management of outsourced activities and availability/transfer of critical information between

           parties, e.g. contract sterilisation services;



 ix. process risk management;



  x. process validation;



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  4 of 58  9 September 2022

 xi. validation of sterilisation processes;



xii. preventative maintenance ­ maintaining equipment, utilities and premises (planned and

           unplanned maintenance) to a standard that will ensure there is no additional risk of

           contamination;



xiii. cleaning and disinfection;



xiv. monitoring systems - including an assessment of the feasibility of the introduction of

           scientifically sound, alternative methods that optimize the detection of environmental

           contamination;



 xv. prevention mechanisms ­ trend analysis, detailed investigation, root cause determination,

           corrective and preventive actions (CAPA) and the need for comprehensive investigational

           tools;



xvi. continuous improvement based on information derived from the above.



2.6 The CCS should consider all aspects of contamination control with ongoing and periodic review

resulting in updates within the pharmaceutical quality system as appropriate. Changes to the systems in

place should be assessed for any impact on the CCS before and after implementation.



2.7 The manufacturer should take all steps and precautions necessary to assure the sterility of the

products manufactured within its facilities. Sole reliance for sterility or other quality aspects should not

be placed on any terminal process or finished product test.



