8  Production and Specific Technologies



Terminally sterilised products



8.1 Preparation of components and materials should be performed in at least a grade D

cleanroom in order to limit the risk of microbial, endotoxin/pyrogen and particle contamination, so

that the product is suitable for sterilisation. Where the product is at a high or unusual risk of microbial

contamination (e.g. the product actively supports microbial growth, the product must be held for long

periods before filling or the product is not processed mostly in closed vessels), then preparation should

be carried out in at least a grade C environment. Preparation of ointments, creams, suspensions and

emulsions should be carried out in at least a grade C environment before terminal sterilisation.

Specific guidance regarding terminally sterilised veterinary medicinal products can be found within

Annex 4 of the GMP Guide.



8.2 Primary packaging containers and components should be cleaned using validated processes to

ensure that particle, endotoxin/pyrogen and bioburden contamination is appropriately controlled.



8.3 Filling of products for terminal sterilisation should be carried out in at least a grade C

environment.



8.4 Where the CCS identifies that the product is at an unusual risk of contamination from the

environment because, for example, the filling operation is slow, the containers are wide necked or are

necessarily exposed for more than a few seconds before closing, then the product should be filled in grade

A with at least a grade C background.



8.5 Processing of the bulk solution should include a filtration step with a microorganism retaining

filter, where possible, to reduce bioburden levels and particles prior to filling into the final product

containers and there should be a maximum permissible time between preparation and filling.



8.6 Examples of operations to be carried out in the various grades are given in Table 3.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)         21 of 58  9 September 2022

Table 3: Examples of operations and grades for terminally sterilised preparation and

processing operations



Grade A - Filling of products, when unusually at risk.

Grade C - Preparation of solutions, when unusually at risk.



              - Filling of products.



Grade D - Preparation of solutions and components for subsequent filling.



Aseptic preparation and processing



8.7 The aseptic process should be clearly defined. The risks associated with the aseptic process,

and any associated requirements, should be identified, assessed and appropriately controlled. The site's

CCS should clearly define the acceptance criteria for these controls, requirements for monitoring and

the review of their effectiveness. Methods and procedures to control these risks should be described and

implemented. Accepted residual risks should be formally documented.



8.8 Precautions to minimize microbial, endotoxin/pyrogenic and particle contamination should

be taken, as per the site's CCS, during the preparation of the aseptic environment, during all

processing stages (including the stages before and after bulk product sterilisation), and until the product

is sealed in its final container. The presence of materials liable to generate particles and fibres should be

minimized in cleanrooms.



8.9 Where possible, the use of equipment such as RABS, isolators or other systems, should be

considered in order to reduce the need for critical interventions into grade A and to minimize the risk

of contamination. Robotics and automation of processes can also be considered to eliminate direct

human critical interventions (e.g. dry heat tunnel, automated lyophilizer loading, sterilisation in place).



8.10 Examples of operations to be carried out in the various environmental grades are given in Table

4.



Table 4: Examples of operations and grades for aseptic preparation and processing operations



              -  Aseptic assembly of filling equipment.

              -  Connections made under aseptic conditions (where sterilised product contact

                 surfaces are exposed) that are post the final sterilising grade filter. These

              -  connections should be sterilised by steam-in-place whenever possible.

              -  Aseptic compounding and mixing.

Grade A -        Replenishment of sterile bulk product, containers and closures.

                 Removal and cooling of unprotected (e.g. with no packaging) items from

              -  sterilisers.

                 Staging and conveying of sterile primary packaging components in the aseptic

              -  filling line while not wrapped.

                 Aseptic filling, sealing of containers such as ampoules, vial closure, transfer of

              -  open or partially stoppered vials.

                 Loading of a lyophilizer.



              - Background support for grade A (when not in an isolator).

Grade B - Conveying or staging, while protected from the surrounding environment, of



                   equipment, components and ancillary items for introduction into grade A.



Grade C - Preparation of solutions to be filtered including sampling and dispensing.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)             22 of 58  9 September 2022

                   - Cleaning of equipment.

                   - Handling of components, equipment and accessories after cleaning.

     Grade D - Assembly under HEPA filtered airflow of cleaned components, equipment and



                        accessories prior to sterilisation.

                   - Assembly of closed and sterilised SUS using intrinsic sterile connection



                        devices.



 8.11 For sterile products where the final formulation cannot be filtered, the following should be

 considered:



      i. all product and component contact equipment should be sterilised prior to use,



     ii. all raw materials or intermediates should be sterilised and aseptically added,



    iii. bulk solutions or intermediates should be sterilised.



8.12 The unwrapping, assembly and preparation of sterilised equipment, components and ancillary

items with direct or indirect product contact should be treated as an aseptic process and performed in

grade A with a grade B background. The filling line set-up and filling of the sterile product should be

treated as an aseptic process and performed in grade A with a grade B background. Where an isolator

is used, the background should be in accordance with paragraph 4.20.



8.13 Preparation and filling of sterile products such as ointments, creams, suspensions and

emulsions should be performed in grade A with a grade B background when the product and

components are exposed to the environment and the product is not subsequently filtered (via a sterilising

grade filter) or terminally sterilised. Where an isolator or RABS is used, the background should be in

accordance with paragraph 4.20.



8.14 Aseptic connections should be performed in grade A with a grade B background unless

subsequently sterilised in place or conducted with intrinsic sterile connection devices that minimize any

potential contamination from the immediate environment. Intrinsic sterile connection devices should be

designed to mitigate risk of contamination.



Where an isolator is used, the background should be in accordance with paragraph 4.20. Aseptic

connections should be appropriately assessed and their effectiveness verified. For requirements

regarding intrinsic sterile connection devices, see paragraphs 8.129 and 8.130.



8.15 Aseptic manipulations (including non-intrinsic sterile connection devices) should be minimized

through the use of engineering design solutions such as preassembled and sterilised equipment.

Whenever feasible, product contact piping and equipment should be pre-assembled, and sterilised in

place.



8.16 There should be an authorized list of allowed and qualified interventions, both inherent and

corrective, that may occur during production (see paragraph 9.34). Interventions should be carefully

designed to ensure that the risk of contamination of the environment, process and product is effectively

minimized. The process of designing interventions should include the consideration of any impact on

air-flows and critical surfaces and products. Engineering solutions should be used whenever possible to

minimize incursion by operators during the intervention. Aseptic technique should be observed at all

times, including the appropriate use of sterile tools for manipulations. The procedures listing the types

of inherent and corrective interventions, and how to perform them, should be first evaluated via risk

management and APS and be kept up to date. Non-qualified interventions should only be used in

exceptional circumstances, with due consideration of the risks associated with the intervention and with

the authorisation of the quality unit. The details of the intervention conducted should be subject to risk

assessment, recorded and fully investigated under the manufacturer's PQS. Any non-qualified



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  23 of 58  9 September 2022

interventions should be thoroughly assessed by the quality department and considered during batch

disposition.



8.17 Interventions and stoppages should be recorded in the batch record. Each line stoppage or

intervention should be sufficiently documented in batch records with the associated time, duration of

the event, and operators involved (ref to paragraph 9.34).



8.18 The duration of each aspect of aseptic preparation and processing should be minimized and

limited to a defined and validated maximum time, including:



      i. the holding time between equipment, component, and container cleaning, drying and

           sterilisation;



     ii. the holding time for sterilised equipment, components, and containers before use and during

           filling/assembly;



    iii. the holding time for a decontaminated environment, such as the RABS or isolator before use;



    iv. the time between the start of the preparation of a product and its sterilisation or filtration

           through a microorganism-retaining filter (if applicable), through to the end of the aseptic

           filling process There should be a maximum permissible time for each product that takes into

           account its composition and the prescribed method of storage;



     v. the holding time for sterilised product prior to filling;



    vi. the aseptic processing time;



   vii. the filling time.



8.19 Aseptic operations (including APS) should be observed on a regular basis by personnel with

specific expertise in aseptic processing to verify the correct performance of operations including

operator behaviour in the cleanroom and address inappropriate practices if detected.



Finishing of sterile products



8.20 Open primary packaging containers should be maintained under grade A conditions with the

appropriate background for the technology as described in paragraph 4.20. For partially stoppered

vials or prefilled syringes (see paragraph 8.126).



8.21 Final containers should be closed by appropriately validated methods.



8.22 Where final containers are closed by fusion, e.g. Blow-Fill-Seal (BFS), Form-Fill-Seal

(FFS), Small and Large Volume Parenteral (SVP & LVP) bags, glass or plastic ampoules, the critical

parameters and variables that affect seal integrity should be evaluated, determined, effectively

controlled and monitored during operations. Glass ampoules, BFS units and small volume containers

(100 ml) closed by fusion should be subject to 100% integrity testing using validated methods. For

large volume containers (>100 ml) closed by fusion, reduced sampling may be acceptable where

scientifically justified and based on data demonstrating the consistency of the existing process, and

a high level of process control. It should be noted that visual inspection is not considered as an

acceptable integrity test method.



8.23 Samples of products using systems other than fusion should be taken and checked for

integrity using validated methods. The frequency of testing should be based on the knowledge and

experience of the container and closure systems being used. A scientifically justified sampling plan



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  24 of 58  9 September 2022

should be used. The sample size should be based on information such as supplier management,

packaging component specifications and process knowledge.



8.24 Containers sealed under vacuum should be tested for maintenance of vacuum after an

appropriate pre-determined period prior to certification/release and during shelf life.



8.25 The container closure integrity validation should take into consideration any transportation or

shipping requirements that may negatively impact the integrity of the container (e.g. by decompression

or extreme temperatures).



8.26 Where the equipment used to crimp vial caps can generate large quantities of non-viable

particle, measures to prevent particle contamination such as locating the equipment at a physically

separate station equipped with adequate air extraction should be taken.



8.27 Vial capping of aseptically filled products can be undertaken as an aseptic process using

sterilised caps or as a clean process outside the aseptic processing area. Where the latter approach

is adopted, vials should be protected by grade A conditions up to the point of leaving the aseptic

processing area, and thereafter stoppered vials should be protected with a grade A air supply until the

cap has been crimped. The supporting background environment of grade A air supply should meet at

least grade D requirements. Where capping is a manual process, it should be performed under grade

A conditions either in an appropriately designed isolator or in grade A with a grade B background.



8.28 Where capping of aseptically filled sterile product is conducted as a clean process with grade

A air supply protection, vials with missing or displaced stoppers should be rejected prior to capping.

Appropriately qualified, automated methods for stopper height detection should be in place.



8.29 Where human intervention is required at the capping station, appropriate technological and

organizational measures should be used to prevent direct contact with the vials and to minimize

contamination. RABS and isolators may be beneficial in assuring the required conditions.



8.30 All filled containers of parenteral products should be inspected individually for extraneous

contamination or other defects. Defect classification and criticality should be determined during

qualification and based on risk and historical knowledge. Factors to consider include, but are not

limited to, the potential impact of the defect to the patient and the route of administration. Different

defect types should be categorized and batch performance analysed. Batches with unusual levels of

defects, when compared with routine defect numbers for the process (based on routine and trend data),

should be investigated. A defect library should be generated and maintained which captures all known

classes of defects. The defect library should be used for the training of production and quality

assurance personnel. Critical defects should not be identified during any subsequent sampling and

inspection of acceptable containers. Any critical defect identified subsequently should trigger an

investigation as it indicates a possible failure of the original inspection process.



8.31 When inspection is performed manually, it should be conducted under suitable and controlled

conditions of illumination and background. Inspection rates should be appropriately controlled and

qualified. Operators performing the inspection should undergo visual inspection qualification (whilst

wearing corrective lenses, if these are normally worn) at least annually. The qualification should be

undertaken using appropriate samples from the manufacturer's defect library sets and taking into

consideration worst case scenarios (e.g. inspection time, line speed where the product is transferred to

the operator by a conveyor system, container size or fatigue) and should include consideration of

eyesight checks. Operator distractions should be minimized and frequent breaks, of an appropriate

duration, should be taken from inspection.



8.32 Where automated methods of inspection are used, the process should be validated to detect

known defects (which may impact product quality or safety) and be equal to, or better than, manual



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  25 of 58  9 September 2022

inspection methods. The performance of the equipment should be challenged using representative

defects prior to start up and at regular intervals throughout the batch.



8.33 Results of the inspection should be recorded and defect types and numbers trended. Reject

levels for the various defect types should also be trended based on statistical principles. Impact to

product on the market should be assessed as part of the investigation when adverse trends are observed.



Sterilisation



8.34 Where possible, finished product should be terminally sterilised, using a validated and

controlled sterilisation process, as this provides a greater assurance of sterility than a validated and

controlled sterile filtration process and/or aseptic processing. Where it is not possible for a product to

undergo terminal sterilisation, consideration should be given to using post-aseptic processing terminal

heat treatment, combined with aseptic process to give improved sterility assurance.



8.35 The selection, design and location of the equipment and cycle/programme used for sterilisation

should be based on scientific principles and data which demonstrate repeatability and reliability of the

sterilisation process. All parameters should be defined, and where critical, these should be controlled,

monitored and recorded.



8.36 All sterilisation processes should be validated. Validation studies should take into account the

product composition, storage conditions and maximum time between the start of the preparation of a

product or material to be sterilised and its sterilisation. Before any sterilisation process is adopted, its

suitability for the product and equipment, and its efficacy in consistently achieving the desired

sterilising conditions in all parts of each type of load to be processed should be validated notably by

physical measurements and where appropriate by Biological Indicators (BI). For effective sterilisation,

the whole of the product, and surfaces of equipment and components should be subject to the required

treatment and the process should be designed to ensure that this is achieved.



8.37 Particular attention should be given when the adopted product sterilisation method is not

described in the current edition of the Pharmacopoeia, or when it is used for a product which is not a

simple aqueous solution. Where possible, heat sterilisation is the method of choice.



8.38 Validated loading patterns should be established for all sterilisation processes and load patterns

should be subject to periodic revalidation. Maximum and minimum loads should also be considered as

part of the overall load validation strategy.



8.39 The validity of the sterilizing process should be reviewed and verified at scheduled intervals

based on risk. Heat sterilization cycles should be revalidated with a minimum frequency of at least

annually for load patterns that are considered worst case. Other load patterns should be validated at a

frequency justified in the CCS.



8.40 Routine operating parameters should be established and adhered to for all sterilisation

processes, e.g. physical parameters and loading patterns.



8.41 There should be mechanisms in place to detect a sterilisation cycle that does not conform to the

validated parameters. Any failed sterilisation or sterilisation that deviated from the validated process

(e.g. have longer or shorter phases such as heating cycles) should be investigated.



8.42 Suitable BIs placed at appropriate locations should be considered as an additional method to

support the validation of the sterilisation process. BIs should be stored and used according to the

manufacturer's instructions. Where BIs are used to support validation and/or to monitor a sterilisation

process (e.g. with ethylene oxide), positive controls should be tested for each sterilisation cycle. If BIs

are used, strict precautions should be taken to avoid transferring microbial contamination to the



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  26 of 58  9 September 2022

manufacturing or other testing processes. BI results in isolation should not be used to override other

critical parameters and process design elements.



8.43 The reliability of BIs is important. Suppliers should be qualified and transportation and storage

conditions should be controlled in order that BI quality is not compromised. Prior to use of a new

batch/lot of BIs, the population, purity and identity of the indicator organism of the batch/lot should

be verified. For other critical parameters, e.g. D-value, Z-value, the batch certificate provided by the

qualified supplier can normally be used.



8.44 There should be a clear means of differentiating products, equipment and components, which

have not been subjected to the sterilisation process from those which have. Equipment such as baskets

or trays used to carry products, other items of equipment and/or components should be clearly labelled

(or electronically tracked) with the product name and batch number and an indication of whether or

not it has been sterilised. Indicators such as autoclave tape, or irradiation indicators may be used, where

appropriate, to indicate whether or not a batch (or sub-batch material, component, equipment) has

passed through a sterilisation process. However, these indicators show only that the sterilisation

process has occurred; they do not indicate product sterility or achievement of the required sterility

assurance level.



8.45 Sterilisation records should be available for each sterilisation run. Each cycle should have a

unique identifier. Their conformity should be reviewed and approved as part of the batch

certification/release procedure.



8.46 Where required, materials, equipment and components should be sterilised by validated

methods appropriate to the specific material. Suitable protection after sterilisation should be provided

to prevent recontamination. If sterilised items are not used immediately after sterilisation, these should

be stored using appropriately sealed packaging and a maximum hold time should be established. Where

justified, components that have been packaged with multiple sterile packaging layers need not be stored

in a cleanroom if the integrity and configuration of the sterile pack allows the items to be readily

disinfected during transfer by operators into grade A (e.g. by the use of multiple sterile coverings that

can be removed at each transfer from lower to higher grade). Where protection is achieved by

containment in sealed packaging, this packaging process should be undertaken prior to sterilisation.



8.47 Where materials, equipment, components and ancillary items are sterilised in sealed packaging

and then transferred into grade A, this should be done using appropriate validated methods (for example,

airlocks or pass-through hatches) with accompanying disinfection of the exterior of the sealed

packaging. The use of rapid transfer port technology should also be considered. These methods should

be demonstrated to effectively control the potential risk of contamination of the grade A and grade B

areas and, likewise, the disinfection procedure should be demonstrated to be effective in reducing any

contamination on the packaging to acceptable levels for entry of the item into the grade B and grade A

areas.



8.48 Where materials, equipment, components and ancillary items are sterilised in sealed packaging

or containers, the packaging should be qualified for minimizing the risk of particulate, microbial,

endotoxin/pyrogen or chemical contamination, and for compatibility with the selected sterilisation

method. The packaging sealing process should be validated. The validation should consider the integrity

of the sterile protective barrier system, the maximum hold time before sterilisation and the maximum

shelf life assigned to the sterilised items. The integrity of the sterile protective barrier system for each

of the sterilised items should be checked prior to use.



8.49 For materials, equipment, components and ancillary items that are not a direct or indirect

product contact part and are necessary for aseptic processing but cannot be sterilised, an effective and

validated disinfection and transfer process should be in place. These items, once disinfected, should be

protected to prevent recontamination. These items, and others representing potential routes of



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  27 of 58  9 September 2022

contamination, should be included in the environmental monitoring programme.



