Environmental and process monitoring



9.4 An environmental monitoring programme should be established and documented. The purpose

of the environmental monitoring programme, is to:



     i. Provide assurance that cleanrooms and clean air equipment continue to provide an

          environment of appropriate air cleanliness, in accordance with design and regulatory

          requirements.



   ii. Effectively detect excursions from environmental limits triggering investigation and

         assessment of risk to product quality.



Risk assessments should be performed in order to establish this comprehensive environmental

monitoring programme, i.e. sampling locations, frequency of monitoring, monitoring methods and

incubation conditions (e.g. time, temperature(s), aerobic and/or anaerobic conditions).

These risk assessments should be conducted based on detailed knowledge of; the process inputs and

final product, the facility, equipment, the criticality of specific processes and steps, the operations

involved, routine monitoring data, monitoring data obtained during qualification and knowledge of

typical microbial flora isolated from the environment.



The risk assessment should include the determination of critical monitoring locations, those locations

where the presence of microorganisms during processing may have an impact upon product quality,

(e.g. grade A, aseptic processing areas and the grade B areas that directly interface with the grade A

area). Consideration of other information such as air visualisation studies should also be included. These

risk assessments should be reviewed regularly in order to confirm the effectiveness of the site's



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)               42 of 58                              9 September 2022

environmental monitoring programme. The monitoring programme should be considered in the overall

context of the trend analysis and the CCS for the site.



9.5 Routine monitoring of cleanrooms, clean air equipment and personnel should be performed in

operation throughout all critical stages of processing, including equipment set-up.



9.6 Other characteristics, such as temperature and relative humidity, should be controlled within

ranges that align with product/processing/personnel requirements and support maintenance of defined

cleanliness standards (e.g. grade A or B).



9.7 The monitoring of grade A should demonstrate the maintenance of aseptic processing

conditions during critical operations. Monitoring should be performed at locations posing the highest

risk of contamination to the sterile equipment surfaces, containers, closures and product. The selection

of monitoring locations and the orientation and positioning of sampling devices should be justified and

appropriate to obtain reliable data from the critical zones.



9.8 Sampling methods should not pose a risk of contamination to the manufacturing operations.



9.9 Appropriate alert levels and action limits should be set for the results of viable and total particle

monitoring. The maximum total particle action limits are described in Table 5 and the maximum viable

particle action limits are described in Table 6. However, more stringent action limits may be applied

based on data trending, the nature of the process or as determined within the CCS. Both viable and total

particle alert levels should be established based on results of cleanroom qualification tests and

periodically reviewed based on ongoing trend data.



9.10 Alert levels for grade A (total particle only) grade B, grade C and grade D should be set such

that adverse trends (e.g. a numbers of events or individual events that indicate a deterioration of

environmental control) are detected and addressed.



9.11 Monitoring procedures should define the approach to trending. Trends should include, but are

not limited to:



    i. increasing numbers of excursions from action limits or alert levels;



   ii. consecutive excursions from alert levels;



  iii. regular but isolated excursion from action limits that may have a common cause, (e.g. single

           excursions that always follow planned preventative maintenance);



  iv. changes in microbial flora type and numbers and predominance of specific organisms.

           Particular attention should be given to organisms recovered that may indicate a loss of control,

           deterioration in cleanliness or organisms that may be difficult to control such as spore-forming

           microorganisms and moulds.



9.12 The monitoring of grade C and D cleanrooms in operation should be performed based on data

collected during qualification and routine data to allow effective trend analysis. The requirements of

alert levels and action limits will depend on the nature of the operations carried out. Action limits may

be more stringent than those listed in Table 5 and Table 6.



9.13 If action limits are exceeded, operating procedures should prescribe a root cause investigation,

an assessment of the potential impact to product (including batches produced between the monitoring

and reporting) and requirements for corrective and preventive actions. If alert levels are exceeded,

operating procedures should prescribe assessment and follow-up, which should include consideration

of an investigation and/or corrective actions to avoid any further deterioration of the environment.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  43 of 58  9 September 2022

Environmental monitoring ­ total particle



9.14 A total particle monitoring program should be established to obtain data for assessing potential

contamination risks and to ensure the maintenance of the environment for sterile operations in a

qualified state.



9.15 The limits for environmental monitoring of airborne particle concentration for each graded

area are given in Table 5.



Table 5: Maximum permitted total particle concentration for monitoring.



             Maximum limits for total particle         Maximum limits for total particle



      Grade               0.5 m/m3                               5 m/m3



          A  at rest     in operation                  at rest           in operation

          B

             3 520                  3 520              29                29



             3 520       352 000                       29                2 930



      C      352 000     3 520 000                     2 930             29 300



      D      3 520 000          Not                    29 300                   Not

                         predetermined (a)                               predetermined (a)



(a) For grade D, in operation limits are not predetermined. The manufacturer should establish in

operation limits based on a risk assessment and on routine data, where applicable.



Note 1: The particle limits given in the table for the "at rest" state should be achieved after a

short "clean up" period defined during qualification (guidance value of less than 20 minutes) in

an unmanned state, after the completion of operations (see paragraph 4.29).



Note 2: The occasional indication of macro particle counts, especially  5 µm, within grade A

may be considered to be false counts due to electronic noise, stray light, coincidence loss etc.

However, consecutive or regular counting of low levels may be indicative of a possible

contamination event and should be investigated. Such events may indicate early failure of the

room air supply filtration system, equipment failure, or may also be diagnostic of poor practices

during machine set-up and routine operation.



9.16         For grade A, particle monitoring should be undertaken for the full duration of critical



processing, including equipment assembly.



9.17         The grade A area should be monitored continuously (for particles 0.5 and 5 µm)



and with a suitable sample flow rate (at least 28 litres (1ft3) per minute) so that all interventions,



transient events and any system deterioration is captured. The system should frequently correlate each



individual sample result with alert levels and action limits at such a frequency that any potential



excursion can be identified and responded to in a timely manner. Alarms should be triggered if alert



levels are exceeded. Procedures should define the actions to be taken in response to alarms including



the consideration of additional microbial monitoring.



9.18 It is recommended that a similar system be used for the grade B area although the sample

frequency may be decreased. The grade B area should be monitored at such a frequency and with



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)                    44 of 58                      9 September 2022

suitable sample size that the programme captures any increase in levels of contamination and system

deterioration. If alert levels are exceeded, alarms should be triggered.



9.19 The selection of the monitoring system should take into account any risk presented by

the materials used in the manufacturing operation (e.g. those involving live organisms, powdery

products or radiopharmaceuticals) that may give rise to biological, chemical or radiation hazards.



9.20 In the case where contaminants are present due to the processes involved and would potentially

damage the particle counter or present a hazard (e.g. live organisms, powdery products and radiation

hazards), the frequency and strategy employed should be such as to assure the environmental

classification both prior to and post exposure to the risk. An increase in viable particle monitoring

should be considered to ensure comprehensive monitoring of the process. Additionally, monitoring

should be performed during simulated operations. Such operations should be performed at appropriate

intervals. The approach should be defined in the CCS.



9.21 The size of monitoring samples taken using automated systems will usually be a function of the

sampling rate of the system used. It is not necessary for the sample volume to be the same as that used

for formal classification of cleanrooms and clean air equipment. Monitoring sample volumes should be

justified.



Environmental and personnel monitoring ­ viable particle



9.22 Where aseptic operations are performed, microbial monitoring should be frequent using a

combination of methods such as settle plates, volumetric air sampling, glove, gown and surface

sampling (e.g. swabs and contact plates). The method of sampling used should be justified within the

CCS and should be demonstrated not to have a detrimental impact on grade A and B airflow patterns.

Cleanroom and equipment surfaces should be monitored at the end of an operation.



9.23 Viable particle monitoring should also be performed within the cleanrooms when normal

manufacturing operations are not occurring (e.g. post disinfection, prior to start of manufacturing, on

completion of the batch and after a shutdown period), and in associated rooms that have not been

used, in order to detect potential incidents of contamination which may affect the controls within the

cleanrooms. In case of an incident, additional sample locations may be used as a verification of the

effectiveness of a corrective action (e.g. cleaning and disinfection).



9.24 Continuous viable air monitoring in grade A (e.g. air sampling or settle plates) should be

undertaken for the full duration of critical processing, including equipment (aseptic set-up) assembly

and critical processing. A similar approach should be considered for grade B cleanrooms based on

the risk of impact on the aseptic processing. The monitoring should be performed in such a way that

all interventions, transient events and any system deterioration would be captured and any risk caused

by interventions of the monitoring operations is avoided.



9.25 A risk assessment should evaluate the locations, type and frequency of personnel monitoring

based on the activities performed and the proximity to critical zones. Monitoring should include

sampling of personnel at periodic intervals during the process. Sampling of personnel should be

performed in such a way that it will not compromise the process. Particular consideration should be

given to monitoring personnel following involvement in critical interventions (at a minimum gloves,

but may require monitoring of areas of gown as applicable to the process) and on each exit from the

grade B cleanroom (gloves and gown). Where monitoring of gloves is performed after critical

interventions, the outer gloves should be replaced prior to continuation of activity. Where monitoring

of gowns is required after critical interventions, the gown should be replaced before further activity

in the cleanroom.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  45 of 58  9 September 2022

9.26 Microbial monitoring of personnel in the grade A and grade B areas should be performed.

Where operations are manual in nature (e.g. aseptic compounding or filling), the increased risk should

lead to enhanced emphasis placed on microbial monitoring of gowns and justified within the CCS.



9.27 Where monitoring is routinely performed by manufacturing personnel, this should be subject

to regular oversight by the quality unit (refer also to paragraph 8.19).



9.28 The adoption of suitable alternative monitoring systems such as rapid methods should be

considered by manufacturers in order to expedite the detection of microbiological contamination issues

and to reduce the risk to product. These rapid and automated microbial monitoring methods may be

adopted after validation has demonstrated their equivalency or superiority to the established methods.



9.29 Sampling methods and equipment used should be fully understood and procedures should be

in place for the correct operation and interpretation of results obtained. Supporting data for the recovery

efficiency of the sampling methods chosen should be available.



9.30 Action limits for viable particle contamination are shown in Table 6



Table 6: Maximum action limits for viable particle contamination



Grade Air sample         Settle plates    Contact plates          Glove print,

            CFU /m3                                               Including 5 fingers on

                         (diam. 90 mm)    (diam. 55mm),           both hands

                         CFU /4 hours(a)  CFU / plate(b)          CFU / glove



A                                         No growth(c)                          5

                                                                                -

B  10                    5                5                                     -



C  100                   50               25



D  200                   100              50



(a) - Settle plates should be exposed in grade A and B areas for the duration of operations

(including equipment set-up) and changed as required after a maximum of 4 hours (exposure

time should be based on validation including recovery studies and it should not have any

negative effect on the suitability of the media used).



   - For grade C and D areas, exposure time (with a maximum of 4 hours) and frequency should

   be based on QRM.



   - Individual settle plates may be exposed for less than 4 hours.



(b) Contact plate limits apply to equipment, room and gown surfaces within the grade A and

grade B areas. Routine gown monitoring is not normally required for grade C and D areas,

depending on their function.



(c) It should be noted that for grade A, any growth should result in an investigation.



Note 1: It should be noted that the types of monitoring methods listed in the table above are

examples and other methods can be used provided they meet the intent of providing information

across the whole of the critical process where product may be contaminated (e.g. aseptic line

set-up, aseptic processing, filling and lyophilizer loading).



Note 2: Limits are applied using CFU throughout the document. If different or new technologies

are used that present results in a manner different from CFU, the manufacturer should

scientifically justify the limits applied and where possible correlate them to CFU.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)      46 of 58                                      9 September 2022

9.31 Microorganisms detected in the grade A and grade B areas should be identified to species level

and the potential impact of such microorganisms on product quality (for each batch implicated) and

overall state of control should be evaluated. Consideration should also be given to the identification of

microorganisms detected in grade C and D areas (for example where action limits or alert levels are

exceeded) or following the isolation of organisms that may indicate a loss of control, deterioration in

cleanliness or that may be difficult to control such as spore-forming microorganisms and moulds and at

a sufficient frequency to maintain a current understanding of the typical flora of these areas.



Aseptic process simulation (APS) (also known as media fill)



9.32 Periodic verification of the effectiveness of the controls in place for aseptic processing should

include an APS using a sterile nutrient media and/or surrogate in place of the product. The APS should

not be considered as the primary means to validate the aseptic process or aspects of the aseptic process.

The effectiveness of the aseptic process should be determined through process design, adherence to the

pharmaceutical quality system and process controls, training, and evaluation of monitoring data.

Selection of an appropriate nutrient media and/or surrogate should be made based on the ability of the

media and/or surrogate to imitate physical product characteristics assessed to pose a risk to product

sterility during the aseptic process. Where processing stages may indirectly impact the viability of any

introduced microbial contamination, (e.g. aseptically produced semi-solids, powders, solid materials,

microspheres, liposomes and other formulations where product is cooled or heated or lyophilized),

alternative procedures that represent the operations as closely as possible should be developed. Where

surrogate materials, such as buffers, are used in parts of the APS, the surrogate material should not

inhibit the growth of any potential contamination.



9.33 The APS should imitate as closely as possible the routine aseptic manufacturing process and

include all the critical manufacturing steps, specifically:



      i. The APS should assess all aseptic operations performed subsequent to the sterilisation and

           decontamination cycles of materials utilised in the process to the point where the container is

           sealed.



     ii. For non-filterable formulations, any additional aseptic steps should be assessed.



    iii. Where aseptic manufacturing is performed under an inert atmosphere, the inert gas should be

           substituted with air in the process simulation unless anaerobic simulation is intended.



    iv. Processes requiring the addition of sterile powders should use an acceptable surrogate material

           in the same containers as those used in the process under evaluation.



     v. Separate simulations of individual unit operations (e.g. processes involving drying, blending,

           milling and subdivision of a sterile powder) should be avoided. Any use of individual

           simulations should be supported by a documented justification and ensure that the sum total

           of the individual simulations continues to fully cover the whole process.



    vi. The process simulation procedure for lyophilized products should represent the entire aseptic

           processing chain including filling, transport, loading, a representative duration of the chamber

           dwell, unloading and sealing under specified, documented and justified conditions

           representing worst case operating parameters.



   vii. The lyophilization process simulation should mimic all aspects of the process, except those

           that may affect the viability or recovery of contaminants. For instance, boiling-over or actual

           freezing of the solution should be avoided. Factors to consider in determining APS design

           include, where applicable:



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  47 of 58  9 September 2022

                    the use of air to break vacuum instead of nitrogen or other process gases,



                    replicating the maximum interval between sterilisation of the lyophilizer and its

                        use,



                    replicating the maximum period of time between filtration and lyophilization, and



                    quantitative aspects of worst-case situations, e.g. loading the largest number of

                        trays, replicating the longest duration of loading where the chamber is open to the

                        environment.



9.34 The APS should take into account various aseptic manipulations and interventions known to

occur during normal production as well as worst-case situations, and take into account the following:



      i. Inherent and corrective interventions representative of the routine process should be

           performed in a manner and frequency similar to that during the routine aseptic process.



     ii. The inclusion and frequency of interventions in the APS should be based on assessed risks

           posed to product sterility.



9.35 APS should not be used to justify practices that pose unnecessary contamination risks.



9.36 In developing the APS plan, consideration should be given to the following:



      i. Identification of worst case conditions covering the relevant variables, such as container size

           and line speed, and their impact on the process. The outcome of the assessment should justify

           the variables selected.



     ii. Determining the representative sizes of container/closure combinations to be used for

           validation. Bracketing or matrix approach may be considered for validation of the same

           container/closure configuration for different products where process equivalence is

           scientifically justified.



    iii. Maximum permitted holding times for sterile product and equipment exposed during the

           aseptic process.



    iv. The volume filled per container, which should be sufficient to ensure that the media contacts

           all equipment and component surfaces that may directly contaminate the sterile product. The

           volume used should provide sufficient headspace to support potential microbial growth and

           ensure that turbidity can be detected during inspection.



     v. The requirement for substitution of any inert gas used in the routine aseptic manufacturing

           process by air unless anaerobic simulation is intended. In these situations, inclusion of

           occasional anaerobic simulations as part of the overall validation strategy should be

           considered (see paragraph 9.33 point iii).



  vi. The selected nutrient media should be capable of growing a designated group of reference

           microorganisms as described by the relevant pharmacopeia and suitably representative local

           isolates.



 vii. The method of detection of microbial contamination should be scientifically justified to ensure

           that contamination is reliably detected.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  48 of 58  9 September 2022

viii. The process simulation should be of sufficient duration to challenge the process, the operators

           that perform interventions, shift changes and the capability of the processing environment to

           provide appropriate conditions for the manufacture of a sterile product.



  ix. Where the manufacturer operates different or extended shifts, the APS should be designed to

           capture factors specific to those shifts that are assessed to pose a risk to product sterility, for

           example the maximum duration for which an operator may be present in the cleanroom.



   x. Simulating normal aseptic manufacturing interruptions where the process is idle (e.g. shift

           changeovers, recharging dispensing vessels, introduction of additional equipment).



  xi. Ensuring that environmental monitoring is conducted as required for routine production, and

           throughout the entire duration of the process simulation.



 xii. Where campaign manufacturing occurs, such as in the use of Barrier Technologies or

           manufacture of sterile active substances, consideration should be given to designing and

           performing the process simulation so that it simulates the risks associated with both the

           beginning and the end of the campaign and demonstrating that the campaign duration does

           not pose any risk.



xiii. The performance of "end of production or campaign APS" may be used as additional

           assurance or investigative purposes; however, their use should be justified in the CCS and

           should not replace routine APS. If used, it should be demonstrated that any residual product

           does not negatively impact the recovery of any potential microbial contamination.



9.37 For sterile active substances, batch size should be large enough to represent routine operation,

simulate intervention operation at the worst case, and cover all surfaces that may come into contact with

the sterile product. In addition, all the simulated materials (surrogates or growth medium) should be

subjected to microbial evaluation. The simulation materials should be sufficient to satisfy the evaluation

of the process being simulated and should not compromise the recovery of micro-organisms.



9.38 APS should be performed as part of the initial validation, with at least three consecutive

satisfactory simulation tests that cover all working shifts that the aseptic process may occur in, and after

any significant modification to operational practices, facilities, services or equipment which are

assessed to have an impact on the sterility assurance of the product (e.g. modification to the HVAC

system, equipment, changes to process, number of shifts and numbers of personnel, major facility shut

down). Normally, APS (periodic revalidation) should be repeated twice a year (approximately every six

months) for each aseptic process, each filling line and each shift. Each operator should participate in at

least one successful APS annually. Consideration should be given to performing an APS after the last

batch prior to shut down, before long periods of inactivity or before decommissioning or relocation of

a line.



9.39 Where manual operation (e.g. aseptic compounding or filling) occurs, each type of container,

container closure and equipment train should be initially validated with each operator participating in

at least 3 consecutive successful APS and revalidated with one APS approximately every 6 months for

each operator. The APS batch size should mimic that used in the routine aseptic manufacturing process.



9.40 The number of units processed (filled) for APS should be sufficient to effectively simulate all

activities that are representative of the aseptic manufacturing process. Justification for the number of

units to be filled should be clearly captured in the CCS. Typically, a minimum of 5000 to 10000 units

are filled. For small batches (e.g. those under 5000 units), the number of containers for APS should at

least equal the size of the production batch.



9.41 Filled APS units should be agitated, swirled or inverted before incubation to ensure contact of

the media with all interior surfaces in the container. All integral units from the APS should be incubated

and evaluated, including units with cosmetic defects or those which have gone through non-destructive



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  49 of 58  9 September 2022

in-process control checks. If units are discarded during the process simulation and not incubated, these

should be comparable with units discarded during a routine fill, and only if production SOPs clearly

specify that units must be removed under the same circumstances (i.e. type of intervention; line location;

specific number of units removed). In no case should more units be removed during a media fill

intervention than would be cleared during a production run. Examples may include those that must be

discarded during routine production after the set-up process or following a specific type of intervention.

To fully understand the process and assess contamination risks during aseptic setup or mandatory line

clearances, these units would typically be incubated separately, and would not necessarily be included

in the acceptance criteria for the APS.



9.42 Where processes include materials that contact the product contact surfaces but are then

discarded (e.g. product flushes), the discarded material should be simulated with nutrient media and be

incubated as part of the APS, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that this waste process would not

impact the sterility of the product.



9.43 Filled APS units should be incubated in a clear container to ensure visual detection of microbial

growth. Where the product container is not clear (e.g. amber glass, opaque plastic), clear containers of

identical configuration may be substituted to aid in the detection of contamination. When a clear

container of identical configuration cannot be substituted, a suitable method for the detection of

microbial growth should be developed and validated. Microorganisms isolated from contaminated units

should be identified to the species level when practical, to assist in the determination of the likely source

of the contaminant.



9.44 Filled APS units should be incubated without unnecessary delay to achieve the best possible

recovery of potential contamination. The selection of the incubation conditions and duration should be

scientifically justified and validated to provide an appropriate level of sensitivity of detection of

microbial contamination.



9.45 On completion of incubation:



    i. Filled APS units should be inspected by personnel who have been appropriately trained and

         qualified for the detection of microbiological contamination. Inspection should be conducted

         under conditions that facilitate the identification of any microbial contamination.



   ii. Samples of the filled units should undergo positive control by inoculation with a suitable

         range of reference organisms and suitably representative local isolates.



9.46 The target should be zero growth. Any contaminated unit should result in a failed APS and the

following actions should be taken:



      i. an investigation to determine the most probable root cause(s);



     ii. determination and implementation of appropriate corrective measures;



    iii. a sufficient number of successful, consecutive repeat APS (normally a minimum of 3) should

         be conducted in order to demonstrate that the process has been returned to a state of control;



    iv. a prompt review of all appropriate records relating to aseptic production since the last successful

         APS;



              a) The outcome of the review should include a risk assessment of potential sterile breaches

                   in batches manufactured since the last successful APS.



              b) All other batches not released to the market should be included in the scope of the

                   investigation. Any decision regarding their release status should consider the

                   investigation outcome.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  50 of 58  9 September 2022

     v. all products that have been manufactured on a line subsequent to a process simulation failure

         should be quarantined until a successful resolution of the process simulation failure has

         occurred;



    vi. where the root cause investigation indicates that the failure was related to operator activity,

         actions to limit the operator's activities, until retrained and requalified, should be taken;



   vii. production should resume only after completion of successful revalidation.



9.47 All APS runs should be fully documented and include a reconciliation of units processed (e.g.

units filled, incubated and not incubated). Justification for filled and non-incubated units should be

included in the documentation. All interventions performed during the APS should be recorded,

including the start and end time of each intervention and the involved person. All microbial monitoring

data as well as other testing data should be recorded in the APS batch record.



9.48 An APS run should be aborted only under circumstances in which written procedures require

commercial lots to be equally handled. An investigation should be documented in such cases.



9.49 An aseptic process should be subject to a repeat of the initial validation when:



      i. the specific aseptic process has not been in operation for an extended period of time; or



     ii. there is a change to the process, equipment, procedures or environment that has the potential

           to affect the aseptic process or an addition of new product containers or container-closure

           combinations.



