Glossary



Airlock ­ An enclosed space with interlocked doors, constructed to maintain air pressure control

between adjoining rooms (generally with different air cleanliness standards). The intent of an airlock

is to preclude ingress of particle matter and microorganism contamination from a lesser controlled

area.



Action limit ­ An established relevant measure (e.g. microbial, or airborne particle limits) that, when

exceeded, should trigger appropriate investigation and corrective action based on the investigation.



Alert level ­ An established relevant measure (e.g. microbial, or airborne particle levels) giving early

warning of potential drift from normal operating conditions and validated state, which does not

necessarily give grounds for corrective action but triggers appropriate scrutiny and follow-up to address

the potential problem. Alert levels are established based on routine and qualification trend data and are

periodically reviewed. The alert level can be based on a number of parameters including adverse trends,

individual excursions above a set limit and repeat events.



Aseptic preparation/processing ­ The handling of sterile product, containers and/or devices in a

controlled environment in which the air supply, materials and personnel are regulated to prevent

microbial, endotoxin/pyrogen and particle contamination.



Aseptic Process Simulation (APS) ­ A simulation of the entire aseptic manufacturing process in order

to verify the capability of the process to assure product sterility. Includes all aseptic operations

associated with routine manufacturing, e.g. equipment assembly, formulation, filling, lyophilization and

sealing processes as necessary.



Asepsis ­ A state of control attained by using an aseptic work area and performing activities in a manner

that precludes microbial contamination of the exposed sterile product.



Bacterial retention testing ­ This test is performed to validate that a filter can remove bacteria from a

gas or liquid. The test is usually performed using a standard organism, such as Brevundimonas

diminuta at a minimum concentration of 107 Colony Forming Units/cm2.



Barrier ­ A physical partition that affords aseptic processing area (usually grade A) protection by

separating it from the background environment. Such systems frequently use in part or totally the

Barrier Technologies known as RABS or isolators.



Bioburden ­ The total number of microorganisms associated with a specific item such as personnel,

manufacturing environments (air and surfaces), equipment, product packaging, raw materials (including

water), in-process materials, or finished products.



Bio-decontamination - A process that eliminates viable bioburden via use of sporicidal chemical agents.



Biological Indicators (BI) ­ A population of microorganisms inoculated onto a suitable medium (e.g.

solution, container or closure) and placed within a steriliser or load or room locations to determine the

sterilisation or disinfection cycle efficacy of a physical or chemical process. The challenge

microorganism is selected and validated based upon its resistance to the given process. Incoming lot D-

value, microbiological count and purity define the quality of the BI.



Blow-Fill-Seal (BFS) ­ A technology in which containers are formed from a thermoplastic granulate,

filled with product, and then sealed in a continuous, integrated, automatic operation. The two most

common types of BFS machines are the Shuttle type (with Parison cut) and the Rotary type (Closed

Parison).



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  53 of 58  9 September 2022

Campaign manufacture ­ A manufacture of a series of batches of the same product in sequence in a

given period of time with strict adherence to established and validated control measures.



Classified area ­ An area that contains a number of cleanrooms (see cleanroom definition).



Cleaning ­ A process for removing contamination e.g. product residues or disinfectant residues.



Clean area ­ An area with defined particle and microbiological cleanliness standards usually containing

a number of joined cleanrooms.



Cleanroom ­ A room designed, maintained, and controlled to prevent particle and microbial

contamination of drug products. Such a room is assigned and reproducibly meets an appropriate air

cleanliness level.



Cleanroom classification ­ A method of assessing the level of air cleanliness against a specification for

a cleanroom or clean air equipment by measuring the total particle concentration.



Cleanroom qualification ­ A method of assessing the level of compliance of a classified cleanroom or

clean air equipment with its intended use.



Closed system ­ A system in which the product is not exposed to the surrounding environment. For

example, this can be achieved by the use of bulk product holders (such as tanks or bags) that are

connected to each other by pipes or tubes as a system, and where used for sterile products, the full

system is sterilised after the connections are made. Examples of these can be (but are not limited to)

large scale reusable systems, such as those seen in active substance manufacturing, or disposable bag

and manifold systems, such as those seen in the manufacture of biological products. Closed systems are

not opened until the conclusion of an operation. The use of the term "closed systems" in this Annex

does not refer to systems such as RABS or isolator systems.



Colony Forming Unit (CFU) ­ A microbiological term that describes a single detectable colony that

originates from one or more microorganisms. Colony forming units are typically expressed as CFU per

ml for liquid samples, CFU per m3 for air sample and CFU per sample for samples captured on solid

medium such as settle or contact plates.



Contamination ­ The undesired introduction of impurities of a microbiological nature (quantity and

type of microorganisms, pyrogen), or of foreign particle matter, into or onto a raw material,

intermediate, active substance or drug product during production, sampling, packaging or repackaging,

storage or transport with the potential to adversely impact product quality.



Contamination Control Strategy (CCS) ­ A planned set of controls for microorganisms,

endotoxin/pyrogen and particles, derived from current product and process understanding that assures

process performance and product quality. The controls can include parameters and attributes related to

active substance, excipient and drug product materials and components, facility and equipment

operating conditions, in-process controls, finished product specifications, and the associated methods

and frequency of monitoring and control.



Corrective intervention ­ An intervention that is performed to correct or adjust an aseptic process during

its execution. These may not occur at a set frequency in the routine aseptic process. Examples include

such as clearing component jams, stopping leaks, adjusting sensors, and replacing equipment

components.



Critical surfaces ­ Surfaces that may come directly into contact with, or directly affect, a sterile product

or its containers or closures. Critical surfaces are rendered sterile prior to the start of the manufacturing

operation, and sterility is maintained throughout processing.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  54 of 58  9 September 2022

Critical zone ­ A location within the aseptic processing area in which product and critical surfaces are

exposed to the environment.



Critical intervention ­ An intervention (corrective or inherent) into the critical zone.



D-value ­ The value of a parameter of sterilisation (duration or absorbed dose) required to reduce the

number of viable organisms to 10 per cent of the original number.



Dead leg ­ Length of non-circulating pipe (where fluid may remain static) that is greater than 3 internal

pipe diameters.



Decommission ­ When a process, equipment or cleanroom are closed and they will not be used again.



Decontamination ­ The overall process of removal or reduction of any contaminants (chemical, waste,

residue or microorganisms) from an area, object, or person. The method of decontamination used (e.g.

cleaning, disinfection, sterilisation) should be chosen and validated to achieve a level of cleanliness

appropriate to the intended use of the item decontaminated. See also Bio-decontamination.



Depyrogenation ­ A process designed to remove or inactivate pyrogenic material (e.g. endotoxin) to a

specified minimum quantity.



Disinfection ­ The process by which the reduction of the number of microorganisms is achieved by the

irreversible action of a product on their structure or metabolism, to a level deemed to be appropriate for

a defined purpose.



Endotoxin ­ A pyrogenic product (i.e. lipopolysaccharide) present in the Gram negative bacterial cell

wall. Endotoxin can lead to reactions in patients receiving injections ranging from fever to death.



Equilibration time ­ Period which elapses between the attainment of the sterilisation temperature at the

reference measurement point and the attainment of the sterilisation temperature at all points within the

load.



Extractables - Chemical entities that migrate from the surface of the process equipment, exposed to an

appropriate solvent at extreme conditions, into the product or material being processed.



First Air ­ Refers to filtered air that has not been interrupted prior to contacting exposed product and

product contact surfaces with the potential to add contamination to the air prior to reaching the critical

zone.



Filter Integrity test - A test to confirm that a filter (product, gas or HVAC filter) retain their retentive

properties and have not been damaged during handling, installation or processing.



Form-Fill-Seal (FFS) ­An automated filling process, typically used for terminally sterilised products,

which constructs the primary container out of a continuous flat roll of packaging film while

simultaneously filling the formed container with product and sealing the filled containers in a

continuous process. FFS processes may utilize a single web system (where a single flat roll of film is

wrapped around itself to form a cavity), or a dual web system (where two flat rolls of film are brought

together to form a cavity), often with the aid of vacuum moulds or pressurised gases. The formed cavity

is filled, sealed and cut into sections. Films typically consist of a polymeric material, polymeric coated

foil or other suitable material.



Gowning qualification ­ A programme that establishes, both initially and on a periodic basis, the

capability of an individual to don the complete gown.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  55 of 58  9 September 2022

Grade A air supply ­ Air which is passed through a filter qualified as capable of producing grade A

total particle quality air, but where there is no requirement to perform continuous total particle

monitoring or meet grade A viable monitoring limits. Specifically used for the protection of fully

stoppered vials where the cap has not yet been crimped.



HEPA filter ­ High efficiency particulate air filter specified in accordance with a relevant international

standard.



Inherent interventions ­ An intervention that is an integral part of the aseptic process and is required for

either set-up, routine operation and/or monitoring (e.g. aseptic assembly, container replenishment,

environmental sampling). Inherent interventions are required by procedure or work instruction for the

execution of the aseptic process.



Intrinsic sterile connection device ­ A device that reduces the risk of contamination during the

connection process; these can be mechanical or fusion sealing.



Isokinetic sampling head ­ A sampling head designed to disturb the air as little as possible so that the

same particles go into the nozzle as would have passed the area if the nozzle had not been there (i.e. the

sampling condition in which the mean velocity of the air entering the sample probe inlet is nearly the

same (± 20 percent) as the mean velocity of the airflow at that location).



Isolator ­ An enclosure capable of being subject to reproducible interior bio-decontamination, with an

internal work zone meeting grade A conditions that provides uncompromised, continuous isolation of

its interior from the external environment (e.g. surrounding cleanroom air and personnel). There are

two major types of isolators:



i.   Closed isolator systems exclude external contamination of the isolator's interior by



     accomplishing material transfer via aseptic connection to auxiliary equipment, rather



     than use of openings to the surrounding environment. Closed systems remain sealed



     throughout operations.



ii.  Open isolator systems are designed to allow for the continuous or semi-continuous



     ingress and/or egress of materials during operations through one or more openings.



     Openings are engineered (e.g. using continuous overpressure) to exclude the entry of



     external contaminant into the isolator.



Leachables ­ Chemical entities that migrate into products from the product contact surface of the

process equipment or containers under normal condition of use and/or storage.



Local isolates ­ Suitably representative microorganisms of the site that are frequently recovered through

environmental monitoring within the classified zone/areas especially grade A and B areas, personnel

monitoring or positive sterility test results.



Lyophilization ­ A physical-chemical drying process designed to remove solvents, by way of

sublimation, from both aqueous and non-aqueous systems, primarily to achieve product or material

stability. Lyophilization is synonymous to the term freeze-drying.



Manual aseptic processing­ An aseptic process where the operator manually compounds, fills, places

and /or seals an open container with sterile product.



Operator - Any individual participating in the processing operation, including line set-up, filling,

maintenance, or other personnel associated with manufacturing activities.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)      56 of 58         9 September 2022

Overkill sterilisation ­ A process that is sufficient to provide at least a 12 log10 reduction of

microorganisms having a minimum D-value of 1 minute.



Parison ­ The "tube" of polymer extruded by the BFS machine from which containers are formed.



Pass-through hatch ­ Synonymous with airlock (see airlock definition) but typically smaller in size.



Patient ­ Human or animal including participants in a clinical trial.



Post-aseptic processing terminal heat treatment­ A terminal moist heat process employed after aseptic

processing which has been demonstrated to provide a sterility assurance level (SAL) 10-6 but where

the requirements of steam sterilisation (for example, F08 min) are not fulfilled. This may also be

beneficial in the destruction of viruses that may not be removed through filtration.



Pyrogen ­ A substance that induces a febrile reaction in patients receiving injections;



Rapid Transfer System/Port (RTP) ­ A System used for the transfer of items into RABS or isolators

that minimizes the risk to the critical zone. An example would be a rapid transfer container with an

alpha/beta port.



Raw material ­ Any ingredient intended for use in the manufacture of a sterile product, including those

that may not appear in the final drug product.



Restricted Access Barrier System (RABS) ­ System that provides an enclosed, but not fully sealed,

environment meeting defined air quality conditions (for aseptic processing grade A), and using a rigid-

wall enclosure and integrated gloves to separate its interior from the surrounding cleanroom

environment. The inner surfaces of the RABS are disinfected and decontaminated with a sporicidal

agent. Operators use gloves, half suits, RTPs and other integrated transfer ports to perform

manipulations or convey materials to the interior of the RABS. Depending on the design, doors are

rarely opened, and only under strictly pre-defined conditions.



Single Use Systems (SUS) ­ Systems in which product contact components are used only once to

replace reusable equipment such as stainless steel transfer lines or bulk containers. SUS covered in this

document are those that are used in manufacturing processes of sterile products and are typically made

up of disposable components such as bags, filters, tubing, connectors, storage bottles and sensors.



Sporicidal agent ­ An agent that destroys bacterial and fungal spores when used in sufficient

concentration for specified contact time. It is expected to kill all vegetative microorganisms.



Sterile Product ­ For purpose of this guidance, sterile product refers to one or more of the sterilised

elements exposed to aseptic conditions and ultimately making up the sterile active substance or finished

sterile product. These elements include the containers, closures, and components of the finished drug

product. Or, a product that is rendered sterile by a terminal sterilisation process.



Sterilising grade filter ­ A filter that, when appropriately validated, will remove a defined microbial

challenge from a fluid or gas producing a sterile effluent. Usually such filters have a pore size equal or

less than 0.22 µm.



Terminal Sterilisation ­ The application of a lethal sterilising agent or conditions to a product in its final

container to achieve a predetermined sterility assurance level (SAL) of 10  or better (e.g. the

theoretical probability of there being a single viable microorganism present on or in a sterilised unit is

equal to or less than 1 x 10-6 (one in a million)).



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  57 of 58  9 September 2022

Turbulent airflow ­ Air that is not unidirectional. Turbulent air in cleanrooms should flush the

cleanroom via mixed flow dilution and ensure maintenance of acceptable air quality.



Unidirectional airflow ­ An airflow moving in a single direction, in a robust and uniform manner, and

at sufficient speed, to reproducibly sweep particles away from the critical processing or testing area.



Unidirectional Airflow (UDAF) unit ­ A cabinet supplied with filtered unidirectional airflow

(previously referred to as a Laminar Airflow Unit or LAF).



Worst case ­ A set of conditions encompassing processing limits and circumstances, including those

within standard operating procedures, that pose the greatest chance of process or product failure (when

compared with ideal conditions). Such conditions have the highest potential to, but do not necessarily

always result in product or process failure.



Water system ­ A system for producing, storing and distributing water, usually compliant to a specific

pharmacopeia grade (e.g. purified water and water for injection (WFI)).



Z-value ­ The temperature difference that leads to a 10-fold change in the D-value of the biological

indicators.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  58 of 58  9 September 2022

