6  Utilities



6.1 The nature and extent of controls applied to utility systems should be commensurate with the

risk to product quality associated with the utility. The impact should be determined via a risk assessment

and documented as part of the CCS.



6.2 In general, higher risk utilities are those that:



   i. directly contact product e.g. water for washing and rinsing, gases and steam for sterilisation,



   ii. contact materials that will ultimately become part of the product,



   iii. contact surfaces that come into contact with the product,



   iv. otherwise directly impact the product.



6.3 Utilities should be designed, installed, qualified, operated, maintained and monitored in a

manner to ensure that the utility system functions as expected.



6.4 Results for critical parameters and critical quality attributes of high risk utilities should be

subject to regular trend analysis to ensure that system capabilities remain appropriate.



6.5 Records of utility system installation should be maintained throughout the system's life-cycle.

Such records should include current drawings and schematic diagrams, construction material lists and

system specifications. Typically, important information includes attributes such as:



   i. pipeline flow direction, slopes, diameter and length,



   ii. tank and vessel details,



   iii. valves, filters, drains, sampling and user points,



6.6 Pipes, ducts and other utilities should not be present in cleanrooms. If unavoidable, then they

should be installed so that they do not create recesses, unsealed openings and surfaces which are

difficult to clean. Installation should allow cleaning and disinfection of outer surface of the pipes.



Water systems



6.7 Water treatment plant and distribution systems should be designed, constructed, installed,

commissioned, qualified, monitored and maintained to prevent microbiological contamination and to

ensure a reliable source of water of an appropriate quality. Measures should be taken to minimize the

risk of presence of particulates, microbial contamination/proliferation and endotoxin/pyrogen (e.g.

sloping of piping to provide complete drainage and the avoidance of dead legs). Where filters are

included in the system, special attention should be given to their monitoring and maintenance. Water



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)          16 of 58                                  9 September 2022

produced should comply with the current monograph of the relevant Pharmacopeia.



6.8 Water systems should be qualified and validated to maintain the appropriate levels of physical,

chemical and microbial control, taking the effect of seasonal variation into account.



6.9 Water flow should remain turbulent through the pipes in water distribution systems to minimize

the risk of microbial adhesion, and subsequent biofilm formation. The flow rate should be established

during qualification and be routinely monitored.



6.10 Water for injections (WFI) should be produced from water meeting specifications that have

been defined during the qualification process, stored and distributed in a manner which minimizes the

risk of microbial growth (e.g. by constant circulation at a temperature above 70°C). WFI should be

produced by distillation or by a purification process that is equivalent to distillation. This may include

reverse osmosis coupled with other appropriate techniques such as electrodeionization (EDI),

ultrafiltration or nanofiltration.



6.11 Where WFI storage tanks are equipped with hydrophobic bacteria retentive vent filters, the

filters should not be a source of contamination and the integrity of the filter tested before installation

and after use. Controls should be in place to prevent condensation formation on the filter (e.g. by

heating).



6.12 To minimize the risk of biofilm formation, sterilisation, disinfection or regeneration of water

systems should be carried out according to a predetermined schedule and as a remedial action

following out-of-limit or specification results. Disinfection of a water system with chemicals should

be followed by a validated rinsing/flushing procedure. Water should be tested after

disinfection/regeneration. Chemical testing results should be approved before the water system is

returned to use and microbiological/endotoxin results verified to be within specification and approved

before batches manufactured using water from the system are considered for certification/release.



6.13 Regular ongoing chemical and microbial monitoring of water systems should be performed to

ensure that the water continues to meet compendial expectations. Alert levels should be based on the

initial qualification data and thereafter periodically reassessed on data obtained during subsequent re-

qualifications, routine monitoring, and investigations. Review of ongoing monitoring data should be

carried out to identify any adverse trend in system performance. Sampling programmes should reflect

the requirements of the CCS and should include all outlets and points of use, at a specified interval, to

ensure that representative water samples are obtained for analysis on a regular basis. Sample plans

should be based on the qualification data, should consider the potential worst case sampling locations

and should ensure that at least one representative sample is included every day of the water that is used

for manufacturing processes.



6.14 Alert level excursions should be documented and reviewed, and include an investigation to

determine whether the excursion is a single (isolated) event or if results are indicative of an adverse

trend or system deterioration. Each action limit excursion should be investigated to determine the

probable root causes and any potential impact on the quality of products and manufacturing processes

as a result of the use of the water.



6.15 WFI systems should include continuous monitoring systems such as Total Organic Carbon

(TOC) and conductivity, as these may give a better indication of overall system performance than

discrete sampling. Sensor locations should be based on risk.



Steam used as a direct sterilising agent



6.16 Feed water to a pure steam (clean steam) generator should be appropriately purified. Pure

steam generators should be designed, qualified and operated in a manner to ensure that the quality of



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  17 of 58  9 September 2022

steam produced meets defined chemical and endotoxin levels.



6.17 Steam used as a direct sterilising agent should be of suitable quality and should not contain

additives at a level which could cause contamination of product or equipment. For a generator

supplying pure steam used for the direct sterilisation of materials or product-contact surfaces (e.g.

porous / hard-good autoclave loads), steam condensate should meet the current monograph for WFI

of the relevant Pharmacopeia (microbial testing is not mandatory for steam condensate). A suitable

sampling schedule should be in place to ensure that representative pure steam is obtained for analysis

on a regular basis. Other aspects of the quality of pure steam used for sterilisation should be assessed

periodically against validated parameters. These parameters should include the following (unless

otherwise justified): non-condensable gases, dryness value (dryness fraction) and superheat.



Gases and vacuum systems



6.18 Gases that come in direct contact with the product/primary container surfaces should be of

appropriate chemical, particulate and microbial quality. All relevant parameters, including oil and

water content, should be specified, taking into account the use and type of the gas, the design of the

gas generation system and, where applicable, comply with the current monograph of the relevant

Pharmacopeia or the product quality requirement.



6.19 Gases used in aseptic processes should be filtered through a sterilising grade filter (with a

nominal pore size of a maximum of 0.22 µm) at the point of use. Where the filter is used on a batch

basis (e.g. for filtration of gas used for overlay of aseptically filled products) or as product vessel vent

filter, then the filter should be integrity tested and the results reviewed as part of the batch

certification/release process. Any transfer pipework or tubing that is located after the final sterilising

grade filter should be sterilised. When gases are used in the process, microbial monitoring of the gas

should be performed periodically at the point of use.



6.20 Where backflow from vacuum or pressure systems poses a potential risk to the product, there

should be mechanism(s) to prevent backflow when the vacuum or pressure system is shut off.



Heating and cooling and hydraulic systems



6.21 Major items of equipment associated with hydraulic, heating and cooling systems should, where

possible, be located outside the filling room. There should be appropriate controls to contain any

spillage and/or cross contamination associated with the system fluids.



6.22 Any leaks from these systems that would present a risk to the product should be detectable (e.g.

an indication system for leakage).



