3  Pharmaceutical Quality System (PQS)



3.1 The manufacture of sterile products is a complex activity that requires specific controls and

measures to ensure the quality of products manufactured. Accordingly, the manufacturer's PQS should

encompass and address the specific requirements of sterile product manufacture and ensure that all

activities are effectively controlled so that the risk of microbial, particulate and endotoxin/pyrogen

contamination is minimized in sterile products. In addition to the PQS requirements detailed in Chapter

1 of the GMP Guide (Part I ­ Basic Requirements for Medicinal Products), the PQS for sterile product

manufacture should also ensure that:



   i. An effective risk management system is integrated into all areas of the product life cycle with

        the aim to minimize microbial contamination and to ensure the quality of sterile products

        manufactured.



   ii. The manufacturer has sufficient knowledge and expertise in relation to the products

         manufactured and the equipment, engineering and manufacturing methods employed that have

         an impact on product quality.



   iii. Root cause analysis of procedural, process or equipment failure is performed in such a way that

          the risk to product is correctly identified and understood so that suitable corrective and

          preventive actions (CAPA) are implemented.



   iv. Risk management is applied in the development and maintenance of the CCS, to identify,

         assess, reduce/eliminate (where applicable) and control contamination risks. Risk management

         should be documented and should include the rationale for decisions taken in relation to risk

         reduction and acceptance of residual risk.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  5 of 58        9 September 2022

   v. Senior management should effectively oversee the state of control throughout the facility and

         product lifecycle. Risk management outcome should be reviewed regularly as part of the on-

         going quality management, during change, in the event of a significant emerging problem, and

         during the periodic product quality review.



  vi. Processes associated with the finishing, storage and transport of sterile products should not

         compromise the sterile product. Aspects that should be considered include: container integrity,

         risks of contamination and avoidance of degradation by ensuring that products are stored and

         maintained in accordance with the registered storage conditions.



 vii. Persons responsible for the certification/release of sterile products have appropriate access to

         manufacturing and quality information and possess adequate knowledge and experience in the

         manufacture of sterile products and the associated critical quality attributes. This is in order to

         allow such persons to determine if the sterile products have been manufactured in accordance

         with the registered specifications and approved process and are of the required quality.



3.2 All non-conformities, such as sterility test failures, environmental monitoring excursions or

deviations from established procedures should be adequately investigated before certification/release

of the batch. The investigation should determine the potential impact upon process and product quality

and whether any other processes or batches are potentially impacted. The reason for including or

excluding a product or batch from the scope of the investigation should be clearly justified and recorded.



