7  Personnel



7.1 The manufacturer should ensure that there are sufficient appropriate personnel, suitably

qualified, trained and experienced in the manufacture and testing of sterile products, and any of the

specific manufacturing technologies used in the site's manufacturing operations, to ensure compliance

with GMP applicable to the manufacture and handling of sterile products.



7.2 Only the minimum number of personnel required should be present in cleanrooms. The

maximum number of operators in cleanrooms should be determined, documented and considered

during activities such as initial qualification and APS, so as not to compromise sterility assurance.



7.3 All personnel including those performing cleaning, maintenance, monitoring and those that

access cleanrooms should receive regular training, gowning qualification and assessment in disciplines

relevant to the correct manufacture of sterile products. This training should include the basic elements



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)   18 of 58                           9 September 2022

of microbiology and hygiene, with a specific focus on cleanroom practices, contamination control,

aseptic techniques and the protection of sterile products (for those operators entering the grade B

cleanrooms and/or intervening into grade A) and the potential safety implications to the patient if the

product is not sterile. The level of training should be based on the criticality of the function and area

in which the personnel are working.



7.4 The personnel accessing grade A and B areas should be trained for aseptic gowning and aseptic

behaviours. Compliance with aseptic gowning procedures should be confirmed by assessment and

periodic reassessment at least annually, and should involve both visual and microbial assessment

(using monitoring locations such as gloved fingers, forearms, chest and hood (facemask / forehead).

See paragraph 9.30 for the expected limits). The unsupervised access to the grade A and grade B areas

where aseptic operations are or will be conducted should be restricted to appropriately qualified

personnel, who have passed the gowning assessment and have participated in a successful APS.



7.5 Unqualified personnel should not enter grade B cleanrooms or grade A in operation. If needed

in exceptional cases, manufacturers should establish written procedures outlining the process by which

unqualified personnel are brought into the grade B and A areas. An authorized person from the

manufacturer should supervise the unqualified personnel during their activities and should assess the

impact of these activities on the cleanliness of the area. Access by these persons should be assessed

and recorded in accordance with the PQS.



7.6 There should be systems in place for the disqualification of personnel from working in or

given unsupervised entry into cleanrooms that is based on aspects including ongoing assessment

and/or identification of an adverse trend from the personnel monitoring programme and/or after being

implicated in a failed APS. Once disqualified, retraining and requalification should be completed

before permitting the operator to have any further involvement in aseptic practices. For operators

entering grade B cleanrooms or performing intervention into grade A, this requalification should

include consideration of participation in a successful APS.



7.7 High standards of personal hygiene and cleanliness are essential to prevent excessive shedding

or increased risk of introduction of microbial contamination. Personnel involved in the manufacture

of sterile products should be instructed to report any specific health conditions or ailments which may

cause the shedding of abnormal numbers or types of contaminants and therefore preclude cleanroom

access. Health conditions and actions to be taken with regard to personnel who could be introducing

an undue microbial hazard should be provided by the designated competent person and described in

procedures.



7.8 Personnel who have been engaged in the processing of human or animal tissue materials or of

cultures of micro-organisms, other than those used in the current manufacturing process, or any

activities that may have a negative impact to quality (e.g. microbial contamination), should not enter

clean areas unless clearly defined and effective decontamination and entry procedures have been

followed and documented.



7.9 Wristwatches, make-up, jewellery, other personal items such as mobile phones and any other

non-essential items should not be allowed in clean areas. Electronic devices used in cleanrooms, e.g.

mobile phones and tablets, that are supplied by the manufacturer solely for use in the cleanrooms, may

be acceptable if suitably designed to permit cleaning and disinfection commensurate with the grade in

which they are used. The use and disinfection of such equipment should be included in the CCS.



7.10 Cleanroom gowning and hand washing should follow a written procedure designed to

minimize contamination of cleanroom clothing and/or the transfer of contaminants to the clean areas.



7.11 The clothing and its quality should be appropriate for the process and the grade of the

working area. It should be worn in such a way as to protect the product from contamination. When the



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  19 of 58  9 September 2022

type of clothing chosen needs to provide the operator protection from the product, it should not

compromise the protection of the product from contamination. Garments should be visually checked

for cleanliness and integrity immediately prior to and after gowning. Gown integrity should also be

checked upon exit. For sterilised garments and eye coverings, particular attention should be taken to

ensure they have been subject to the sterilisation process, are within their specified hold time and that

the packaging is visually inspected to ensure it is integral before use. Reusable garments (including eye

coverings) should be replaced if damage is identified, or at a set frequency that is determined during

qualification studies. The qualification of garments should consider any necessary garment testing

requirements, including damage to garments that may not be identified by visual inspection alone.



7.12 Clothing should be chosen to limit shedding due to operators' movement.



7.13 A description of typical clothing required for each cleanliness grade is given below:



   i. Grade B (including access / interventions into grade A): appropriate garments that are

         dedicated for use under a sterilised suit should be worn before gowning (see paragraph 7.14).

         Appropriately sterilised, non-powdered, rubber or plastic gloves should be worn while

         donning the sterilised garments. Sterile headgear should enclose all hair (including facial hair)

         and where separate from the rest of the gown, it should be tucked into the neck of the sterile

         suit. A sterile facemask and sterile eye coverings (e.g. goggles) should be worn to cover and

         enclose all facial skin and prevent the shedding of droplets and particles. Appropriate

         sterilised footwear (e.g. over-boots) should be worn. Trouser legs should be tucked inside the

         footwear. Garment sleeves should be tucked into a second pair of sterile gloves worn over the

         pair worn while donning the gown. The protective clothing should minimize shedding of

         fibres or particles and retain particles shed by the body. The particle shedding and the particle

         retention efficiencies of the garments should be assessed during the garment qualification.

         Garments should be packed and folded in such a way as to allow operators to don the gown

         without contacting the outer surface of the garment and to prevent the garment from touching

         the floor.



  ii. Grade C: Hair, beards and moustaches should be covered. A single or two-piece trouser suit

         gathered at the wrists and with high neck and appropriately disinfected shoes or overshoes

         should be worn. They should minimize the shedding of fibres and particles.



 iii. Grade D: Hair, beards and moustaches should be covered. A general protective suit and

         appropriately disinfected shoes or overshoes should be worn. Appropriate measures should be

         taken to avoid any ingress of contaminants from outside the clean area.



 iv. Additional gowning including gloves and facemask may be required in grade C and D areas

         when performing activities considered to be a contamination risk as defined by the CCS.



7.14 Cleanroom gowning should be performed in change rooms of an appropriate cleanliness grade

to ensure gown cleanliness is maintained. Outdoor clothing including socks (other than personal

underwear) should not be brought into changing rooms leading directly to grade B and C areas. Single

or two-piece facility trouser suits, covering the full length of the arms and the legs, and facility socks

covering the feet, should be worn before entry to change rooms for grades B and C. Facility suits and

socks should not present a risk of contamination to the gowning area or processes.



7.15 Every operator entering grade B or A areas should gown into clean, sterilised protective

garments (including eye coverings and masks) of an appropriate size at each entry. The maximum

period for which the sterilised gown may be worn before replacement during a shift should be defined

as part of the garment qualification.



7.16 Gloves should be regularly disinfected during operations. Garments and gloves should be

changed immediately if they become damaged and present any risk of product contamination.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  20 of 58  9 September 2022

7.17 Reusable clean area clothing should be cleaned in a laundry facility adequately segregated

from production operations, using a qualified process ensuring that the clothing is not damaged and/or

contaminated by fibres or particles during the repeated laundry process. Laundry facilities used should

not introduce risk of contamination or cross-contamination. Inappropriate handling and use of clothing

may damage fibres and increase the risk of shedding of particles. After washing and before packing,

garments should be visually inspected for damage and visual cleanliness. The garment management

processes should be evaluated and determined as part of the garment qualification programme and

should include a maximum number of laundry and sterilisation cycles.



7.18 Activities in clean areas that are not critical to the production processes should be kept to a

minimum, especially when aseptic operations are in progress. Movement of personnel should be slow,

controlled and methodical to avoid excessive shedding of particles and organisms due to over-

vigorous activity. Operators performing aseptic operations should adhere to aseptic technique at all

times to prevent changes in air currents that may introduce air of lower quality into the critical zone.

Movement adjacent to the critical zone should be restricted and the obstruction of the path of the

unidirectional (first air) airflow should be avoided. A review of airflow visualisation studies should be

considered as part of the training programme.



