10 Quality Control (QC)



10.1 There should be personnel available with appropriate training and experience in microbiology,

sterility assurance and knowledge of the processes to support the design of the manufacturing activities,

environmental monitoring regime and any investigation assessing the impact of microbiologically

linked events to the safety of the sterile product.



10.2 Specifications for raw materials, components and products should include requirements for

microbial, particulate and endotoxin/pyrogen limits when the need for this has been indicated by

monitoring and/or by the CCS.



10.3 The bioburden assay should be performed on each batch for both aseptically filled product and

terminally sterilised products and the results considered as part of the final batch review. There should

be defined limits for bioburden immediately before the final sterilising grade filter or the terminal

sterilisation process, which are related to the efficiency of the method to be used. Samples should be

taken to be representative of the worst case scenario (e.g. at the end of hold time). Where overkill

sterilisation parameters are set for terminally sterilised products, bioburden should be monitored at

suitable scheduled intervals.



10.4 For products authorised for parametric release, a supporting pre-sterilisation bioburden

monitoring programme for the filled product prior to initiating the sterilisation cycle should be

developed and the bioburden assay should be performed for each batch. The sampling locations of

filled units before sterilisation should be based on a worst case scenario and be representative of the

batch. Any organisms found during bioburden testing should be identified and their impact on the

effectiveness of the sterilising process determined. Where appropriate, the level of endotoxin/pyrogen

should be monitored.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  51 of 58  9 September 2022

10.5 The sterility test applied to the finished product should only be regarded as the last in a series

of critical control measures by which sterility is assured. It cannot be used to assure sterility of a

product that does not meet its design, procedural or validation parameters. The test should be validated

for the product concerned.



10.6 The sterility test should be performed under aseptic conditions. Samples taken for sterility

testing should be representative of the whole of the batch but should in particular include samples

taken from parts of the batch considered to be most at risk of contamination, for example:



      i. For products which have been filled aseptically, samples should include containers filled at

           the beginning and end of the batch. Additional samples, e.g. taken after critical interventions

           should be considered based on risk.



     ii. For products which have been heat sterilised in their final containers, samples taken should

           be representative of the worst case locations (e.g. the potentially coolest or slowest to heat part

           of each load).



    iii. For products which have been lyophilized, samples taken from different lyophilization loads.



Note: Where the manufacturing process results in sub-batches (e.g. for terminally sterilised products)

then sterility samples from each sub-batch should be taken and a sterility test for each sub-batch

performed. Consideration should also be given to performing separate testing for other finished

product tests.



10.7 For some products it may not be possible to obtain a sterility test result prior to release because

the shelf life of the product is too short to allow completion of a sterility test. In these cases, the

additional considerations of design of the process and additional monitoring and/or alternative test

methods required to mitigate the identified risks should be assessed and documented.



10.8 Any process (e.g. Vaporized Hydrogen Peroxide, Ultra Violet) used to decontaminate the

external surfaces of sterility samples prior to testing should not negatively impact the sensitivity of the

test method or the reliability of the sample.



10.9 Media used for product testing should be quality control tested according to the related

Pharmacopeia before use. Media used for environmental monitoring and APS should be tested for

growth promotion before use, using a scientifically justified and designated group of reference

microorganisms and including suitably representative local isolates. Media quality control testing

should normally be performed by the end user. Any reliance on outsourced testing or supplier testing

of media should be justified and transportation and shipping conditions should be thoroughly considered

in this case.



10.10 Environmental monitoring data and trend data generated for classified areas should be

reviewed as part of product batch certification/release. A written procedure should be available that

describes the actions to be taken when data from environmental monitoring are found out of trend or

exceeding the established limits. For products with short shelf life, the environmental data for the time

of manufacture may not be available; in these cases, the compliance should include a review of the

most recent available data. Manufacturers of these products should consider the use of

rapid/alternative methods.



10.11 Where rapid and automated microbial methods are used for general manufacturing purposes,

these methods should be validated for the product(s) or processes concerned.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  52 of 58  9 September 2022

