                                 PHARMACEUTICAL INSPECTION CONVENTION

                         PHARMACEUTICAL INSPECTION CO-OPERATION SCHEME



                                                                         PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)

                                                                         9 September 2022



                          REVISED ANNEX 1

(MANUFACTURE OF STERILE MEDICINAL PRODUCTS)



                                     TO

 GUIDE TO GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICE FOR



                      MEDICINAL PRODUCTS



        Revised Annex 1 will be incorporated into the PIC/S GMP Guide (PE 009)

                               and enter into force on 25 August 2023,



               except for point 8.123 which is postponed until 25 August 2024



                                                 © PIC/S 2022

                         Reproduction prohibited for commercial purposes.



                             Reproduction for internal use is authorised,

                              provided that the source is acknowledged.



Editor:  PIC/S Secretariat

         14 rue du Roveray

         CH-1207 Geneva



e-mail: info@picscheme.org

web site: https://www.picscheme.org



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)              1 of 58                               9 September 2022

Document map



Section Number                General overview



1. Scope                      Includes additional areas (other than sterile products) where the

                              general principles of the annex can be applied.



2. Principle                  General principles as applied to the manufacture of sterile

                              products.



3. Pharmaceutical Quality     Highlights the specific requirements of the PQS when applied to

    System (PQS)              sterile products.



4. Premises                   General guidance regarding the specific needs for premises

                              design and also guidance on the qualification of premises

                              including the use of Barrier Technology.



5. Equipment                  General guidance on the design and operation of equipment.



6. Utilities                  Guidance regarding the special requirements of utilities such as

                              water, gas and vacuum.



7. Personnel                  Guidance on the requirements for specific training, knowledge

                              and skills. Also gives guidance regarding the qualification of

                              personnel.



8. Production and specific    Guidance on the approaches to be taken regarding aseptic and

    technologies              terminal sterilization processes. Guidance on the approaches to

                              sterilization of products, equipment and packaging components.

                              Also guidance on different technologies such as lyophilization

                              and Form-Fill-Seal where specific requirements apply.



9. Environmental and process  This section differs from guidance given in section 4 in that the

    monitoring                guidance here applies to ongoing routine monitoring regarding

                              the design of systems and setting of action limits alert levels and

                              reviewing trend data.



                              The section also gives guidance on the requirements of Aseptic

                              Process Simulations (APS).



10. Quality control (QC)      Guidance on some of the specific Quality Control requirements

                              relating to sterile products.



11. Glossary                  Explanation of specific terminology.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)       2 of 58                               9 September 2022

1  Scope



The manufacture of sterile products covers a wide range of sterile product types (active substance,

excipient, primary packaging material and finished dosage form), packed sizes (single unit to multiple

units), processes (from highly automated systems to manual processes) and technologies (e.g.

biotechnology, classical small molecule manufacturing systems and closed systems). This Annex

provides general guidance that should be used in the design and control of facilities, equipment, systems

and procedures used for the manufacture of all sterile products applying the principles of Quality Risk

Management (QRM), to ensure that microbial, particulate and endotoxin/pyrogen contamination is

prevented in the final product.



QRM applies to this document in its entirety and will not, normally, be referred to in specific

paragraphs. Where specific limits or frequencies or ranges are specified, these should be considered as

a minimum requirement. They are stated due to historical regulatory experience of issues that have been

identified and have impacted the safety of patients.



The intent of the Annex is to provide guidance for the manufacture of sterile products. However, some

of the principles and guidance, such as contamination control strategy, design of premises, cleanroom

classification, qualification, validation, monitoring and personnel gowning, may be used to support the

manufacture of other products that are not intended to be sterile such as certain liquids, creams,

ointments and low bioburden biological intermediates, but where the control and reduction of microbial,

particulate and endotoxin/pyrogen contamination is considered important. Where a manufacturer elects

to apply guidance herein to non-sterile products, the manufacturer should clearly document which

principles have been applied and acknowledge that compliance with those principles should be

demonstrated.



