Sterilisation by heat



8.50 Each heat sterilisation cycle should be recorded either electronically or by hardcopy, using

equipment with suitable accuracy and precision. The system should have safeguards and/or

redundancy in its control and monitoring instrumentation to detect a cycle not conforming to the

validated cycle parameter requirements and abort or fail this cycle (e.g. by the use of duplex/double

probes connected to independent control and monitoring systems).



8.51 The position of the temperature probes used for controlling and/or recording should be

determined during the validation and selected based on system design and in order to correctly record

and represent routine cycle conditions. Validation studies should be designed to demonstrate the

suitability of system control and recording probe locations, and should include the verification of the

function and location of these probes by the use of an independent monitoring probe located at the

same position during validation.



8.52 The whole of the load should reach the required temperature before measurement of the

sterilising time-period starts. For sterilisation cycles controlled by using a reference probe within the

load, specific consideration should be given to ensuring the load probe temperature is controlled within

defined temperature range prior to cycle commencement.



8.53 After completion of the high temperature phase of a heat sterilisation cycle, precautions

should be taken against contamination of a sterilised load during cooling. Any cooling liquid or gas

that comes into contact with the product or sterilised material should be sterilised.



8.54 In those cases where parametric release has been authorized, a robust system should be

applied to the product lifecycle validation and the routine monitoring of the manufacturing process.

This system should be periodically reviewed. Further guidance regarding parametric release is

provided in Annex 17.



Moist heat sterilisation



8.55 Moist heat sterilisation can be achieved using steam, (direct or indirect contact), but also

includes other systems such as superheated water systems (cascade or immersion cycles) that could be

used for containers that may be damaged by other cycle designs (e.g. Blow-Fill-Seal containers, plastic

bags).



8.56 The items to be sterilised, other than products in sealed containers, should be dry, packaged in

a protective barrier system which allows removal of air and penetration of steam and prevents

recontamination after sterilisation. All loaded items should be dry upon removal from the steriliser.

Load dryness should be confirmed by visual inspection as a part of the sterilisation process acceptance.



8.57 For porous cycles (hard goods), time, temperature and pressure should be used to

monitor the process and be recorded. Each sterilised item should be inspected for damage,

packaging material integrity and moisture on removal from the autoclave. Any item found not

to be fit for purpose should be removed from the manufacturing area and an investigation

performed.



8.58 For autoclaves capable of performing prevacuum sterilisation cycles, the temperature

should be recorded at the chamber drain throughout the sterilisation period. Load probes may

also be used where appropriate but the controlling system should remain related to the load

validation. For steam in place systems, the temperature should be recorded at appropriate



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  28 of 58  9 September 2022

condensate drain locations throughout the sterilisation period.



8.59 Validation of porous cycles should include a calculation of equilibration time, exposure time,

correlation of pressure and temperature and the minimum/maximum temperature range during

exposure. Validation of fluid cycles should include temperature, time and/or F0. Critical processing

parameters should be subject to defined limits (including appropriate tolerances) and be confirmed as

part of the sterilisation validation and routine cycle acceptance criteria.



8.60 Leak tests on the steriliser should be carried out periodically (normally weekly) when a vacuum

phase is part of the cycle or the system is returned, post-sterilisation, to a pressure lower than the

environment surrounding the steriliser.



8.61 There should be adequate assurance of air removal prior to and during sterilisation when the

sterilisation process includes air purging (e.g. porous autoclave loads, lyophilizer chambers). For

autoclaves, this should include an air removal test cycle (normally performed on a daily basis) or the

use of an air detector system. Loads to be sterilised should be designed to support effective air removal

and be free draining to prevent the build-up of condensate.



8.62 Distortion and damage of non-rigid containers that are terminally sterilised, such as containers

produced by Blow-Fill-Seal or Form-Fill-Seal technologies, should be prevented by appropriate cycle

design and control (for instance setting correct pressure, heating and cooling rates and loading patterns).



8.63 Where steam in place systems are used for sterilisation (e.g. for fixed pipework, vessels and

lyophilizer chambers), the system should be appropriately designed and validated to assure all parts

of the system are subjected to the required treatment. The system should be monitored for temperature,

pressure and time at appropriate locations during routine use to ensure all areas are effectively and

reproducibly sterilised. These locations should be demonstrated as being representative of, and

correlated with, the slowest to heat locations during initial and routine validation. Once a system has

been sterilised by steam in place, it should remain integral and where operations require, maintained

under positive pressure or otherwise equipped with a sterilising vent filter prior to use.



8.64 In fluids load cycles where superheated water is used as the heat transfer medium, the heated

water should consistently reach all of the required contact points. Initial qualification studies should

include temperature mapping of the entire load. There should be routine checks on the equipment to

ensure that nozzles (where the water is introduced) are not blocked and drains remain free from debris.



8.65 Validation of the sterilisation of fluids loads in a superheated water autoclave should include

temperature mapping of the entire load and heat penetration and reproducibility studies. All parts of

the load should heat up uniformly and achieve the desired temperature for the specified time. Routine

temperature monitoring probes should be correlated to the worst case positions identified during the

qualification process.



Dry heat sterilisation



8.66 Dry heat sterilisation utilizes high temperatures of air or gas to sterilise a product or article. Dry

heat sterilisation is of particular use in the thermal removal of difficult-to-eliminate thermally robust

contaminants such as endotoxin/pyrogen and is often used in the preparation of components for aseptic

filling. The combination of time and temperature to which product, components or equipment are

exposed should produce an adequate and reproducible level of lethality and/or endotoxin/pyrogen

inactivation/removal when operated routinely within the established limits. The process may be

operated in an oven or in a continuous tunnel process, e.g. for sterilisation and depyrogenation of glass

containers.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  29 of 58  9 September 2022

8.67 Dry heat sterilisation/depyrogenation tunnels should be configured to ensure that airflow

protects the integrity and performance of the grade A sterilising zone by maintaining appropriate

pressure differentials and airflow through the tunnel. Air pressure difference profiles should be

assessed. The impact of any airflow change should be assessed to ensure the heating profile is

maintained. All air supplied to the tunnel should pass through at least a HEPA filter and periodic tests

(at least biannually) should be performed to demonstrate air filter integrity. Any tunnel parts that come

into contact with sterilised components should be appropriately sterilised or disinfected. Critical process

parameters that should be considered during validation and/or routine processing should include, but

are not limited to:



    i. belt speed or dwell time within the sterilising zone,



   ii. temperature ­ minimum and maximum temperatures,



  iii. heat penetration of the material/article,



  iv. heat distribution/uniformity,



   v. airflows determined by air pressure difference profiles correlated with the heat distribution

           and penetration studies.



8.68 When a thermal process is used as part of the depyrogenation process for any component or

product contact equipment/material, validation studies should be performed to demonstrate that the

process provides a suitable Fh value and results in a minimum 3 log10 reduction in endotoxin

concentration. When this is attained, there is no additional requirement to demonstrate sterilisation in

these cases.



8.69 Containers spiked with endotoxin should be used during validation and should be carefully

managed with a full reconciliation performed. Containers should be representative of the materials

normally processed (in respect to composition of the packaging materials, porosity, dimensions,

nominal volume). Endotoxin quantification and recovery efficiency should also be demonstrated.



8.70 Dry heat ovens are typically employed to sterilise or depyrogenate primary packaging

components, starting materials or active substances but may be used for other processes. They should

be maintained at a positive pressure relative to lower grade clean areas throughout the sterilisation and

post sterilisation hold process unless the integrity of the packaging is maintained. All air entering the

oven should pass through a HEPA filter. Critical process parameters that should be considered in

qualification and/or routine processing should include, but are not limited to:



      i. temperature,



     ii. exposure period/time,



    iii. chamber pressure (for maintenance of over pressure),



    iv. air speed,



     v. air quality within the oven,



    vi. heat penetration of material/article (slow to heat spots),



   vii. heat distribution/uniformity,



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  30 of 58  9 September 2022

  viii. load pattern and configuration of articles to be sterilised/depyrogenated including minimum

           and maximum loads.



Sterilisation by radiation



8.71 Sterilisation by radiation is used mainly for the sterilisation of heat sensitive materials and

products. Ultraviolet irradiation is not an acceptable method of sterilisation. Guidance regarding

ionising radiation sterilisation can be found within Annex 12.



8.72 Validation procedures should ensure that the effects of variation in density of the product and

packages are considered.



Sterilisation with ethylene oxide



8.73 This method should only be used when no other method is practicable. During process

validation, it should be shown that there is no damaging effect on the product and that the

conditions and time allowed for degassing result in the reduction of any residual ethylene oxide (EO)

gas and reaction products to defined acceptable limits for the given product or material.



8.74 Direct contact between gas and microbial cells is essential, precautions should be taken to

avoid the presence of organisms likely to be enclosed in material such as crystals or dried protein. The

nature, porosity and quantity of packaging materials can significantly affect the process.



8.75 Before exposure to the gas, materials should be brought into equilibrium with the

humidity and temperature required by the process. Where steam is used to condition the load for

sterilisation, it should be of an appropriate quality. The time required for this should be balanced

against the opposing need to minimize the time before sterilisation.



8.76 Each sterilisation cycle should be monitored with suitable BIs, using the appropriate number

of test units distributed throughout the load at defined locations that have been shown to be worst

case locations during validation.



8.77 Critical process parameters that could be considered as part of the sterilisation process

validation and routine monitoring include, but are not limited to:



    i. EO gas concentration,



   ii. pressure,



  iii. amount of EO gas used,



  iv. relative humidity,



   v. temperature,



  vi. exposure time.



8.78 After sterilisation, the load should be aerated to allow EO gas and/or its reaction products to

desorb from the packaged product to predetermined levels. Aeration can occur within a steriliser

chamber and/or in a separate aeration chamber or aeration room. The aeration phase should be

validated as part of the overall EO sterilisation process validation.



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  31 of 58  9 September 2022

Filter sterilisation of products which cannot be sterilised in their final container



8.79 If the product cannot be sterilised in its final container, solutions or liquids should be sterilised

by filtration through a sterile sterilising grade filter (with a nominal pore size of a maximum of 0.22

µm that has been appropriately validated to obtain a sterile filtrate) and subsequently aseptically filled

into a previously sterilised container. The selection of the filter used should ensure that it is compatible

with the product and as described in the marketing authorization (see paragraph 8.135).



8.80 Suitable bioburden reduction prefilters and/or sterilising grade filters may be used at multiple

points during the manufacturing process to ensure a low and controlled bioburden of the liquid prior to

the final sterilising filter. Due to the potential additional risks of a sterile filtration process, as compared

with other sterilisation processes, an additional filtration through a sterile sterilising grade filter, as close

to the point of fill as possible, should be considered as part of an overall CCS.



8.81 The selection of components for the filtration system and their interconnection and arrangement

within the filtration system, including pre-filters, should be based on the critical quality attributes of the

product, justified and documented. The filtration system should minimize the generation of fibres and

particles, not cause or contribute to unacceptable levels of impurities, or possess characteristics that

otherwise alter the quality and efficacy of the product. Similarly, the filter characteristics should be

compatible with the fluid and not be adversely affected by the product to be filtered. Adsorption of

product components and extraction/leaching of filter components should be evaluated (see paragraph

8.135).



8.82 The filtration system should be designed to:



    i. allow operation within validated process parameters;



   ii. maintain the sterility of the filtrate;



  iii. minimize the number of aseptic connections required between the final sterilising grade filter

           and the final filling of the product;



  iv. allow cleaning procedures to be conducted as necessary;



   v. allow sterilisation procedures, including sterilisation in place, to be conducted as necessary;



  vi. permit in-place integrity testing, of the 0.22 µm final sterilising grade filter, preferably as a

           closed system, both prior to, and following filtration as necessary. In-place integrity testing

           methods should be selected to avoid any adverse impact on the quality of the product.



8.83 Sterile filtration of liquids should be validated in accordance with relevant Pharmacopeia

requirements. Validation can be grouped by different strengths or variations of a product but should be

done under worst case conditions. The rationale for grouping should be justified and documented.



8.84 During filter validation, wherever possible, the product to be filtered should be used for

bacterial retention testing of the sterilising grade filter. Where the product to be filtered is not suitable

for use in bacterial retention testing, a suitable surrogate product should be justified for use in the test.

The challenge organism used in the bacterial retention test should be justified.



8.85 Filtration parameters that should be considered and established during validation should

include, but are not limited to:



      i. The wetting fluid used for filter integrity testing:



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  32 of 58  9 September 2022

                It should be based on the filter manufacturer's recommendation or the fluid to be

                   filtered. The appropriate integrity test value specification should be established.



                If the system is flushed or integrity tested in-situ with a fluid other than the product,

                   appropriate actions are taken to avoid any deleterious effect on product quality.



     ii. Filtration process conditions including:



                fluid pre-filtration holding time and effect on bioburden,



                filter conditioning, with fluid if necessary,



                maximum filtration time/total time filter is in contact with the fluid,



                maximum operating pressure,



                flow rate,



                maximum filtration volume,



                temperature,



                the time taken to filter a known volume of bulk solution and the pressure difference

                   to be used across the filter.



8.86 Routine process controls should be implemented to ensure adherence to validated filtration

parameters. Results of critical process parameters should be included in the batch record, including but

not limited to the minimum time taken to filter a known volume of bulk solution and pressure difference

across the filter. Any significant difference from critical parameters during manufacturing should be

documented and investigated.



8.87 The integrity of the sterilised filter assembly should be verified by integrity testing before use

(pre-use post sterilisation integrity test or PUPSIT), to check for damage and loss of integrity caused

by the filter preparation prior to use. A sterilising grade filter that is used to sterilise a fluid should be

subject to a non-destructive integrity test post-use prior to removal of the filter from its housing. The

integrity test process should be validated and test results should correlate to the microbial retention

capability of the filter established during validation. Examples of tests that are used include bubble

point, diffusive flow, water intrusion or pressure hold test. It is recognized that PUPSIT may not always

be possible after sterilisation due to process constraints (e.g. the filtration of very small volumes of

solution). In these cases, an alternative approach may be taken providing that a thorough risk assessment

has been performed and compliance is achieved by the implementation of appropriate controls to

mitigate any risk of a non-integral filtration system. Points to consider in such a risk assessment should

include but are not limited to:



    i. in depth knowledge and control of the filter sterilisation process to ensure that the potential for

         damage to the filter is minimized,



   ii. in depth knowledge and control of the supply chain to include:



               contract sterilisation facilities,

               defined transport mechanisms,

               packaging of the sterilised filter, to prevent damage to the filter during transportation



                   and storage.



  iii. in depth process knowledge such as:



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  33 of 58  9 September 2022

               the specific product type, including particle burden and whether there exists any risk

                   of impact on filter integrity values, such as the potential to alter integrity-testing values

                   and therefore prevent the detection of a non-integral filter during a post-use filter

                   integrity test; and



               pre-filtration and processing steps, prior to the final sterilising grade filter, which would

                   remove particle burden and clarify the product prior to the sterile filtration.



8.88 The integrity of critical sterile gas and air vent filters (that are directly linked to the sterility of

the product) should be verified by testing after use, with the filter remaining in the filter assembly or

housing.



8.89 The integrity of non-critical air or gas vent filters should be confirmed and recorded at

appropriate intervals. Where gas filters are in place for extended periods, integrity testing should be

carried out at installation and prior to replacement. The maximum duration of use should be specified

and monitored based on risk (e.g. considering the maximum number of uses and heat treatment/

sterilisation cycles permitted as applicable).



8.90 For gas filtration, unintended moistening or wetting of the filter or filter equipment should be

avoided.



8.91 If the sterilising filtration process has been validated as a system consisting of multiple filters

to achieve the sterility for a given fluid, the filtration system is considered to be a single sterilising unit

and all filters within the system should satisfactorily pass integrity testing after use.



8.92 In a redundant filtration system (where a second redundant sterilising grade filter is present as

a backup but the sterilising process is validated as only requiring one filter), post-use integrity test of

the primary sterilising grade filter should be performed and if demonstrated to be integral, then a post-

use integrity test of the redundant (backup) filter is not necessary. However, in the event of a failure of

the post-use integrity test on the primary filter, post-use integrity test on the secondary (redundant) filter

should be performed, in conjunction with an investigation and risk assessment to determine the reason

for the primary filter test failure.



8.93 Bioburden samples should be taken from the bulk product and immediately prior to the final

sterile filtration. In case where a redundant filtration set-up is used, it should be taken prior to the first

filter. Systems for taking samples should be designed so as not to introduce contamination.



8.94 Liquid sterilising grade filters should be discarded after the processing of a single batch and the

same filter should not be used continuously for more than one working day unless such use has

been validated.



8.95 Where campaign manufacture of a product has been appropriately justified in the CCS and

validated, the filter user should:



      i. assess and document the risks associated with the duration of filter use for the sterile filtration

         process for a given fluid;



     ii. conduct and document effective validation and qualification studies to demonstrate that the

         duration of filter use for a given sterile filtration process and for a given fluid does not

         compromise performance of the final sterilising grade filter or filtrate quality;



    iii. document the maximum validated duration of use for the filter and implement controls to ensure

         that filters are not used beyond the validated maximum duration. Records of these controls

         should be maintained;



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  34 of 58  9 September 2022

    iv. implement controls to ensure that filters contaminated with fluid or cleaning agent residues, or

         considered defective in any other way, are removed from use.



Form-Fill-Seal (FFS)



8.96 The conditions for FFS machines used for terminally sterilised products should comply with

the environmental requirements of paragraphs 8.3 and 8.4 of this Annex. The conditions for FFS

machines used in aseptic manufacture should comply with the environmental requirements of paragraph

8.10 of this Annex.



8.97 Contamination of the packaging films used in the FFS process should be minimized by

appropriate controls during component fabrication, supply and handling. Due to the criticality of

packaging films, procedures should be implemented to ensure that the films supplied meet defined

specifications and are of the appropriate quality, including material thickness and strength, microbial

and particulate contamination, integrity and artwork, as relevant. The sampling frequency, the

bioburden and, where applicable, endotoxin/pyrogen levels of packaging films and associated

components should be defined and controlled within the PQS and considered in the CCS.



8.98 Particular attention should be given to understanding and assessing the operation of the

equipment, including set-up, filling, sealing and cutting processes, so that critical process parameters

are understood, validated, controlled and monitored appropriately.



8.99 Any product contact gases, e.g. those used to inflate the container or used as a product overlay,

should be appropriately filtered, as close to the point of use as possible. The quality of gases used and

the effectiveness of gas filtration systems should be verified periodically in accordance with paragraphs

6.18 and 6.19.



8.100 The controls identified during qualification of FFS should be in alignment with the CCS.

Aspects to be considered include but are not limited to:



        i. determination of the boundaries of the critical zone,



       ii. environmental control and monitoring, both of the machine and the background in which it is

           placed,



      iii. personnel gowning requirements,



      iv. integrity testing of the product filling lines and filtration systems (as relevant),



       v. duration of the batch or filling campaign,



      vi. control of packaging films, including any requirements for film decontamination or

           sterilisation,



     vii. cleaning-in-place and sterilisation-in-place of equipment as necessary,



    viii. machine operation, settings and alarm management (as relevant).



8.101 Critical process parameters for FFS should be determined during equipment qualification and

should include, but are not limited to:



PS/INF 26/2022 (Rev. 1)  35 of 58  9 September 2022

        i. settings for uniform package dimensions and cutting in accordance with validated parameters;



       ii. setting, maintenance and monitoring of validated forming temperatures (including pre-heating

           and cooling), forming times and pressures as relevant;



      iii. setting, maintenance and monitoring of validated sealing temperatures, sealing temperature

           uniformity across the seal, sealing times and pressures as relevant;



      iv. environmental and product temperature;



       v. batch-specific testing of package seal strength and uniformity;



      vi. settings for correct filling volumes, speeds and uniformity;



     vii. settings for any additional printing (batch coding), embossing or debossing to ensure that unit

           integrity is not compromised;



    viii. methods and parameters for integrity testing of filled containers (see paragraph 8.22).



8.102 Appropriate procedures for the verification, monitoring and recording of FFS critical process

parameters and equipment operation should be applied during production.



8.103 Operational procedures should describe how forming and sealing issues are detected and

