4.0	 Qualification
Qualification is a part of cleaning validation involving the traditional activities of equipment qualifica-
tion and process qualification. For cleaning validation purposes, equipment qualification focuses on 
qualifying (or verifying) the equipment used as part of the cleaning process, such as a CIP skid and 
automated parts washer. For fully manual cleaning operations, such as a brushing or scrubbing, there 
may be no equipment qualification activities. Design qualification has also been considered as another 
qualification activity, which is addressed in the design and development stage. 
The emphasis for this section is on process qualification activities. Process qualification involves the 
runs performed under a protocol designed to demonstrate the consistency of the cleaning process. 
The traditional approach for cleaning validation has been to focus on the qualification protocols to 
demonstrate effectiveness and consistency. The lifecycle approach that the industry has been moving 
toward involves a different approach with a more comprehensive view, with qualification runs being 
only one of the stages of validation. The lifecycle approach also includes design/development activi-
ties and validation maintenance (ongoing controls).
This section covers protocol elements and specific important issues for cleaning validation proto-
cols, including the number of validation runs required, mock soiling for validation runs, worst-case 
process conditions, and the disposition of equipment/product during validation runs. It also covers 
grouping approaches for products and equipment as well as important considerations in clean hold 
time studies. It ends with a discussion of documentation for “cleaning verification”. 
4.1	 Protocol Elements
Cleaning validation protocols have many of the same elements as process validation protocols. For 
reasons of clarity, the format of a cleaning validation protocol usually follows the same approach 
(as appropriate) as used for process validation protocols for a given company. Common elements 
include (but are not limited to) purpose, validation design/strategy, scope, responsibilities, applicable 
product(s) and equipment, cleaning procedure and associated documentation, acceptance criteria, 
training, and a requirement for a final report. Key elements for cleaning validation protocols include 
residue limits (see Section 5.0), sampling procedures (see Section 6.0) and analytical methods (see 
Section 7.0). 
Two approaches are used for documentation of elements. One general approach is to reference other 
documents for details regarding that element. For example, specification of swab sampling sites can 
be in the protocol while the rationale for selection of those sites can be in another document that is 
referenced in the protocol. The advantage of referencing other documents is that only the detailed 
information required for executing the protocol is included in the protocol; supporting information 
is only referenced thus allowing for more “streamlined” protocols. Another approach is to include 
all relevant details for a given element in the protocol. The advantage of having more details in the 
protocol is that greater clarity is provided to those executing the protocol. The approach used should 
consider the knowledge management systems within a given firm. 
4.2	 Key Protocol Issues 
The validation protocol is not written and approved until the cleaning process has been designed and 
developed (see Section 3.0). The execution of the protocol should not begin until the protocol is ap-
proved. However, execution of the protocol as an engineering or practice run can be helpful in some 
circumstances (e.g., for activities that are highly complicated or new to those executing the protocol). 
Any problems in the execution of the engineering/practice run can be corrected before actual valida-
tion runs. The time spent in such runs may lead to the higher likelihood of “right first time” protocol 
execution for the formal qualification runs.
24
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Key issues for protocols (aside from limits, analytical methods and sampling procedures, which are 
covered elsewhere) are discussed below.
4.2.1	 Number of Runs in a Protocol
The traditional approach for cleaning validation protocols has been to require an evaluation of three 
consecutive runs of the cleaning processes. “Consecutive” means that no cleaning events of that same 
process are skipped without an appropriate rationale. For example, if the cleaning validation is for 
cleaning of Product A, there may be manufacture and cleaning of Product B in between manufacture 
of lots or batches of Product A. 
Based on lifecycle approaches to validation, as well as several regulatory documents including the 
2011 U.S. FDA process validation guidance, the newer approach has been to provide a rationale, 
based on an understanding of the cleaning process, documentation from the design and develop-
ment phase, and data from sufficiently similar cleaning processes, for a specific number of validation 
runs required (9,10). This might result in fewer than three runs or greater than three runs. It should 
be recognized that this new U.S. FDA process validation guidance does not formally cover cleaning 
validation. However, a number of principles in that document may be applicable to the validation of 
cleaning processes.
4.2.2	 Mock Soiling
Ordinarily a cleaning validation run is performed by cleaning on a commercial-scale batch. An alter-
native approach is to use what is called “mock soiling” or “artificial soiling” to simulate the nature 
and condition of the manufactured product on the commercial equipment at the time of initiating 
the cleaning process. If mock soiling is used, a rationale must be provided for its use as well as why 
the mock soiling simulates a “realistic” manufacturing situation. A common reason for mock soiling 
has been to obtain three consecutive cleaning validation runs without being forced to make three 
commercial-scale batches of the cleaned product. “Mock soiling” (a process) should be distinguished 
from a “mock soil” (sometimes called a “surrogate soil”), which is a product which simulates the physi-
cochemical properties of the actual soil.
4.2.3	 Worst-Case Process Conditions
The traditional approach for cleaning validation protocols has been to include worst-case process 
conditions in the three protocol runs. Rationales for worst-case conditions should be given in or refer-
enced in the protocol. For example, worst-case process conditions may include maximum dirty hold 
time, maximum batches or elapsed time in a campaign, shortest allowed time for manual cleaning 
steps, lowest allowed temperature for manual cleaning processes, and worst-case circuits for CIP skid 
selection. Parameters such as temperature, cleaning agent concentration, flow rates, and process step 
times for automated cleaning processes are generally controlled in a narrow range such that challeng-
ing the cleaning process in the validation runs at the lower or upper end of the specification is not 
appropriate. If those narrowly controlled parameters are to be challenged in the extremes or outside 
the specified range, those challenges can be evaluated in development studies to demonstrate the 
robustness of the cleaning process. 
There may be different approaches for addressing worst-case process conditions. In one approach, 
a worst-case process condition is addressed in each of the required validation runs. An alternative 
approach is to address a specific worst-case condition in the design and development of the cleaning 
process such that the cleaning process is developed to address a worst-case condition. Data from such 
design and development studies may support the use of worst-case conditions in fewer runs.
25
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Another example of worst-case conditions is the number of batches in a campaign where validated 
cleaning is only performed at the end of campaign. In such cases, there may be no cleaning between 
batches or there may be only “minor cleaning” (such as vacuuming for solids manufacture or a wa-
ter rinse for liquids manufacture). In this case, the maximum number of batches may represent the 
worst case. Therefore, the validation protocol should consider the effect of the maximum number of 
batches in the campaign. 
In such an approach, it may not be feasible to schedule three consecutive campaigns with the same 
maximum number of batches. One practical way to address this is to manufacture and perform clean-
ing validation after a specified number of batches that may represent a minimum campaign length. 
When a campaign involves more than the previous number of batches, a validation protocol is ex-
ecuted on that longer campaign. Data from the longer campaign are then compared with data from the 
earlier validation runs to determine whether the data are equivalent. The specifics of the results will 
indicate whether additional validation runs are needed to extend the validated length of the campaign. 
A third approach is to address campaign length during the design and development phase. If data or a 
rationale can be developed to support no change in the difficulty of cleaning regardless of  the campaign 
length, then the validation runs can be at any campaign length. 
4.2.4	 Disposition of Products and Equipment during Validation
A cleaning process generally only affects the next product manufactured in the cleaned equipment. 
Therefore, following protocol execution the “cleaned” product may be released following company 
procedures for product release. That release of product is independent of the data obtained for the 
immediately following cleaning process. The data from that cleaning process is used for the release 
of the cleaned equipment.
There are several approaches used for disposition of the equipment following the cleaning process. 
One approach is to not release the equipment until acceptable data (including meeting all residue cri-
teria) are obtained for that specific validation run. At that time, the equipment may be safely released 
for manufacture of the same or another product. An alternative approach is to release the equipment 
following company procedures at risk for manufacture of the next product. However, that next prod-
uct cannot be released until acceptable data (including meeting all residue criteria) are obtained for 
that specific validation run. If the cleaning validation run fails to meet its acceptance criteria, then the 
impact on that specific next manufactured product should be assessed as part of the investigation into 
that non-conformance. The results of the investigation will determine whether that next manufac-
tured product can be released.
If there are separate validation protocols for equipment items in a train used to manufacture the 
product on which the validation is being performed, each equipment item can be released based on 
the protocol data for that validation run for that equipment item. It is not necessary to wait until vali-
dation is complete on all equipment items in the train before any item can be released for subsequent 
manufacture. 
4.3	 Grouping/Family Approach
Grouping is a strategy whereby manufactured products and/or equipment are considered together, 
and a formal protocol is performed on a representative from the group. The representative from the 
group is usually the worst case among products or equipment in a group. Grouping is also called ma-
trixing, family approach or bracketing. The rationale for grouping is to generate optimum value from 
cleaning validation tasks based on a risk approach. One requirement for grouping is that product and 
26
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
equipment be cleaned by the same cleaning process. The use of products and equipment grouping may 
be used to streamline cleaning validation programs while ensuring sufficient data are available to sup-
port the validation of procedures, processes, and equipment associated with cleaning. The grouping 
program for a given facility or company should be specified or referenced (e.g., by pointing to a facil-
ity cleaning rationale) in a well-designed validation program/validation master plan. 
4.3.1	 Product Grouping
Products may be grouped together if they are manufactured on the same or equivalent equipment, 
and cleaned by the same cleaning procedure. Products may be assessed for their relative cleanabil-
ity by several methods. Relative cleanability may be affected by the nature of the active ingredients, 
of the excipients, and/or of degradation products. One example of assessing relative cleanability 
involves selecting the product with the least-soluble active ingredient in the cleaning solution. This 
approach may be appropriate for small-molecule API synthesis cleaned with a solvent or for finished 
drug product manufacture involving water-soluble formulations. Such an approach may also be pos-
sible for solid dosage drug products provided that the excipient portion of the different drug products 
has the same effect on the difficulty of cleaning. Another approach involves determining relative dif-
ficulty of cleaning using laboratory studies. For laboratory studies, cleanability is assessed on coupons 
or small equipment parts using representative surfaces, with stainless steel being the most common 
because of its predominance in pharmaceutical equipment. For coupons, the roughness of the sur-
face should be the same or rougher (as a worst case) than actual equipment surfaces. From the lab 
results, the relative cleanability of each product is defined, typically by determining under proposed 
cleaning parameters which product requires the longest time to clean. Bioactivity and clinical effects 
may also be considered for the selection of a representative product.
One option for product grouping is to use a surrogate worst-case product. In this situation, the worst-
case product is an artificially constructed product (which may not be a commercial product) designed 
to be more difficult to clean than products expected to be routinely manufactured. One rationale 
for this approach is to maintain continuity of the worst-case product (in cases where a commercial 
product might be discontinued). Another rationale is to minimize situations in which new worst-case 
products are added. 
A qualification protocol on the representative (worst-case) product is performed. The acceptance cri-
terion for that worst-case product is generally the most stringent acceptance criterion of all products 
in the group (that is, the lowest residue limit). Successful cleaning validation of the representative 
(worst-case) product means the cleaning of the other products in the group is also validated. Based on 
risk assessments (addressing both quality risks and business risks), one approach is to perform a single 
confirmatory validation run on every other product in the group. Also based on a risk assessment, 
another approach is to perform qualification protocols on both the most difficult to clean product and 
the product with the lowest limit.
4.3.2	 Equipment Grouping
Equipment may be grouped together if they are similar and can be cleaned by the same cleaning pro-
cedure. Grouping of equipment is an effective method for encompassing equipment from a limited 
population of systems undergoing cleaning validation without redundant testing. The grouping strat-
egy is based on designating equipment as “identical” or “similar,” based on design, mode of opera-
tion, and cleanability. Such a determination usually involves evaluating the equipment qualification, 
with the stipulation that qualification differences that do not affect the cleaning process may allow 
one to conclude that two equipment items are identical for cleaning purposes. Regulatory documents 
such as the U.S. FDA SUPAC guidance may assist in that determination (11).
27
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Once equipment has been placed within a designation, the designation defines the cleaning validation 
requirements. If it involves identical equipment, a protocol involving any combination of identical 
equipment items in the group is performed. Provided an adequate rationale is given for determining 
the equipment items are identical, there is no need to perform validation runs on every item in the 
group. For similar equipment, the representative equipment is the worst case or may involve bracket-
ing of the equipment. For example, for storage tanks that are of the same size but different complex-
ity due to the number of baffles, the more complex equipment is chosen as the worst case. For similar 
equipment of different sizes, the largest and smallest (representing the extremes) may be chosen for 
the formal validation runs (unless one size can be determined as the worst case). If there is no worst 
case or bracketing involved, then any equipment items in the group of similar items may be chosen 
for validation runs. Confirmatory validation runs (perhaps only one run) are an option for other equip-
ment (not a worst-case) within the group. 
A specific case of equipment grouping involves “minor” equipment, such as utensils, small parts, and 
smaller equipment. In the case of such minor equipment, it may be appropriate to evaluate a cleaning 
procedure for those parts and to validate the cleaning process using equipment grouping. The group-
ing of the parts may involve selection of worst-cases based on complexity, size and functionality.
4.3.3	 Introduction of a New Product or Equipment into a Group
The introduction of a new product into an already validated group is assessed using the same science 
and risk-based evaluation process (e.g., based on solubility in the cleaning solvent, a laboratory cou-
pon study, and/or information from other process cleaning studies) to initially determine the worst-
case product. It is recommended that if each new product is tested in a lab evaluation, a suitable con-
trol, such as the previous worst-case product, be included. Relative product cleanability is then used to 
determine validation requirements for that new product on equipment used for other products in that 
group. The relative cleanability of the product in relation to the preceding worst-case product, as well 
as any change in the lowest limit for products in the group, will dictate the validation requirements. 
Based on a documented risk assessment, introduction of an easier-to-clean product may just require 
laboratory and/or scale-up studies to confirm ease of cleaning or may require one confirmatory run. 
Introduction of a more difficult-to-clean product requires validation of that new worst-case product. 
Based on risk considerations, introduction of new identical equipment may simply involve a deter-
mination that it is equivalent or may require an additional confirmatory run. Introduction of new 
similar equipment requires an evaluation if that new equipment represents a new worst case or a new 
bracketing extreme. If not a new worst case or new extreme, special attention should be paid to the 
first commercial cleaning event to confirm effectiveness. If the new equipment is a new worst case or 
bracketing extreme, the validation requirements for the previous worst case or bracketing extreme 
should be performed for the new worst-case or bracketing extreme equipment.
4.4	 “Cleaning Verification” Documentation
“Cleaning verification” as used in this Technical Report refers to documentation which says that a 
one-off cleaning event is effective for cleaning equipment so that the equipment can be used for subse-
quent manufacture of a product. There may be a variety of other terms for this same concept that are 
used by various companies. Examples of where cleaning verification might be used include cleaning 
after manufacture of a clinical trial product or cleaning after product manufacture where there is a 
deviation (e.g., the dirty hold time is exceeded) that affects a validated cleaning processes. 
Documentation for cleaning verification purposes is similar to the documentation for cleaning valida-
tion, except that the verification data is specific to one cleaning event. From a compliance perspective, 
28
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
the data applies only to the one cleaning event (although from a scientific perspective the data may 
suggest similar performance if the cleaning event were repeated). Another difference is that because 
cleaning verification is typically performed on a unique cleaning event, there may be limited cleaning 
design and development before execution of that event. One approach is to utilize a cleaning SOP 
and a cleaning verification protocol. Alternatively, companies might use a concept that defines explicit 
requirements for cleaning verification in an SOP and documents the specific activities, sample posi-
tions and so on in a form which will be approved. It is generally not appropriate to consider three 
cleaning verification runs as constituting a “validation” especially if the element of appropriate design 
and development is absent.
29
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Based on the understanding of the cleaning process, potential residues remaining on equipment sur-
faces after cleaning can be identified. Residues may include the active drug, excipients, processing 
aids, cleaning agents, bioburden, endotoxin, and degradants. Those residues, if present at unaccept-
able levels and could potentially contaminate or adulterate the next manufactured product, should 
be identified. Based on a risk assessment, residues are selected that will be measured in a cleaning 
validation protocol, and for which limits should be established. Typically for non-sterile manufactur-
ing, this includes the drug active, the cleaning agent and bioburden. Typically, for sterile manufacture, 
endotoxin should also be included. Other potential residues may be added to this list based on the risk 
assessment. Furthermore, based on a process understanding and risk assessment, it may be acceptable 
to not set limits for potential residues in this list. For example, in non-sterile manufacturing, setting 
limits for and measuring bioburden in a protocol may not be required if there is a final wipe or rinse 
of equipment surfaces with a sanitizing or disinfecting agent, such as 70% isopropanol, provided there 
is a scientific rationale and/or supporting laboratory studies.
The determination of cleaning limits and acceptance criteria is a crucial element of a cleaning valida-
tion program. A limit is typically an actual numerical value and is one of the acceptance criteria of a 
cleaning validation protocol. Limits and acceptance criteria should be:
• Practical
• Verifiable
• Achievable
• Scientifically sound
The limits should be practical in the sense that the limit chosen should be appropriate for the actual 
cleaning situation to be validated. Also, the limits must be verifiable by a qualified analytical procedure. 
In addition, the limits must be achievable by the cleaning process for the product and by the analytical 
methodology available for the target residue. Finally, the company should develop a scientifically sound 
rationale for the limits chosen. It is very important that cleaning limits not be selected arbitrarily but 
rather there be a logical and scientific basis for the limits selected. The scientific rationale should be ap-
propriately documented and should be logical, comprehensive, and readily understood.
5.1	  Considerations for Developing Limits
As used in this Technical Report, “product” may be drug product, API, intermediate, or another type 
of formulation. If “drug product” is intended, that terminology will be utilized. 
Residues remaining on equipment may transfer to a subsequently manufactured product. Thus, it is 
important to have information about the potential residues as well as the product which could become 
contaminated. Furthermore, the nature of the cleaning process itself is also important. Once these 
areas have been considered, it is important to obtain a cleaning process understanding (e.g., through 
process mapping), and then to perform a risk assessment for the appropriate evaluation of limits.
Relevant information for the subsequently manufactured product may include, as appropriate for the 
nature of the product (drug product, API, or intermediates), the formulation, the product’s specifi-
cations, the dosing, the route of administration, the batch size, and the shared equipment. Product 
specifications may be important, e.g., for establishing bioburden limits. Relevant information on the 
cleaned product includes the formulation, the dosing, the toxicity, and the route of administration. 
Relevant information on the cleaning process includes the cleaning agent, cleaning method, and the 
various cleaning parameters (see Section 3.0 on design and development of cleaning processes).
