7.0	 Analytical Methods
55
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
cleaning validation until TOC replaced the readily oxidizable substances pharmacopeial method, after 
which pharmaceutical companies were readily familiar with and comfortable with the technology. 
On the other hand, if a new analytical method is required because existing in-house methods are 
not adequate for the intended purpose, then that new method should be considered. These may be 
implemented by using contract analytical laboratories or by bringing the new analytical methodol-
ogy in-house. A decision on bringing the method in-house versus using a contract laboratory may be 
based on business considerations.
7.3	 Specific vs. Nonspecific Analytical Methods for Validation 
Protocols
Specific analytical methods are those which measure a certain residue in the presence of expected 
interferences. If the target analyte in a validation protocol is the active ingredient, such interferences 
may include degradation products and related substances, excipients, cleaning agents and cleaning 
process by-products. Examples of specific methods include liquid chromatography (including HPLC, 
UPLC and TLC) and spectrophotometry (including UV, visible and infrared). Each of these methods 
requires the use of an appropriate reference standard. In contrast, nonspecific analytical methods 
measure a general property, such as conductivity or TOC, which could be due to a variety of analytes 
or sources.
Selection of an analytical method may depend on the nature of the residue as it exists after the clean-
ing process. Only if an active ingredient is not degraded during the cleaning process (e.g., surviving 
high temperatures and pH extremes in an aqueous environment) does it make sense to use a specific 
analytical method for that active ingredient. If a specific analytical method for an active ingredient 
were utilized following a cleaning process that has been demonstrated to degrade that active ingredi-
ent, it is likely that residues of the active ingredient would be nondetectable (i.e. not measurable) by 
that specific analytical method. In such a case, use of a specific analytical method for the degradant or 
use of a nonspecific method (such as TOC) may be considered for measuring residues in a validation 
protocol. Alternatively, if limits are established for the degradation product of an active ingredient, 
then a specific analytical method for the degradant may be considered for use. 
It should be recognized that the proper use of a nonspecific analytical method may provide a more 
robust demonstration of acceptable cleaning in a validation protocol, because it may have responses 
from species other than the target residue, yet those responses must be assumed as due to the target 
residue (24). However, exceeding the residue limit using a nonspecific analytical method provides no 
information on the nature of the failure. The high analytical result may be due to responses from the 
active ingredient, the excipients, the cleaning agent, and/or a combination of those species.
Nothing in this Technical Report should be interpreted as saying that, as a general principle, specific 
analytical methods should be used in preference to nonspecific analytical methods. 
7.3.1	 Regulatory Status of Specific and Nonspecific Methods
Both specific methods and nonspecific methods have been found acceptable by regulatory authorities. 
However, one must be careful not to misuse an analytical method. For example, specific methods can 
be misused by failing to recognize the degradation of the active ingredient in the cleaning process, 
and nonspecific methods can be misused by failing to attribute the nonspecific response entirely to 
the residue of concern. 
The U.S. FDA cleaning validation guidance states that one should “Determine the specificity and 
56
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
sensitivity of the analytical method used to detect residuals or contaminants” (20). While some have 
interpreted this to mean that a specific analytical method should be used, a better interpretation is 
that irrespective of the type of method selected, make sure it is used appropriately. The European 
PIC/S recommendations state that “The analytical methods used to detect residuals or contaminants 
should be specific for the substance to be assayed….” (22). This again has been interpreted to mean 
that only specific analytical methods should be used. However, it is not applied in that manner since 
nonspecific methods are widely used by companies worldwide and have been accepted by the U.S. 
FDA and European regulatory authorities. 
7.4	 Most Commonly Used Analytical Techniques
The focus of this section is to discuss the most commonly used analytical procedures in pharmaceu-
tical cleaning validation (25). The Task Force believes it was more appropriate to focus on common 
uses of analytical methods, based on the stages of cleaning validation where they have been demon-
strated to provide relevant information. The features, benefits and limitations of methods are often 
situational and are therefore not covered here.
Additional considerations in selecting methods are listed below:
• Availability of instrumentation
• Speed of analysis
• Specificity of technique
• Sampling limitations (including sampling solvents)
• Detection/quantitation limit
• Linearity of response
• Online adaptability
• Cost
Most applications in pharmaceutical cleaning validation involve quantitation of residues over a vali-
dated range. However, in certain situations, pass-fail tests, also known as ‘‘go-no go’’ testing, may be 
used to establish that the residue is below the acceptance limit. Such testing may be used in qualifica-
tion runs for clinical manufacture (where the effort to fully validate an analytical method over a linear 
range may be costly) or for routine monitoring and equipment release based on final rinse solvent 
testing. A pass-fail test generally does not demonstrate the robustness of the cleaning process unless 
the pass-fail point is significantly below the desired acceptance limit. Since the transition point is a 
range, the range must be known and its relationship to the limits must be established in the validation 
process. The actual result, although passing, could have been very close to failure and with normal 
plus/minus variation it could actually represent a failed result.
For more information on analytical method use in biotechnology manufacture, please consult PDA 
Technical Report No. 49, Points to Consider for Biotechnology Cleaning Validation (2).
7.4.1	 Liquid Chromatography (LC)
LC includes HPLC (High Performance Liquid Chromatography), UPLC (Ultra Performance Liquid 
Chromatography, and TLC (Thin Layer Chromatography). All these methods involve the separation 
of component by a chromatography procedure and then the measurement of one or more separated 
species. For HPLC and UPLC, the measurement is typically ultraviolet (UV) detectors, although other 
appropriate detectors may be used based on the analyte of interest. 
HPLC and UPLC methods are typically specific methods, which are widely used for measurement 
of active ingredients in small molecule-manufacturing (both API and drug product manufacturing). 
In many cases, HPLC/UPLC methods have been previously developed as a potency assay method 
for the active ingredient, and only need minor modification to make the method suitable for use as a 
method for residue determination in qualification runs. Those additional modifications may involve 
57
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
confirming that the useful range is suitable for residue determinations and that additional “expected 
interferences” that are present in the cleaning system do not interfere with measurement of the active 
ingredient. HPLC/UPLC methods may not be suitable for measuring residues of an active ingredient 
if the active ingredient is degraded in the cleaning process, unless the chromatography conditions al-
low separation and measurement of degradants of interest. 
TLC methods may be used for various stages for cleaning of small molecules. For example it may be 
used for design/development to confirm and characterize degradation of the active. TLC methods 
may also be used for any investigation (at any stage of cleaning validation) to characterize residues. 
7.4.2	 UltraViolet/Visible Spectrophotometry (UV/Vis)
UV/Vis involves measuring transmission/absorbance of a specified wavelength of light by a solvent 
solution of the residue. It typically requires a chromophore in the molecule, although it is also pos-
sible to modify the residue to produce a chromophore. For example, it is commonly used in small-
molecule manufacturing, particularly for API manufacturing where it is not necessary to separate it 
from a matrix to quantify the residue. Because of its simplicity, UV/Vis techniques may be used in the 
design/development, qualification and validation maintenance stages of cleaning validation as well as 
for any investigations. UV/Vis has also the possibility of being used in PAT applications for comple-
tion of the cleaning steps for small molecule API manufacturing (26).
7.4.3	 Total Organic Carbon (TOC)
TOC is applicable to any residue containing significant amounts of organic carbon. The TOC meth-
od is based on oxidizing the carbon present and measuring the carbon dioxide produced. Oxidizing 
methods include UV, persulfate, and combustion. Techniques for measuring the generated carbon 
dioxide include conductivity, membrane-based conductivity and infrared. Both online and offline ap-
plications of TOC are possible.
For use of TOC, the target residue must have adequate aqueous solubility for the intended purpose. 
The most common way of applying the TOC method to a cleaning validation testing strategy is to 
assume that all residues detected are due to the target residue (24). In manufacturing situations, TOC 
is commonly used for measuring residues if the target residue (e.g., the active ingredient) is degraded 
during the cleaning process. However, it may also be used in situations where the active is not de-
graded. The rationale for use of TOC in such situations is ease of analytical method development and 
the worst-case assumptions inherent in TOC analysis. 
TOC may be used for all stages of cleaning validation, including design/development, qualification 
and validation maintenance as well as for investigations. 
7.4.4	 Conductivity
Conductivity measurement is a method to detect dissociated ionic substances in water samples. For 
qualification protocols conductivity readings are expressed in micro-Siemens/cm (µS/cm); for con-
trol and monitoring of the cleaning solution, conductivity readings are expressed as milliSiemens/cm 
(mS/cm). It is often used to measure cleaning agent residues (e.g., caustic or acidic agents) and to con-
trol cleaning agent concentration in automated cleaning processes (e.g., CIP). Conductivity readings 
are highly influenced by the sample temperature. Temperature adjustment of the sample, automated 
temperature compensation or a conductivity/concentration curve at a specified temperature can be 
used to standardize the measurements.
To allow correlation of conductivity readings with concentrations of cleaning agent, a dilution curve 
58
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
(conductivity vs. concentration) should be established (at a relevant temperature) by conductivity 
measurements of different dilutions in the relevant range near the acceptance value.
Conductivity is a nonspecific method that correlates linearly (within a defined range) to the ion con-
centration in an aqueous sample. Analytical instruments are robust and can be used on the manufac-
turing floor by trained personnel. The method cannot differentiate between different ions. Therefore, 
as with TOC, all conductivity results above the water baseline should be attributed to the contami-
nant in question (e.g., the cleaning agent). 
Conductivity is often a function of alkaline or acidic cleaning agent. Measuring conductivity is a good 
measure of the completion of rinsing, and therefore an indirect measure of good cleaning for routine 
monitoring of a cleaning process.
Conductivity can also be used for measuring residues of an ionic active ingredient, either in cases 
where the cleaning agent is water alone or in other cases involving ionic cleaning agents if all the 
conductivity response is attributed to the active ingredient (even though some of the response may 
be due to the cleaning agent).
7.4.5	 Organoleptic Evaluation
“Organoleptic” evaluation includes visual inspection as well as other evaluations such as smell. Visual 
inspection is commonly used during all stages of cleaning validation, as it is a minimum requirement 
under GMPs for use of equipment for manufacture. Visual inspection is a nonspecific method in that 
the nature of the residue generally cannot be identified except by further analysis. 
Training and a detailed documented procedure is required to ensure that “visually clean” from one 
operator to the next is consistent. What one can visually see will vary with distance, angle, lighting, 
nature of surface, and inspector’s visual acuity. Some equipment surfaces (e.g., piping) are usually not 
accessible for visual inspection. The use of optical equipment like mirrors, remote videoscopes, or 
borescopes can help to facilitate visual inspection. 
The visual inspection procedure should specify how operators are to deal with visual observations. 
Visual inspection may find four different types of visual observations: residue, surface anomalies, 
foreign object and water. Residue is the main concern which would constitute a visual failure when 
one is assessing the acceptability of a cleaning cycle. A sample of the residue should be collected for 
further testing, if possible, to assist in the investigation of the cause. Typically, surface anomalies and 
foreign objects are not considered visual inspection failures for cleaning validation purposes, but must 
be further investigated and corrected, as applicable. Surface anomalies should be noted and a “suit-
ability for use” assessment should be performed to remediate any issue(s) found. Rouge is the most 
common type of surface anomaly discovered during visual inspection; rouge is generally considered 
a preventive maintenance problem, not a cleaning process problem. Foreign objects and their removal 
should be documented. Also, how the foreign object came to be in the equipment should be investi-
gated. Sometimes a distinction is made between absence of water pooling (“free drained equipment”) 
and the absence of any visible water droplets (“dry equipment”). Particularly for water pooling, the 
observation should be documented, the cause investigated, and the impact on issues such as visual 
examination and bioburden proliferation on storage should be addressed. 
All equipment surfaces should be visually inspected if possible. Visual inspection may not be per-
formed on the interior of lines and tubing (although outlets may be inspected) on equipment where 
disassembly of the equipment is not practical or possible, or where inspection of the equipment could 
potentially be dangerous to the inspector (e.g., entry into a confined space).
59
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
A training program should be developed for visual inspection. Inspectors typically should be trained 
and/or requalified on an established basis. If visual inspection is not possible on an area of concern, 
it is important to ensure that other sampling methods (such as rinse sampling) can adequately detect 
potential residues of concern.
Smell as an organoleptic method is generally only used if an unusual smell occurs during sampling of 
the equipment, which would suggest the need for an investigation. 
7.5	 Other Useful Analytical Techniques
Below are other techniques which may be useful for various stages of cleaning validation. 
7.5.1	 pH
pH is a measure of the hydrogen ion concentration. It can be used as a monitoring process check, 
particularly when equipment is stored wet in a preservative solution (typically acid or base). pH can 
also be used to verify qualitatively the presence of the correct cleaning solution. pH can be used to 
complement conductivity measurements. However, pH is less useful than conductivity for measuring 
residues of alkaline or acidic cleaning solutions because pH has a logarithmic relation with hydro-
gen ion concentration, whereas conductivity has a direct, linear relationship with ions. Furthermore, 
there is not necessarily a direct correlation of conductivity and pH, particularly for neutralized clean-
ing agents.
7.5.2	 InfraRed (IR)
This includes both FTIR (Fourier Transform InfraRed) and NIR (Near InfraRed). These techniques 
are most useful in an investigation where there is a need to identify organic residues that may be pres-
ent. FTIR has also been combined with a fiber-optic probe for direct quantitative measurement of 
residues on surfaces for qualification protocols (27).
7.5.3	 Light Microscopy
Light microscopy, including Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), is a method of identifying con-
taminants on equipment surfaces. In many cases, conventional light microscopy and SEM can be 
combined with other analytical techniques, such as x-ray diffraction, mass spectrometry, and nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR). Microscopic techniques alone may identify the physical nature of a resi-
due but not the chemical nature. One of the practical applications of microscopy is in the evaluation 
and identification of unknown contaminants on new or used equipment. These techniques are espe-
cially valuable in the evaluation of residues in an investigation.
7.5.4	 Titrations
Titration is another simple analytical method that is often overlooked even though it might provide 
valuable information in the proper cleaning situation. Titrations may be specific (orthophosphate 
ions) or nonspecific (e.g., for all anionic surfactants). This method is more likely to be used for alkaline 
or acidic cleaning agent analysis in qualification runs. 
7.5.5	 Gravimetric Analysis
Gravimetric analysis can be useful for design/development studies and for qualification runs. It is 
most commonly used for determining residues in small-molecule API synthesis where a larger vol-
ume of a solvent rinse or solvent reflux is evaporated to dryness. 
60
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
7.5.6	 Enzyme Linked Immunosorbant Assay (ELISA)
An ELISA assay is an antigen-antibody type reaction involving the use of specific chemicals developed 
especially for the residue involved. Its use is generally limited to biotechnology and biologics manu-
facture where it can be used in the design/development stage to confirm degradation of the active 
ingredient and in any investigations.
7.5.7	 Capillary Zone Electrophoresis (CZE)
Also known as capillary electrophoresis (CE), this technique separates residues by charge and friction-
al forces in an electrical field. Detection is usually with a fluorescence detector. CZE has been applied 
mostly in the biotechnology industry for active ingredients and degraded active ingredients where it 
can be used in design/development and qualification stages as well as in investigations. 
7.5.8	 Atomic Absorption (AA) and Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP)
Both of these techniques can be used for measuring metals in solution, where the metal is part of a 
formulation or for unknown residues, such as suspected rouge. 
7.5.9	 Ion Mobility Spectrometry (IMS)
This technique is a type of mass spectrometry which only provides information on the time of flight 
of the analyzed species. It has been promoted for its short analysis time (a few minutes). It may have 
more application for routine monitoring and release.
7.6	 Microbial Test Methods
The 1993 U.S. FDA cleaning validation guidance states that “Control of the bioburden through ad-
equate cleaning and storage of equipment is important to ensure that subsequent sterilization or sani-
tization procedures achieve the necessary assurance of sterility” (20). The PIC/S recommendations 
call for “the validation of cleaning procedures for the removal of contaminants associated with the 
previous products, residues of cleaning agents as well as the control of potential microbial contami-
nants” (22). Control of microbial residues is thus an important part of cleaning validation. Microbial 
residues include bioburden and endotoxin. Typically bioburden sampling and analysis is performed 
during cleaning validation protocols unless there is a documented science- and risk-rationale for omit-
ting such sampling and analysis. Science- and risk-based rationales for excluding microbiological test-
ing in protocols may include manufacturing considerations, such as all solvent processing for small-
molecule API manufacture, use of a final alcohol rinse for oral dose drug products, use of subsequent 
sterilization cycles, and/or demonstration of adequate microbial control in sufficiently similar clean-
ing processes.
7.6.1	 Endotoxin
Typically, endotoxin testing is performed for cleaning validation runs if the next product has endo-
toxin specifications. Endotoxin analytical methods are typically compendial methods. Science- and 
risk-based rationales for excluding endotoxin testing in protocols may include manufacturing con-
siderations, such as all solvent processing for small-molecule API manufacture, use of a validated 
endotoxin reduction step, and/or demonstration of adequate endotoxin control in sufficiently similar 
cleaning processes.
7.6.2	 Bioburden
Testing of bioburden is done through rinse-water sampling, swab sampling and contact plate sam-
61
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
pling. Rinse-water sampling typically involves membrane filtration, placement of the membrane on 
an appropriate agar, incubation, and a count of CFUs. The main rationale for rinse-water sampling 
for bioburden is that it provides an overall picture of equipment cleanliness. Also, bioburden testing 
of rinse water is typically already a qualified method for testing water systems for bioburden. The 
biggest weakness of rinse-water sampling and membrane filtration is that the full range of the accep-
tance criteria is not able to be utilized. For example, if 100 ml of rinse water is used for testing with an 
acceptance criteria of 100 CFU/mL. The typical number of colonies that can be counted is 300 before 
Too Numerous To Count (TNTC) is achieved; this only allows an acceptance criterion of 3 CFU/mL 
before failing to demonstrate that the acceptance criterion is met. In most situations this is not an is-
sue; it may result in the need to test smaller sample volumes (or diluted samples). An alternative is to 
perform spread-plate or pour-plate microbiological analyses.
Two methods for directly measuring on surfaces are swab and contact plate. For swab samples, the 
swab can be desorbed and a count made by a pour-plate or spread-plate method. Contact plates are 
directly incubated and enumerated. The biggest concern with contact plates and swab procedures is 
potentially exposing product contact surfaces to an unknown media or buffer solution from swabs; 
thus acceptable removal of this media or buffer solution should be demonstrated before manufactur-
ing can occur. Another concern is that contact plates require flat surfaces.
Most companies use analytical techniques for bioburden involving incubation in an appropriate me-
dium and counting of CFUs. Such a procedure has the disadvantage of only providing a number for 
CFUs and not individual cells. Sampling and processing of the test sample may affect the reported 
number of CFUs due to disruption of aggregated cells. In addition, while it is common to report 
bioburden counts below 20 CFU as quantifiable numbers, it is recognized that enumeration below 20 
CFU is not scientifically established. Another alternative is to use rapid instrumental microbiological 
procedures. PDA Technical Report 33, Evaluation, Validation and Implementation of  New Microbiological 
Testing Methods should be consulted for a discussion of rapid methods (28).
7.7	 Analytical Method Validation
This section focuses on analytical method validation for “chemical” residues. Typically endotoxin 
methods are compendial methods and do not require formal validation but require a confirmation for 
their application of use or suitability. Microbial methods that are approved microbiology laboratory 
methods do not require additional method validation.
7.7.1	 General Principles
Since one key part of cleaning validation is setting residue limits and then measuring (using an analyti-
cal method) the actual residues left on surfaces after cleaning, it is critical that the analytical method 
be appropriately validated. Method validation is typically accomplished using the criteria in ICH Q2 
(R1) (29). However, the types of assays listed in ICH Q2 do not explicitly cover cleaning validation 
methods. One approach is to essentially validate analytical methods, much like an “Assay” in ICH Q2, 
establishing accuracy, precision, specificity, linearity and range, with added determination of limit of 
quantitation/ limit of detection (LOD/LOQ). LOD/LOQ must be below the acceptance limit for the 
sample, and ideally is significantly below the acceptance limit so that the robustness of the cleaning 
process can be established. In addition to the ICH Q2 parameters, sample stability as a function of 
storage conditions (time, temperature, vial for storage, etc.) may be evaluated if there is a significant 
interval between sampling and analysis. Specific methods should address possible interferences from 
other species, such as cleaning agents, which might occur only in the cleaning process.
In cases where a nonspecific method is utilized, it is not necessary to compensate for the lack of speci-
62
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
ficity by “other supporting analytical procedures” (as suggested in ICH Q2). The reason for this is 
that for cleaning validation purposes, the limit value is not a target (as it is for a potency assay); rather 
the limit is a value not to be exceeded. As long as these other species that contribute to the nonspecific 
response do so in a positive manner (thus increasing the response value), and as long as the total mea-
sured value is attributed to the target residue, such complementary methods suggested by ICH Q2 
are not required. Furthermore, it is not required to correlate nonspecific methods with a specific ana-
lytical method except to the extent that accuracy in the method validation of the nonspecific method 
may be established using a known standard where the concentration or activity is established by a 
specific analytical method. While Detection Limit and Quantitation Limit are not part of the “Assay” 
requirement in ICH Q2, it is critical that these values be at or below the pre-established limit for the 
residue (otherwise it would not be possible to claim that residues were below predetermined limit 
values). However, it is not necessary to drive detection or quantitation limits as low as possible; hav-
ing detection or quantitation limits of 10% or less of the residue limit in the analytical sample is ideal 
(but not always possible) to establish the robustness of the cleaning process. Assay capability should 
take into account both the target/limit and the process capability, and provide relevant measurements 
for both.
When performing carryover calculations it should be ensured that the analytical methods that will be 
used for cleaning validation are sensitive enough to meet the acceptance criteria. To provide reliable 
results for carryover calculations, the results should be equal to or above the LOQ. Results between 
the LOQ and the LOD typically show a higher-than-acceptable variation of the results obtained and 
are typically reported as less than LOQ.
For companies that use a pass/fail analytical method for meeting cleaning validation limits, analyti-
cal method validation is less extensive. In such a procedure, the only conclusion of the analytical 
procedure is whether the experimental sample is less than or equal to or above the pass/fail value. 
Accuracy and precision are typically performed only at the residue limit but linearity and range are 
not performed. Note that in this case, the pass/fail value selected should take into consideration any 
applicable correction factor due to the sampling method recovering less than 100% from the surface. 
Such pass/fail methods do not allow collection of relevant data to support a process capability de-
termination to establish action or alert levels for routine monitoring. Pass/fail analytical procedures 
are more likely to be used in manufacture of early clinical trial materials where a cleaning verification 
mode is employed. However, such methods can also be used for qualification runs and for routine 
monitoring.
Analytical method validation protocols may only include validation of the residue in solutions. It may 
also include sampling recovery studies, although those sampling recovery studies may be performed 
as separate studies apart from the analytical method validation.
Acceptability of variability of results for parameters, such as accuracy and precision for chemical 
methods at typical residue levels, are generally much broader than in a typical potency assay. Relative 
standard deviation (RSD) requirements of 15-20% are typical.
7.7.2	 Compendial Methods
Compendial methods do not require separate analytical method validation provided those methods 
are used within the parameters in the compendia. For example, a compendial method for endotoxin 
is generally appropriate for measuring endotoxin in final rinse water samples. However, suitability of 
use of compendial methods should be addressed.
When using swab or rinse samples with a compendial analytical method, items that should be con-
63
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
sidered for suitability of use include the validated range, possible interferences from the cleaning pro-
cess, possible interference from the swab, and recovery of residue from the swab (see Section 6.1.3).
When using TOC in rinse-water samples (a compendial method), additional work should be done to 
support its applicability for test samples where the TOC values could be above 500 ppb or where a 
linear range is to be established. Just performing system suitability as specified in the USP requirement 
may not be adequate to demonstrate that the TOC analytical procedure could accurately analyze 
samples at 1 ppm or 5 ppm. For that reason, analytical method validation as for any other method 
should be considered. An additional reason for formal method validation for TOC in rinse-water 
samples is that the USP method is essentially set up as a pass/fail test, not as a quantitative assay.
7.7.3	 Visual Inspection
Method validation in this case is actually the determination of a quantitative “visual limit” where 
visual examination is the sole sampling/analytical method and “visually clean” is used as the sole ac-
ceptance criterion for the given residue in the absence of swab or rinse sampling for that residue. If visual 
examination is used to supplement swab or rinse sampling, such determination of a visual limit is not 
required. A visual limit under specified viewing conditions can be determined by spiking coupons of the 
equipment surface materials with solutions of the residue at different levels (in μg/cm2) and having a 
panel of trained observers determine the lowest level at which residues are clearly visible across the 
spiked surface. The significance of such a visual limit is that if equipment surfaces are determined 
to be visually clean under the same (or more stringent) viewing conditions in a cleaning validation 
protocol, the level of the residue is below the visual limit. Appropriate viewing conditions include 
distance, lighting and angle. The visual limit depends on the nature of the residue as well as the nature 
of the surface (e.g., stainless steel vs. PTFE).
7.7.4	 Bioburden Methods
Approved and qualified microbiological lab procedures do not require additional method validation 
for use in cleaning validation programs. However, suitability for use of such methods in the presence 
of cleaning process chemicals should be addressed (30).
7.7.5	 Transfer to another Laboratory and Use of Contract Laboratories
Other laboratories (other than the laboratory that originally validated a method) can be utilized to 
perform an analytical method for cleaning validation purposes. In such cases, a method transfer pro-
tocol should be established and executed to determine that the other laboratory can suitably analyze 
samples using that method. If a method is developed by a contract laboratory and qualification run 
samples are analyzed by that contract laboratory, then no transfer protocol is required. It is preferable 
that analytical method validation protocol be reviewed and approved by the pharmaceutical company 
prior to execution of that protocol. Care should be used in the transfer protocol to first determine 
whether the measurements between the two laboratories are practically significant before any deter-
mination of statistical significance is performed (31). If an analytical method has been developed and 
validated previously by the contract laboratory, then the pharmaceutical company should review that 
protocol and the final report to determine the acceptability of the method for its (new) intended use 
as well as perform an audit of the contract laboratory. 
64
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
A key part of the validation lifecycle for any system is maintenance of the validated state. A variety 
of terms are used within the industry for those activities that follow the cleaning process design/
development and successful execution of the formal validation protocols. The term used in this Tech-
nical Report for those activities is “validation maintenance”; other related terms used in the industry 
include “continued process verification”, “ongoing process maintenance”, “ongoing process control”, 
“monitoring”, and “continued process control”. Validation maintenance is critical for cleaning valida-
tion because a lapse, shift, and/or change in the validated state has the potential to adversely impact 
the quality, safety and purity of subsequent batches of the same or different products. The main tools 
for ensuring the continued maintenance of the validated state are change control, periodic monitor-
ing and data trending review. Additionally, training is an important area of control for cleaning pro-
cesses, and it is one of the primary mechanisms for controlling manual cleaning consistency. 
In each of these areas, knowledge of the operational parameters and/or design space (see Section 
3.0) should be applied. Furthermore, application of risk management principles should be used for 
selection of validation maintenance practices for a given facility or process. Risks to be addressed 
include not only product quality risks. Note that for formal risk management assessments, the risk 
focus should be on risks to patients and product quality. However, risks related to business operations 
and operator safety may be the rationale for certain validation maintenance practices. For example, 
monitoring of conductivity in the recirculating cleaning solution line may be based primarily on qual-
ity concerns. However, provided that such monitoring of the recirculating cleaning solution is done, 
monitoring of detergent level in a drum may be based primarily on a business risk to prevent inter-
ruptions in manufacture. Activities (and the frequency of those activities) to be conducted during 
validation maintenance should be initially selected during the design/development and qualification 
stages. However, they may be modified based on new information and/or data collected during rou-
tine commercial manufacture. Examples of such information include newly discovered sources of 
variation or consistent trending data. Maintenance of the validated state should include the cleaning 
process and equipment, including preventive maintenance and calibration for the equipment being 
cleaned and the equipment used for cleaning.
8.1	 Critical Parameter Measurement
It is of utmost importance to understand the control range of critical parameters used to define the 
cleaning process. Typically, these include cleaning agent concentration, temperature, flow rate and 
times for all processing steps. During the design phase, an appropriate level of understanding of the 
process and its variability should be obtained to design a cleaning process capable of addressing this 
inherent variability. Once the process is well defined, there are a variety of control strategies that may 
be used. 
One control strategy is to set minimum and/or maximum values for each of the critical cleaning pa-
rameters during a cleaning cycle. In this approach, each of the steps of the cycle has a defined proven 
range or threshold (lower threshold or upper threshold) that should be measured and maintained dur-
ing each execution of the cleaning cycle, and each parameter should be within that range or within 
that threshold. This approach has an advantage in that it is straightforward to implement and control 
and demonstrates proper performance of the cleaning process on each cleaning run. 
Measurement of parameters for purpose of feedback for process control (such as process completion) 
is discussed separately in Section 11.3 on Process Analytical Technology.
8.2	 Process Alarms
Another practice for validation maintenance is alarming of critical parameters or events. Alarms for 
