10.0	 Special Considerations
76
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
10.1.2	Factors in Selection
A number of factors need to be considered when selecting cleaning agents for CGMP applications. 
These include:
10.1.2.1	 Broad Spectrum Effectiveness
The cleaning agent should be effective at removing the residues that may range from single com-
ponents to complex mixtures of various chemistries that constitute a product’s active ingredients, 
excipients, degradants, and other contaminants. A broad-spectrum cleaner may also facilitate more 
effective grouping strategies.
10.1.2.2	  Substrate Compatibility
The cleaning agent should be compatible with the various equipment substrate materials, such as 
stainless steel, polymers, glass, and soft metals.
10.1.2.3	 Stability and Shelf Life
To ensure consistent performance after transportation and storage, cleaning agent stability and shelf 
life under those exposure conditions should be considered.
10.1.2.4	 Analyzability
Cleaning agents should be analyzable and quantifiable down to the acceptance criteria established.
10.1.2.5	 Disposal
Cleaning agents should meet the local waste water discharge requirements such as limits on pH, 
phosphates and heavy metals. When organic solvents are used, air emission requirements may need 
to be considered. 
10.1.2.6	 Safety
Particularly for cleaners used for manual cleaning applications, appropriate personal protective equip-
ment may be required.
10.1.2.7	 Toxicity
Cleaning agent toxicity is not only important for personnel safety during cleaning, but also is used in 
determining the residue limit and consequently cleaning process efficiency. 
10.1.2.8	 Rinsability
Cleaning agents should be free-rinsing. Cleaning agents that foam can be difficult to rinse and may 
also cause pump cavitation in CIP systems and COP washers. 
10.1.2.9	 Quality
Cleaning agents should have a specification, be lot-traceable, and preferably be manufactured using 
CGMP practices with appropriate change control policies.
10.2	 Nonproduct Contact Surfaces
Nonproduct contact surfaces may be defined in different ways by manufacturers. For surfaces with no 
product contact (e.g., floors, walls, outsides of process equipment), there should be cleaning proce-
dures. However, these cleaning processes are generally less critical and do not require cleaning valida-
77
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
tion. Cleaning for these nonproduct contact surfaces may be repeated in full or in part if the cleaning 
process results in visible and/or gross levels of residual soils.
There are other nonproduct contact surfaces which may contact the product indirectly, such as by a 
vector or by an airborne route. These are sometimes called “indirect product contact surfaces”. Ex-
amples of these types of surfaces might include lyophilizers, equipment used solely to manufacture 
and transfer buffers, media, and excipients, and stopper bowls. These indirect product contact sur-
faces should be included in the cleaning validation program. However, because of the limited impact 
of these indirect product contact surfaces, requirements for cleaning validation, such as limits, may 
be different from cleaning validation for direct product contact surfaces. A risk assessment should be 
utilized to define the requirements, which will depend on the specifics of the manufacturing situation. 
For example, for highly hazardous drug active ingredients, cleaning validation of nonproduct contact 
surfaces may be performed in order to document any potential of airborne transfer to another prod-
uct as well as for operator safety reasons (12).
See Section 10.9 for information related to secondary packaging equipment surfaces.
10.3	 Process Analytical Technology
Process Analytical Technology (PAT) is defined by the U.S. FDA to be “a system for designing, analyzing, 
and controlling manufacturing through timely measurements (i.e. during processing) of critical quality 
and performance attributes of raw and in-process materials and processes, with the goal of ensuring 
final product quality” (32). The U.S. FDA further notes that “the term ‘analytical’ in PAT is viewed 
broadly to include chemical, physical, microbiological, mathematical, and risk analysis conducted in an 
integrated manner.” The use of a PAT approach may replace traditional validation approaches. 
Much has been published about PAT in general and about PAT in many processes; the reader should 
investigate current literature for a general background on PAT. However, there are limited publica-
tions about PAT in cleaning processes and cleaning validation as compared to PAT for other manufac-
turing operations. The use of a feedback loop from the analytical measurement to control a cleaning 
process or cleaning process step is the point of using PAT. It should be noted that consistent with PAT 
principles, the timely measurement could be in-line, online or at-line.
10.3.1		 Timely Measurements
“Timely measurements” have long been used in cleaning processes to assist in the design of rinse cycle 
times in automated CIP systems. For example, a common practice in the design of the rinsing process 
using cleaning solutions or products with high conductivity values has been to measure conductiv-
ity of the final rinse as a function of rinse time. If evaluated over several cleaning process runs in the 
design phase, a minimum time to consistently complete the rinsing process can be effectively deter-
mined. A safety factor (additional time) may be included as part of this determination. While such a 
study in the design phase would be appropriate for a PAT application, unless it combines the timely 
measurement with a feedback mechanism to control the cleaning process during commercial clean-
ing processes, it would not be considered to be a PAT. As described in this paragraph, the purpose of 
the timely measurement is not to control the rinsing process but to assist in selecting a fixed rinse time. 
10.3.2		 PAT for Cleaning Process Control
The more relevant use of PAT for cleaning processes is the use of a timely measurement to define the 
completion of a cleaning process. In this case, the achievement of a certain analytical measurement is 
a controlling mechanism for completion of that process. In the situation referred to previously about 
measuring conductivity online, if it is possible to determine through experimentation and modeling that 
78
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
the achievement of a certain conductivity correlates in a statistically significant and operationally mean-
ingful manner with the end of the rinsing process, conductivity could be employed in a PAT approach. 
That is, the rinse time is not fixed but could be variable depending on the time needed to achieve that 
predetermined conductivity value. In addition, consistent with PAT principles, it would be expected that 
the achievement of that conductivity value would be within a defined time window. The U.S. FDA PAT 
guidance (32) states “Within the PAT framework, a process end point is not a fixed time; rather it is the 
achievement of the desired material attributes. This, however, does not mean that process time is not 
considered. A range of acceptable process times (process window) is likely to be achieved during the man-
ufacturing phase and should be evaluated, and considerations for addressing significant deviations from 
acceptable process times should be developed.” In both cases, a final conductivity is recorded and a final 
rinse time is recorded. However, in the traditional approach, time is the step-controlling parameter and 
conductivity is the monitoring parameter. In a PAT approach, conductivity could be the step-controlling 
parameter and time would be the monitoring parameter. Lack of achieving the desired conductivity 
within the time window should result in an investigation under a CAPA program. 
Another example of a PAT application for cleaning is in the use of organic solvent cleaning in small-
molecule API synthesis. In this situation, the active ingredient in the solvent may be measured using 
online UV spectroscopy. The achievement of a low absorbance value, corresponding to the limit of 
the active in the rinse or solvent reflux sample, may be used to determine the process completion. 
Sometimes there is an objection to the use of PAT in this way because it seems to violate the cleaning 
validation principle of not cleaning until clean (or testing until the equipment is clean). However, one 
of the features of PAT is that traditional rules of what is done for validation may not apply. As noted in 
the U.S. FDA’s 2011 Process Validation guidance, “In the case of a strategy using PAT, the approach 
to process qualification will differ from that used in other process designs” (10). 
10.3.3		 Additional Considerations for Online Measurements
It should be clarified that online methods by themselves do not necessarily constitute PAT. As dis-
cussed previously, online measurements (such as UV spectroscopy or conductivity) of a final rinse can 
be a routine monitoring tool in a cleaning process step without controlling a process step. Such online 
measurements, even though they don’t control process completion, may be used as a means of clean-
ing verification after each cleaning event. 
10.4	 Clean Hold Considerations
Following cleaning, equipment that is to be reused should be stored in a manner to protect it from 
contamination during storage. Clean hold time is the time from the end of cleaning until subsequent 
use of the equipment, which may be product manufacture or may be a steam-in-place (SIP) cycle. 
“Clean hold time” is different from “dirty hold time” in that dirty hold time should be evaluated in 
the basic cleaning validation protocol as a worst-case condition or challenge. Clean hold time may be 
included as a second part of the basic cleaning validation protocol or may be considered as a separate 
protocol (apart from the basic cleaning validation protocol). The cleaning process validation study 
and the clean hold time study are related in that the data for bioburden at the end of the cleaning 
process also serve as the “time zero” bioburden data for the clean hold study.
The major concern with the clean hold time is the possibility of recontamination from external sourc-
es and the possibility of microbial proliferation because the equipment is wet with water during the 
clean hold period. The major regulatory concern is the control of microbial proliferation during the 
storage of equipment. If the microorganisms that proliferate are Gram-negative bacteria then issues 
with endotoxin may also arise. External sources of recontamination can be prevented by closing the 
79
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
dry equipment or by wrapping the dry equipment in plastic (or storing in plastic bags). Selection 
of an area for storage (including temperature and humidity) is also important for preventing exter-
nal recontamination. Water in the equipment can come from lack of drying at the end of cleaning, 
condensation of water onto equipment surfaces from humid air because of a temperature drop, and 
external sources (such as splashing water onto cleaned equipment because the equipment is stored 
next to a wash sink). 
Criteria used to determine acceptability after storage under defined conditions may include lack of 
microbial proliferation, endotoxin level and visual examination. A major regulatory concern is the 
control of microbial proliferation during the storage of equipment. While based on a risk assessment 
it may be possible to justify not measuring bioburden for a clean hold time before a sterilization pro-
cess, it may be prudent to measure bioburden after the clean hold time to ensure that the subsequent 
sterilization is not excessively challenged. This is also important from the standpoint of the control 
of pyrogens from Gram-negative bacteria, which may not be removed or inactivated by sterilization 
processes. An additional issue is to insure that plastic wrap or bags are intact and not compromised 
during the clean hold storage. Storage instructions should be specified in a control document, such as 
the cleaning procedure or approved storage procedure. 
The best procedures are to store cleaned equipment in a dry state or in a solution that inhibits the 
microbial proliferation. If equipment is to be stored in a dry state, manufacturing controls should be 
in place to ensure that equipment is sufficiently drained and dried upon completion of the cleaning 
process, as well as to minimize the amount of condensed water accumulation in the equipment after 
cleaning due to equipment cooling. In addition, it is preferred that equipment be stored in a manner 
to prevent external recontamination. If stored in a dry state and if protected from external contami-
nation (e.g., by sealing the equipment or by covering any openings with appropriate “GMP” covers), 
formal studies to demonstrate lack of microbial proliferation may not be necessary. Based on sound 
scientific principles, microorganisms will not proliferate on clean, dry surfaces. If stored in an inhibit-
ing solution, the solution should be known to inhibit microbial growth (such as dilute caustic) or data 
should be developed to demonstrate inhibition. Recirculation of the storage solutions may also assist 
in microbial growth inhibition. Procedures should be in place to adequately remove that inhibiting 
solution from equipment prior to use.
If the equipment is stored with a possibility of water in all or parts of the equipment, there are two com-
mon strategies to control microbial proliferation during the storage of equipment. One strategy is to 
establish an acceptable time between the end of cleaning and the beginning of the next use (which may 
be sterilization, sanitization, or a manufacturing process step) by performing a clean hold validation. After 
a predetermined storage time, sampling by a suitable method is performed and the post-hold data is com-
pared to the data at the beginning of storage. If rinse sampling is used, it should be ambient temperature 
water so that what is measured is the bioburden remaining on surfaces (the use of a hot water rinse may 
reduce the bioburden in the rinse solution). Bioburden (and possibly endotoxin) levels in the equipment 
are measured to ensure that levels would not challenge the sterilization or sanitization procedures or 
exceed in-process manufacturing specifications. Since purified water or WFI is not an ideal medium for 
bacterial growth, another approach is to require the use of the cleaned equipment within a short time 
period, such as one shift or 24 hours, such that microbial proliferation is not likely to occur.
If clean hold validation is not performed, or if the validated clean hold time is exceeded, a validated 
water (usually hot purified water or WFI) flush may be used before sterilization, sanitization, and/
or use of the equipment to reduce microbial proliferation that might have occurred during storage 
to an acceptable level before further manufacturing or processing on the equipment. After the water 
flush, sampling (by rinse, swab or plating) is performed. Bioburden (and optionally endotoxin) levels 
80
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
in the equipment are measured to ensure that levels would not challenge the sterilization or sanitiza-
tion procedures or exceed in-process manufacturing specifications. Another approach is to perform 
additional bioburden sampling to document that microbial proliferation has not occurred. 
For clean hold time studies using rinse water fed from process lines, a few common approaches for 
establishing the acceptable amount of rinse water to use are based on the minimum working vol-
ume of the system or the minimum CIP rinse based on the design. Bioburden values in rinse sample 
should be compared to the measured bioburden values based on the equivalent rinse sampling at the 
beginning of storage. It is preferable to collect the entire volume of rinse solution and agitate it for 
a specified period of time to ensure homogeneity before collecting the sub-sample for testing. This 
collection of the entire rinse sample may be done in the process vessel itself or in an external vessel.
Validation of clean hold studies on a given piece of equipment is applicable to all products using that 
equipment and to all cleaning processes for that equipment, provided the final state of the cleaned 
equipment and the storage conditions are consistent. If a validated clean hold time is exceeded, an 
assessment should be made as to the need for corrective action. Appropriate corrective actions before 
use or further processing may include cleaning the equipment again using a validated cleaning pro-
cess or using a validated hot water rinse (as described above) to bring bioburden to an acceptable level. 
If any changes to the equipment, manufacturing processes and/or cleaning procedures are made, the 
impact of these changes on the clean hold studies should be evaluated.
If cleaned equipment is to be stored for an extended period of time in an area that is not controlled, it 
is even more important that the equipment be stored in a dry state because of possibilities of signifi-
cant bacterial or mold proliferation. In any case, there should be a procedure in place to deal with the 
return of such equipment to active use. This may be an individual determination on a case-by-case 
basis, it may be treating the equipment as if it exceeded the dirty hold time, or it may be treating the 
equipment as if it exceeded the clean hold time. A risk assessment for the specific facility will help 
determine which option is utilized. 
10.5	 New and Used Equipment
Introducing additional equipment into a firm’s established cleaning validation program presents sev-
eral issues which will require careful consideration. Factors such as equipment design, materials of 
construction, modes of operation and product-contact surface area are likely to influence decisions 
on how the incoming equipment will fit and on what steps should be taken to integrate the equip-
ment into the cleaning program. Additionally, whether the equipment is of new construction or was 
obtained as a used piece of equipment should be considered when developing steps to utilize the 
equipment. These considerations for new and used equipment may also be applicable to equipment 
that has been repaired or refurbished.
10.5.1 New Equipment
When adding new equipment to a cleaning program, some points to consider are as follows.
10.5.1.1 Cleaning Procedure Development
If the new equipment is sufficiently similar to existing equipment, design/development for the new 
equipment may leverage knowledge from that existing equipment. If the new equipment is not simi-
lar to existing equipment, additional cleaning development work may be required. The design charac-
teristics and operational parameters of the new equipment may present hard-to-clean areas or operat-
ing ranges not previously encountered in existing equipment.
81
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
10.5.1.2 Post-Installation Cleaning
Following the installation of the new equipment, cleaning is typically required in order to remove any 
grease, dust or other debris. Manufactured product residues are not usually a concern at this point. 
The effectiveness of this cleaning may be shown using a visual inspection, water-break evaluation, a 
white-glove (or black-glove) test, and/or various chemical tests (such as TOC and conductivity). This 
cleaning is not typically validated, but is verified (see Section 4.4 on “Cleaning Verification”).
10.5.1.3 Grouping Impact
If a firm employs a grouping approach regarding equipment, the addition of new equipment into the 
production facility may have an impact on established equipment groups. See Section 4.3 “Group-
ing/Family Approach” for more information.
10.5.1.4 Limit Calculation Impact
The addition of new equipment into an established train, line or group may have an impact on accep-
tance limits based on the increase or decrease of product-contact surface area. Calculations should be 
reviewed for any impact and any changes implemented through a change control program.
10.5.2		 Used Equipment
When adding used equipment to a cleaning validation program, the points noted in the previous sec-
tion about new equipment apply. An additional point to consider for used equipment is equipment his-
tory. It is desirable to have as much information as possible about the compounds that were previously 
manufactured in the equipment. Some information of interest would be the type of compound (e.g., 
pharmaceutical or pesticide) and the hazards and/or toxicity of the compounds. That information may 
be used to determine an acceptable cleaning process for the used equipment, and to set acceptance 
limits for those compounds for a cleaning verification evaluation following the cleaning process.
If little to no information about the previous compounds is available, it may be possible to identify 
potential manufactured products by FTIR analysis of swabbed surfaces. Additional surface modifica-
tion steps (e.g., descaling, pickling, passivation, reglassing, repolishing) may be taken to assure the 
cleanliness of the equipment. An evaluation of cleanliness may also entail TOC analysis (as a general 
measurement of equipment cleanliness) and/or FTIR analysis of sampled surfaces (to confirm re-
moval of any potentially objectionable organic residues identified in the precleaning FTIR analysis). 
The justification for a firm’s decision should be captured in a documented risk-consideration. In some 
cases, the additional cost of the steps taken for used equipment may negate any cost benefit; there-
fore, this consideration should be made well in advance of the purchase.
10.6	 Measurement Systems Analysis (MSA) 
The identification and measurement of variation in the process are needed to determine if the system is 
performing as desired and if not, to provide insights into what must be better controlled in order to meet 
specifications. The purpose of measurement systems analysis is to measure, understand and control the 
variation caused by measurement systems. By separating out this source of variation, the impact of varia-
tion in the parameters or aspects being measured can be understood in relation to the cleaning method. 
Before beginning a MSA it is extremely important:
• To clearly define the parameters or aspects to be controlled
• To identify tests capable of achieving the measurements needed 
• To understand measurement requirements (bias, gage Repeatability and Reproducibility (R&R), accuracy, 
stability, linearity, etc.)
82
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
It can be very wasteful and stressful to achieve an unnecessarily low level of measurement sensitivity. 
For example, if lower limits of detection are quite good compared to the threshold level specification, 
then statistically significant differences between two tests, provided both are well below the threshold 
for acceptance, often have no operational significance. Be careful not to confuse the process of MSA 
for the overall goal: a safe and robust cleaning process that consistently meets its target values. 
10.6.1		 MSA Components
The measurement system variation for continuous data can be broken down into the sum of two 
components: R&R. Such studies examine the precision of a measurement system but not the accuracy. 
Repeatability is an estimate of short term variation of the error that occurs when successive measure-
ments are made under the same conditions.
Reproducibility is an estimate of the variation in the average of measurements made between opera-
tors using the same equipment or between laboratories performing the same assays and it captures 
the precision of the different groups (labs or operators).
10.6.2		 Attribute R&R
Attribute R&R are used for discrete data often with binary outcomes and distributions (e.g., pass/
fail, good/bad, yes/no). In these studies the focus is on analysis of the ability of the evaluator to de-
tect nonconformance. This is called effectiveness. The effectiveness of different evaluators is compared 
when assessing reproducibility and how biased the evaluator is towards acceptance or rejection. The 
probability of false negatives/positives is also calculated, which results in the ability to measure bias 
towards one outcome or the other.
10.6.3		 Minimizing Variations
There are guidelines for acceptable levels of variation for continuous data as well as attribute levels 
(effectiveness, bias (False Acceptance/Rejection)) (33). However the main goal is, as always, to achieve 
an acceptable level of control for the system in question based upon a previously agreed upon set of 
criteria that make sense from a business and patient safety perspective. Ideally, the bulk of the varia-
tion that one measures should come from the items being tested, not the test methods themselves.
Many actions can be taken to improve the precision of measurements. 
• Regular maintenance and calibration of equipment
• Maintaining and updating SOPs
• Meaningful operator training
• Mapping or charting the process to identify sources of variation (noise) 
• Alternative measurement systems for the aspect in focus
• analytical method with greater resolution (discrimination)
• development of better standards for comparison
• ensure random sampling/test performance when collecting data
• change from manual to automated system
10.6.4		 MSA and Cleaning Validation Strategy
In cleaning validation carryover calculations, safety factors are always included in order to cover un-
certainties due to cleaning as measured by visual inspection, assumptions about surface area, or the 
system in general. Sometimes one is faced with the dilemma of needing to have measurable limits and 
83
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
thus being unable to apply the safety factor best practice would indicate. Within this framework of 
uncertainty, one must create a control strategy whose capabilities are sufficient to ensure patient safety. 
MSA is a statistical tool that aids both the analytical methods of detection for carryover as well as the 
process parameters monitored in the control strategy for the cleaning process. Once the MSA for the 
analytic is under control, one can use the same MSA techniques to measure the variation within the 
control strategy. For example, one can answer the question about whether the pressure fluctuations 
measured at the spray ball are responsible for or correlated to the trends in TOC from rinse tests or is 
the variation simply due to the system used for pressure measurements? One can thus systematically 
address critical process parameters for better control. Should these investigations prove fruitless, then 
one must re-examine the assumptions in the risk assessments and control strategy that lead to the 
prioritization of these process parameters.
10.7	 Cleaning for API Manufacture
Equipment for multiproduct intermediate and API manufacturing can be exposed to a large variety 
of substances and agents (e.g., solvents, reagents, catalysts, cell cultures and processing aids). Detailed 
written procedures should be established to enable effective and reproducible cleaning of these residues 
and subsequent release of the equipment for next use. Acceptance criteria for residues and the choice 
of cleaning procedures and cleaning agents should be justified on the basis of being practical, achiev-
able and scientifically sound. For equipment producing later stage intermediates and final APIs, cleaning 
procedures will therefore need to be developed and validated to remove manufacturing residues that 
may include raw materials, un-isolated intermediates, by-products, degradants and the product itself. It 
should be noted that equipment used solely for some raw materials that are Generally Recognized as 
Safe (GRAS) and for raw materials or intermediates, visual inspection alone may be appropriate if all 
parts of the equipment are visually inspectable. For API manufacturing, lack of adequate cleaning may 
impact not only potential cross contamination of the next product, it may also impact the processing of 
the next product (e.g., if residual materials interfere with subsequent process reactions).
The need for limits for residual organic solvents should be evaluated and can utilize a risk assessment. 
For example, some residual organic solvents evaporate upon drying of the equipment. If there are 
measures in place (e.g., equipment drying or flush with next process solvent) that may mitigate the 
risk for residues of residual solvents then analytical limits may not be necessary. If necessary, limits 
for residual organic solvents may be derived from ICH Q3 guidance (19). Limits for other residues 
expected to be present after cleaning must also be established. For some residues, such as earlier in-
termediates, dose, toxicity, or acceptable daily intake information may not be established or available. 
For other residues, such as proteins or unstable residues, degradation may occur to produce multiple 
other residues, some of which may not be characterized. For these cases, other approaches to the 
establishment of limits may be necessary. Industry benchmarking data may be used to determine if 
there are common limits applied for these cases. For any limits approach used, the rationales and risk 
assessments used to establish that approach should be documented and approved.
Facilities and manufacturing systems for intermediates and APIs should be designed to facilitate cleaning 
as appropriate to the type and stage of manufacture. Equipment used for API manufacturing is often large, 
closed and complex. It often includes a significant amount of process piping and large-scale vessels, dryers, 
condensers and/or chromatography columns. For this reason, visual inspection of much of the equipment 
may not be possible due to inaccessibility. Equipment design for cleanability is a significant factor in the 
ease and reproducibility of cleaning for these types of large closed systems. Design factors of particular 
importance can include equipment and pipe sloping for drainage, elimination or minimization of deadlegs, 
adequate pump size for turbulent flow of cleaning solutions, and the use of spray coverage devices. 
84
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Quality risk-assessments should be used to determine the need for microbiological specifications (if 
any) after cleaning, if any. The harsh chemical environment (e.g., pH extremes, use of organic sol-
vents, high temperature processes) that is often associated with small-molecule intermediate and API 
manufacture may eliminate the risk to product quality from microbiological proliferation. Where 
microbiological specifications have been established for the cleaning, facilities should be designed to 
limit exposure to objectionable microbiological contaminants. Equipment cleaning and/or sanitation 
studies should address microbiological and endotoxin contamination for those processes where there 
is a need to reduce total microbiological count or endotoxins in the API or other processes where 
such contamination could be of concern (e.g., aqueous-based processing of non-sterile APIs used to 
manufacture sterile products). 
Cleaning validation at product changeover should be directed to situations or process steps where 
contamination or carryover of materials poses the greatest risk to API quality (34). Cleaning valida-
tion is typically performed on equipment used to produce later stage intermediates and APIs. See 
ICH Q7 Table 1 for guidance on where cleaning validation may be expected (34). For equipment used 
in early intermediate production, it may be unnecessary to validate equipment cleaning procedures. 
In these cases, cleaning verification for multipurpose equipment is still required. Validated analytical 
methods used to verify the equipment cleaning should be used. If product/processing residues are 
demonstrated to be removed by subsequent purification steps, this may be considered in a document-
ed risk assessment to determine the level of cleaning and cleaning validation necessary.
Cleaning procedures should be monitored at appropriate intervals after validation to ensure that they 
remain effective when used during routine changeovers. Depending on equipment design and com-
plexity, it is typical for API equipment cleanliness to be routinely monitored by analytical testing 
and/or visual examination, where feasible, after each cleaning after cleaning validation is completed. 
This is often associated with the higher risk of some API cleaning circumstances (e.g., large closed 
equipment that cannot be easily visually inspected and the fact that contamination of one batch of 
API can often implicate many batches of drug product). This routine cleaning monitoring after each 
campaign for multipurpose equipment is often accomplished via rinse sampling and testing for large 
closed equipment. 
For more information on biotechnology API manufacture, see PDA Technical Report No. 49 (2).
10.8	 Topical Drug Products
The major issue with topical drug products relates to how limits are set. The approach to setting 
limits depends on the systemic availability of the drug active ingredient when applied to the skin. 
Some topical products, such as drug patches, are actually transdermal delivery mechanisms to allow 
systemic availability of the drug active ingredients. While for other topical drug products, the effect of 
the drug active ingredient is limited to the skin itself and there is generally no, or very low, systemic 
availability of the drug active ingredient.
10.8.1		 Topical Drug Products with Systemic Availability
Limits for topical drug products where the drug active ingredient is topically designed to be available 
systemically are established based on a typical carryover calculation based on a safe level in the next 
product. That safe level may be established on either a fraction of the dose or on a toxicological evalu-
ation (see Section 5.0). A significant difference may be the portion of the active in the topical drug 
product that is systemically available from the cleaned topical product versus the portion of the active 
ingredient that is systemically available when that active ingredient is present as a residue in the next 
topical product. In the absence of specific information, it may be assumed as a worst case that the 
85
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
residue of the cleaned active is 100% systemically available when in the next product. As with other 
carryover calculation based on the therapeutic dose, the minimum dose of cleaned active ingredient 
and the maximum dose of the next product should be adjusted based on factors such as the number 
of applications per day (or per other time period) and the amount of product applied per application. 
Another factor that may be considered in setting limits in this situation is dermal irritation of the ac-
tive ingredient. In most cases, this will not be a limiting factor, but it may be considered, particularly 
if the active ingredient, which is the residue, is not systemically available when present in the next 
topical drug product.
10.8.2		 Topical Drug Products with No or Limited Systemic Availability
For some topical drug products, the therapeutic effect is limited to the skin to which the drug product 
is applied. An example of such a product is sunscreen (a drug product in some countries, such as the 
USA). If the therapeutic effect of the active ingredient is so limited then a modification of a traditional 
carryover calculation may be utilized. The reason is that a “dose” for such topical drug products is 
generally not well defined, as the “use instructions” may typically read “Apply to the affected area.” 
10.8.2.1	 Adjusted Calculation
A traditional carryover calculation bases the limit on a minimum dose of active ingredient of the prod-
uct that is cleaned and a maximum dose of the next drug product. However, in this situation (where 
the effect of the active ingredient is limited to the skin it is applied to) it is not necessary to consider 
the minimum dose of the cleaned active ingredient as application to a very small area (such as 100 cm2) 
and the maximum dose of the next product as application to the entire body (such as 1.6 m2). Those 
calculations can be used but they result in extremely low limits. However, the relevant safety concern is 
what happens if 0.001 of the amount of active applied to a given area (such as 100 cm2) appears in the 
next drug product which is also applied to the same surface area (in this example, 100 cm2). Because 
the therapeutic effect is limited to the skin surface the drug product is applied to, limits can be based on 
0.001 of the concentration of the active ingredient from the cleaned product in the subsequently man-
ufacture drug product (suitably modified by application conditions which will be discussed shortly). In 
other words, if the drug product which is cleaned contains 0.5% drug active ingredient, then the safe 
level in the next drug product is 0.001 of that concentration, or 0.0005% (5 ppm). 
10.8.2.2	  Modification Based on Frequency of Application
Carryover calculations should be modified first based on the frequency of application. For example, 
if the cleaned product is applied a minimum of once per day and the second product is applied a 
maximum of three times a day, then the limit should be lower by a factor of 3 (with a resulting limit 
of 0.00016% in the example given). If the first product is applied a minimum of three times a day and 
the second product applied a maximum of once per day, then the limit may be higher by a factor of 3 
(resulting in a limit of 0.0015% in the example given). 
10.8.2.3	  Modification Based on Amount Applied per Surface Area
A second modifying factor is based on the amount applied per surface area. This is sometimes difficult to 
assess. However, if it is clear that one product is applied at a significantly higher amount per surface area 
then that factor should also be considered. For example, if the cleaned product is typically applied at a rate 
of 2 mg/cm2 and the second product typically applied at a rate of 4 mg/cm2, the concentration limit in 
the basic example given would be lower by a factor of 2 (resulting in a concentration limit of 0.00025%). 
One approach is to establish a therapeutic dose of topical preparation in terms of area of application 
covered by one fingertip unit (FTU), which is defined as the amount of topical preparationointment 
86
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
dosadelivered from a tube with a 5-mm diameter nozzle, applied from the distal skin-crease to the 
tip of index finger an adult forefinger (35). One FTU measures approximately 0.5g. As the average 
human adult area covered by 1 FTU is 286 cm2, approximately 1.75 mg of the topical formulation is 
applied per each square centimeter of the skin surface area. 
10.8.2.4	 Additional Considerations
If a firm has a policy or procedure for a default limit (such as 10 ppm of the cleaning active in the next 
drug product), then the calculated limit (considering the modification discussed in Sections 10.8.2.2 
and 10.8.2.3) should be compared to that default limit and the lower of the two values utilized for 
subsequent calculations.
In addition, if there is evidence that the active ingredient in the cleaned product would be systemically 
available if it were present in the vehicle (excipients) of the next product, then the calculation in 10.8.1 
may not be applicable. In such a case, either the calculation in 10.8.1 should be considered or the order 
of manufacture may be restricted.
10.8.3		 Additional Safety Considerations
If active ingredients used in topical preparations produce adverse skin irritation effects, hypersensitiv-
ity, and/or possible photosensitivity reactions, those considerations should be evaluated to determine 
whether more stringent residue limits should be established. 
10.8.4		 Additional Cleaning Considerations
Topical drug products may present cleaning challenges because of the nature of the excipients used 
and the high viscosities of the drug product. In place of a water prerinse, it may be necessary to physi-
cally remove gross amounts of product left on equipment surfaces using a plastic scraper or a nonwo-
ven wipe. Particularly if the excipients are designed to make the topical drug product “waterproof”, 
more stringent cleaning process conditions, such as higher temperatures or higher concentrations of 
cleaning agents, may be required for effective cleaning. 
10.9	 Animal Drug Products
Cleaning validation for animal drug products is basically the same as for human drug products. The 
main complication is in setting limits because one product (the cleaned product) may be for one animal 
species and the next product manufactured in the cleaned equipment may be for a different species. For 
example, the cleaned product may be dosed only to horses and the next product dosed only to dogs. In 
this situation, a toxicological assessment to determine a safe limit should be considered for the effect of 
the active ingredient of the cleaned product (dosed only to horses) as if it were used for dogs. All rel-
evant toxicology and safety information should be considered; for example, drugs that may be residues 
in products for cows may have restrictions not based on toxicity to the cows but because of concerns 
about safety of the cow’s milk. These concerns may also apply to facilities that make both human and 
animal drugs. Limits based on toxicological evaluations are discussed in Section 5.0.
10.10	
Packaging Components and Packaging Equipment
10.10.1 Primary Packaging Components
Product contact surface of primary packaging closures and containers should be free of materials that 
could adulterate the drug product to the extent that fitness for use would be compromised. An evalu-
ation of suitability may include considerations of manufacturing process residues, cleaning agents/
solvents, particles, bioburden and/or endotoxin.
87
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
10.10.1.1 Oral Dosage Forms Primary Packaging Components
Cleaning of containers and stoppers used for oral dosage forms is based on a risk analysis. The risk 
should be assessed and appropriate cleaning levels defined that will control the risks to acceptable 
levels. Cleaning of containers for solid oral dosage forms, related to risk analysis, could be limited 
to removing of solid material by blowing a stream of compressed filtered air into the bottles while 
inverted. From a microbial perspective, most solid oral drug products will not allow microorganisms 
to proliferate, due to the extremely low water activities of these types of products. 
Some consideration could be provided for the cleaning of containers for liquid oral dosage forms even 
if the liquid does inhibit growth of microorganisms, due to presence of components, like preserva-
tives or sugar at high concentrations, or a final terminal heat treatment. 
10.10.1.2 Parenteral Dosage Forms Primary Packaging Components
Cleaning of containers and stoppers used for parenteral dosage forms is based on a risk analysis. The 
risk should be assessed and the cleaning levels validated at the acceptance criteria. Since the parenteral 
container/closure components are in contact with the drug product, similar cleaning qualification con-
siderations as for direct product contact surfaces for manufacturing equipment should be addressed.
For cleaning processes used as a depyrogenation step for container/closure components, the qualifi-
cation should demonstrate successful endotoxin removal (36). The efficiency of the cleaning process 
to depyrogenate can be assessed by spiking containers or closures with known quantities of endo-
toxin, followed by measuring endotoxin content after cleaning. The studies are typically performed by 
applying a reconstituted endotoxin solution onto the test surfaces and allowing the solution to air dry. 
Positive controls (test surfaces with applied endotoxin but without the endotoxin reduction process) 
should be used to measure the percentage recovery in the test method. Data should demonstrate that 
the cleaning process reduces the endotoxin content by at least a 3-log reduction in a spiking study.
Container washer qualification should start by using a spray coverage test to verify all the surfaces are 
efficiently rinsed. The cleaning performance qualification should consider removal of residues com-
ing from the surface treatment (if applicable) and/or particles (which, as an example, could come 
from burned glass molding lubricant as well as glass particles if breakage occurs before wash).
For closures (such as stoppers), the cleaning performance qualification should consider removal of 
residues coming from the closure manufacturing process, like the lubricant and cleaning agent used, 
as well as particles.
10.10.2	 Packaging Equipment
Packaging equipment may be categorized into primary and secondary equipment.
10.10.2.1 Primary Packaging Equipment
Primary packaging equipment may exert direct impact on the quality of the finished product. Examples 
of such equipment may include oral, topical and aseptic liquid fillers, tablet fillers, oral powder fillers, 
tube fillers, blister machines and other filling machinery that has parts with direct finished dosage product 
contact. The cleaning processes and validation practices for primary equipment should not differ from 
the same practices utilized for direct impact manufacturing equipment as they present similar risk of cross 
contamination. Auxiliary equipment such as hoppers, tubing, piping, conveyors, cappers, cottoners and 
other product contact surfaces should be cleaned and validated the same as associated filling equipment. 
The design of packaging equipment should consider “gentle handling” of finished product to minimize 
possible attrition and breakage in the case of solid dosage products and possible adsorption of liquids. The 
88
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
cleaning of dedicated primary packaging lines may not require validation. Consideration should be given 
to design of the lines and cleaning procedures to minimize validation efforts. While there is a possibility 
of preferential transfer of residues from the primary packaging equipment to an initial portion of the 
packaged product, this risk may be reduced by discarding an initial portion of processed product. 
10.10.2.2	 Secondary Packaging Equipment
Secondary packaging equipment, such as induction sealers, retorquers, labelers, palletizers and other 
similar equipment that does not have direct impact on the quality of the product, should be designed 
to allow only minimal inevitable residuals generated by the packaging process. However, appropriate 
attention should be given to document cleaning of this secondary equipment. 
Once the drug substance is sealed in its primary packaging, the risk of cross-contamination is gener-
ally relatively low. Cleaning processes should be used on the packaging lines after primary packaging, 
but do not require cleaning validation. The main concern with cross-contamination is a compromised 
primary package (such as a broken vial or a crushed bottle) that might release product that transfers 
to the outside of the primary packaging of a different product. Depending on the hazard properties 
of the product, its presence on the outside of the primary packaging of a different drug product 
may be an unacceptable risk. Cleaning processes for such situations should be considered. However, 
because contamination of the next product may only involve contamination of the outside of the 
primary package, the requirements for cleaning validation should be assessed based on risk to patients 
or to people handling the vials from that external contamination on the primary package. In those 
cases where the risk is significant (such as a genotoxic API), a dedicated line or a cleaning step known 
to remove, deactivate or degrade that active drug should be considered. Degradation processes may 
appropriately be confirmed in a laboratory study demonstrating degradation or inactivation of the 
highly hazardous API.
10.11	
Tubing and Hoses
Tubing and hoses have diverse transfer applications in pharmaceutical manufacturing operations. 
Types may vary from flexible plastics to fixed stainless steel piping. Conditions for use may be single- 
or multiple-use. Biocompatibility and inertness of the tubing with the contact material is a primary 
consideration prior to use. The regulatory standards on transfer tubing and hoses used in manufactur-
ing processes are covered under compliance with U.S. FDA standards 21 CFR Part 177.2600 (37). This 
rule is applied in combination with ISO 10993-1 (38) standard for medical devices and USP class I-VI 
plastics tests (39).
The procedure for cleaning should be effective for exposing all product contact surfaces and the inter-
nal bore of tubing to the cleaning detergent and rinsing solution or water. A key for cleaning of tubing 
and hoses is to assure turbulent flow throughout as well as to assure proper sloping for drainage for 
fixed tubing. Visual inspection of the internal bore of the tubing/hose to evaluate the efficiency for 
removal of residue may be performed with the aid of video devices, such as a borescope. It is recom-
mended to drain tubing and hoses of any water/resident solution when not in use. Tubing/hoses 
cleaned in place attached to the main equipment receive the same cleaning regimen as the equipment. 
Although priority is given to the attached equipment when selecting the cleaning detergent and pro-
cedure, evaluation of the impact on the cleaning and storage (hold time) conditions of tubing/hoses 
should be considered. Shorter tubing length may benefit cleaning ability, drainage and storage man-
agement. CIP cleaning equipment or automated hose washers often may be utilized and qualified to 
consistently perform cleaning of tubing or hoses. 
Design of the tubing and hoses should take into consideration welded or permanently embedded 
89
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
fittings for ease of cleaning. If removable end fittings are used, they should be removed during each 
cleaning cycle. If not dried before storage, tubing/hose should be stored on the slope (to allow drain-
age) and should be covered using hose-end covers of spun-bonded polyolefin or similar materials to 
reduce the risk of microbial and/or particulate contamination during storage. 
Based on the material of composition, the indicators of damage (such as pressure testing) should be 
predefined for the tubing under the conditions of use. Qualification for use of product contact tub-
ing and hoses should include an assessment of the useful lifetime for the manufacturing operation. 
The assessment should integrate a visual component of inspecting tubing periodically for signs of 
tear, pitting and disintegration, with wear characteristics, such as particulate shedding detected under 
subvisible conditions. 
10.12	
Excipients
The excipients used for a drug product should be considered in the cleaning validation program. One 
issue for excipients is the possible effect on cleaning of a drug product. This effect is generally more 
pronounced for solid dosage products, where the excipient may be a coating or other functional mate-
rial designed to retard dissolution. This is one reason why some companies prefer to use a laboratory 
cleaning study, as compared to only evaluating the solubility of the active ingredient, to determine the 
difficulty of cleaning of different products in a grouping approach.
Unless the excipient has some kind of unusual toxicity, limits are generally not set for excipients in 
a cleaning validation protocol. A case where limits may be set for excipients is where the excipient 
is known to have a significant effect on the performance of the next manufactured product, such as 
complexing with the API to reduce bioavailability. However, it should be recognized that in all cases, 
residues of excipients after cleaning should be such that the equipment is visually clean. A surface 
which is not “visually clean” due to a high level of an excipient should be generally considered a clean-
ing validation failure.
10.13	
Dedicated Equipment
Equipment for pharmaceutical manufacturing and packaging may be dedicated for processing only 
one product. Some points to consider regarding cleaning validation of dedicated equipment are cov-
ered below.
10.13.1 Reasons for Dedication
Reasons for dedication of equipment may be quality driven (such as to avoid cross-contamination of 
one active ingredient into another product) or may be based on business considerations (such as for 
production efficiency). Regulatory agencies recommend dedicated equipment and/or facilities in cer-
tain situations. For example, the PIC/S recommendations state that “Dedicated equipment should be 
used for products which are difficult to remove (e.g., tarry or gummy residues in bulk API manufac-
turing), for equipment which is difficult to clean (e.g., bags for fluid bed dryers), or for products with 
a high safety risk (e.g., biological or products of high potency which may be difficult to detect below 
an acceptable limit)” (22). That PIC/S document also states that “For certain allergenic ingredients, 
penicillins, cephalosporins or potent steroids and cytotoxics, the limit should be below the limit of de-
tection by best available analytical methods. In practice this may mean that dedicated plants are used 
for these products.” Additionally, the ANVISA Resolution – RDC No. 17 states that “There should 
be used segregated facilities and dedicated to the production of certain medications such as certain 
biological preparations (e.g., live microorganisms) and the highly sensitizing materials (e.g., penicillin, 
cephalosporin, carbapenem and other beta-lactic derivatives) in order to minimize the risk of serious 
90
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
damage to health due to cross contamination”, and further that “The production of certain highly 
active products, such as some antibiotics, certain hormones, cytotoxic substances should be held in 
segregated areas” (40). Finally, there are the U.S. FDA draft recommendations about dedication for 
beta-lactams (41).
Risk assessments and appropriate controls should be considered in cases where regulatory documents 
may be unclear or overly strict on the requirement for dedication or segregation for manufacturing. 
10.13.2 Cleaning Validation Issues
Since cross-contamination of the active ingredient from the previous product to the next product is 
not an issue for dedicated equipment, cleaning validation related to the active itself is generally not 
considered a requirement. The 1993 U.S. FDA cleaning validation guidance states that “When the 
cleaning process is used only between batches of the same product (or different lots of the same in-
termediate in a bulk process) the firm need only meet a criteria of, “visibly clean” for the equipment. 
Such between batch cleaning processes do not require validation” (20). Since “between batches of 
the same product” may refer to dedicated equipment and/or a campaign between products, it can be 
interpreted that cleaning validation is not required for these scenarios. However, cleaning validation 
should be considered for dedicated equipment if carryover of the cleaning agent or the contribution 
of bioburden or degradation byproducts to the next manufactured batch is a concern. In its Compli-
ance Guidance Manual 7356_002, U.S. FDA clarified their position by stating that “lack of demonstra-
tion of effectiveness of cleaning” for dedicated equipment warrants a warning letter (42). It makes 
good sense for manufacturers to conduct risk assessments for all cleaning scenarios to determine the 
need for cleaning validation to comply with product quality (including residues and lot integrity) and 
regulatory expectations. Principles for determining acceptance criteria for cleaning agent, bioburden, 
endotoxin, and degradation products for cleaning validation of dedicated equipment are essentially 
the same as for nondedicated equipment. It is considered to be best practice to document effective-
ness of a cleaning process for dedicated equipment even if “visually clean” is the only criteria. 
91
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Cleaning validation is required by regulatory authorities worldwide. It is encapsulated in the U.S. 
CGMPs (6,43) and in the EU GMPs (22,44). ICH Q7 also stresses the importance of cleaning valida-
tion for API manufacture (36). FDA, PIC/S and WHO also require cleaning validation in guidances 
(20,22,45). There are other guidance documents from various countries but most are a variation on 
the U.S. FDA guidance and/or the PIC/S recommendations. It is recommended that the applicable 
regulations and guidances be carefully consulted as part of the design or evaluation of a cleaning 
validation program. 
