5.0	 Residue and Limits
30
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
5.2	
The Basis for Quantitative Limits
Limits are usually based on one of the following as described in later sections:
• The medical or pharmacological potency of the drug active
• The toxicity of the residue
• A default value
Different manufacturing and cleaning situations may require different approaches. For example, for in 
vitro diagnostics, the effect of the residue on the stability or performance of the subsequently manu-
factured product may provide a better scientific rationale for establishing limits. The following section 
discusses the basis of typical carryover calculations. Depending on the manufacturer, the expression 
of those calculations may be different because it may combine various steps given below. However, it 
is critical that the units used in the equation be internally consistent; for this reason, unit conversion 
factors (e.g., grams to micrograms) may be utilized in these equations. In addition, companies may 
use different terms (or acronyms) for the same concept but still apply the same basic principles in 
calculations; this is to be expected in a field as diverse as cleaning validation. 
5.3	
Acceptable Concentration of Residue in Next Product
The first determination is the acceptable level (i.e., concentration) of the target residue in the sub-
sequently manufactured product. This may be called by different terms, but for this document that 
concentration will be called Acceptable Residue Level (abbreviated ARL). This is an expression of the 
maximum concentration of residue allowed in that next product, as determined by medical, pharma-
cological, safety, stability and/or performance issues. For chemical residues (such as the drug active or 
cleaning agent), this concentration is typically given as μg/g or μg/mL (or an equivalent expression 
depending on the units selected). For bioburden, this is typically given as colony forming units (CFU), 
CFU/g or CFU/mL. 
5.3.1	 ARL Based on Drug Active Dose
For drug actives in drug product manufacture, this is typically determined as one-one thousandth (0.001) 
of minimum daily dose of the drug active in a maximum daily dose of the next drug product. This 
approach is an alternative to the acceptable daily exposure (ADE) (see Section 5.3.2.1) approach 
for non-highly hazardous active ingredients for manufacture in nondedicated equipment. This is ex-
pressed in the following equation:
[Equation 5A]
ARL = MDD × SF
LDD
Where:
ARL = the acceptable residue level in the next drug product
MDD = the minimum daily dose of the active of the cleaned product
SF = the safety factor, which is typically 0.001
LDD = the largest daily dose of the next drug product to be manufactured in the same equipment
[Note 1: For API manufacture, where both the cleaned product and the next manufactured product are 
APIs, Equation 5A, as well as other applicable equations in Section 5.3, is modified with LDD being 
the largest daily dose of the next drug active manufactured in the same equipment.]
[Note 2: For MDD, another approach is to use the single therapeutic dose rather than the minimum 
daily dose. The use of a minimum daily dose has a scientific rationale based on normalizing the dos-
31
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
age frequency for the cleaned product and the next product. For products administered daily, the use 
of a single therapeutic dose may be more stringent so it is an acceptable practice. However, if the 
cleaned product is administered once a week, and the next product is administered once a day then 
the use of a single therapeutic dose in place of the MDD will result in patients who take the next 
product receiving 0.001 of a single weekly dose taken on a weekly basis. Therefore, in the latter case, 
it is preferable to compare both products on the same basis, either weekly or daily (convert a daily 
dose to a weekly dose by multiplying by 7, or convert a weekly dose to a daily dose by dividing by 7).]
[Note 3: Another approach is to express the safety factor (SF) as 1000 rather than 0.001. In such cases, 
SF will be in the denominator of Equation 5A.]
5.3.2 	ARL Based on Toxicity
There are typically two types of calculations based on the toxicity of the residue for either drug prod-
uct or API manufacture. 
One approach is the Risk-MaPP Acceptable Daily Exposure (ADE) approach (12), which may be appli-
cable to residues of drug actives, intermediates, and degradants. The limit is generally based on a No 
Observable Adverse Effect Level (NOAEL) or other relevant toxicological data. For highly hazardous 
drug actives, using the ADE approach is generally required in order to justify manufacturing those 
active ingredients in nondedicated equipment. For non-highly hazardous drug actives, the ADE ap-
proach is an alternative to the dose-based approach (see Section 5.3.1). 
A second approach may be the use of LD50 values for limits for residues like cleaning agents which do 
not have a dose. 
5.3.2.1 ADE Determinations Based on ISPE’s Risk-MaPP
The safe daily amount in this approach is called the ADE. The first step is to identify the NOAEL for 
that chemical (usually in an animal study or from relevant human data) by evaluating the response 
that makes the chemical hazardous. An ADE is estimated by a qualified toxicologist based on the body 
weight and a variety of adjustment factors as given in Equation 5B. While the ADE definition specifies 
safety by any route of exposure, use of an ADE for a specific and relevant route of exposure is also 
allowed; this may allow for higher ADE value provided that the potential exposure is limited to that 
specific route of exposure. 
[Equation 5B]
ADE = NOAEL × BW	 
UFC × MF × PK
Where:
NOAEL = No Observable Adverse Effect Level
BW = body weight of patient taking next product 
UFC = a composite uncertainty factor determined from such factors as interspecies differences, 
intraspecies differences, subchronic to chronic extrapolation, LOAEL to NOAEL extrapolation, and 
database completeness
MF = a factor based on the judgment of the toxicologist
PK = a pharmacokinetic factor to account for different routes of exposures
32
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
The ARL for drug product manufacture is then calculated by the following equation:
[Equation 5C]
ARL = ADE
LDD
Where:
ARL = the acceptable residue level in the next drug product
ADE = Acceptable Daily Exposure of the residue
LDD = the largest daily dose of the next drug product to be manufactured in the same equipment
[Note: For API manufacture, the LDD value is the largest daily dose of the next drug active manufac-
tured in the same equipment.]
5.3.2.2 Toxicity Calculations Based on LD50 Data
This approach is used for residues where the relevant data are short-term toxicity studies, such as a 
LD50 study. Examples of such residues include cleaning agents and intermediates. In this case, the 
NOEL is estimated from the LD50 value using the following equation:
[Equation 5D]
NOEL = LD50 × BW
MF1
Where:
NOEL = No Observable Effect Level
LD50 = the 50% lethal dose of the target residue in an animal, typically in mg/kg of body weight 
(by the appropriate route of administration) 
BW = body weight of patient taking next product 
MF1 = modifying factor or factors, selected by the toxicologist
The cumulative modifying factors selected are generally no more than 1000.
Once the NOEL is estimated, the SDI is determined by Equation 5E. 
[Equation 5E]
SDI = NOEL
MF2
Where:
SDI = Safe Daily Intake of the residue
NOEL = No Observable Effect Level
MF2 = modifying factor or factors, selected by the toxicologist
The cumulative modifying factors selected are generally no more than 1000.
Once the SDI is established, the ARL is determined by Equation 5F.
[Equation 5F]
ARL = SDI
LDD
Where:
ARL = the acceptable residue level in the next drug product
LDD = the largest daily dose of the next drug product to be manufactured in the same equipment
33
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
In Equations 5D and 5E, the modifying factors can be based on one of several published references 
(13-15). An alternative approach for this series of calculations is to combine Equations 5D, 5E and 5F 
into one equation for determining the ARL directly.
5.3.3	 Other ARL Determinations
For residues which are genotoxic, one alternative approach used when the NOEL values are not available 
is to determine the SDI using the Threshold of Toxicological Concern principle (16) which, based on an 
U.S. FDA determination about safe levels in foods, is established at 1.5 μg/day. While this may be appropri-
ate for oral doses, it may not be appropriate for injectables since the U.S. FDA determination was based on 
safe levels in foods (which are taken orally). The ARL is expressed in the following equation:
[Equation 5G]
ARL = SDI
LDD
Where:
ARL = the acceptable residue limit in the next drug product
SDI = the safe daily intake of the residue
LDD = the largest daily dose of the next drug product to be manufactured in the same equipment
For residues for which the concern is a possible deleterious effect on stability, performance or efficien-
cy of a subsequent product or process, the ARL must be determined directly based on an understand-
ing of the products, the process, and the expected effect. For example, for an in vitro diagnostic, the 
acceptable level of residue of a previous product may be determined based on the effect on stability 
or performance of that next in vitro diagnostic. That level may be determined by spiking studies of 
residue in the in vitro diagnostic to determine effects on stability and/or performance (e.g., false posi-
tives or false negatives). 
5.4 	 Acceptable Total Carryover
Once the ARL is determined, the maximum allowable carryover (MAC or MACO) can be calculated. 
MAC is the total amount of a target residue allowed in a batch of the next manufactured product. It is cal-
culated by multiplying the ARL by the minimum batch size of the next product. MAC, which may be ex-
pressed in mass units for chemical residues (e.g., μg or mg or g), is expressed in the following calculation:
[Equation 5H]
MAC = ARL × MBS
Where:
MAC = the Maximum Allowable Carryover
ARL = the Acceptable Residue Limit in the next product
MBS = the Minimum Batch Size of the next product
Note that the minimum batch size is typically expressed in mass units if ARL is expressed as μg/g or 
in volume units if ARL is expressed as μg/mL. For API manufacture, where both the cleaned product 
and the next manufactured product are APIs, Equation 5H is modified with MBS being the minimum 
batch size of the next drug active manufactured in the same equipment
Because the MAC is the total amount allowed in the next manufactured product, it is also the total 
amount allowed on shared equipment surfaces (that is, shared between the cleaned product and the 
next manufactured product).
34
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
5.5	 Surface Area Limit
Once the MAC is determined, the surface area limit (SAL) can be calculated by dividing the MAC by 
the total equipment shared surface area between the two products. SAL, which may be expressed for 
chemical residues in mass units per surface area (e.g., μg/cm2), is expressed in the following calculation:
[Equation 5I]
SAL = MAC
SSA
Where:
SAL = the Surface Area Limit (on shared equipment surfaces)
MAC = Maximum Allowable Carryover
SSA = Shared Surface Area 
5.6	 Limit in Protocol Samples
Once the SAL is determined, the limit in swab or rinse samples can be calculated. Three typical cases 
of limits in samples are covered below.
5.6.1	 Limit per Swab
For swab sampling, one approach is to express the limit as a mass-per-swab sample (e.g., μg of residue per 
swab or μg/swab). The mass-limit-per-swab is determined by multiplying the SAL by the area sampled 
(typical swab sampling areas are 25 cm2 and 100 cm2) (17). This is expressed in the following calculation:
[Equation 5J]
Limit per swab = SAL × swabbed area
Where:
SAL = the Surface Area Limit (on shared equipment surfaces)
5.6.2	 Concentration Limit in Extracted Swab Solvent
For swab sampling, another approach is to express the limit as a concentration of the residue in a 
fixed amount of solvent (aqueous or organic) used for extracting the swab. The concentration limit is 
typically expressed in units such as μg/g, μg/mL or ppm. This concentration limit is determined by 
multiplying the SAL by the area sampled, and then dividing the result by the amount of solvent used 
for extracting the swab (in g or mL). This is expressed in the following calculation:
[Equation 5K]
Concentration Limit = SAL × swabbed area
SEA
Where:
SAL = Surface Area Limit (on shared equipment surfaces)
SEA = Solvent Extraction Amount
35
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.6.3	 Concentration Limit in Rinse Sampling Solution
For rinse sampling, most companies express the limit as a concentration of the residue in a fixed 
amount of the rinse sampling solution. This concentration limit is typically express in units such as 
μg/g, μg/mL or ppm. This concentration limit is determined by multiplying the SAL by the area 
sampled by rinse sampling and then dividing the result by the amount of rinse solution used for the 
sampling rinse (in g or mL). This is expressed in the following calculation:
[Equation 5L]
Concentration Limit = SAL × Area Sampled by Rinse Sampling
Rinse Sampling Volume
Where:
SAL = the Surface Area Limit
If the entire equipment train is rinsed with one rinse solution, then the SSA and the “Area Sampled 
by Rinse Sampling” are identical. Therefore, a simplified expression for the concentration limit in the 
rinse sample (avoiding the need to determine the SSA) is:
[Equation 5M]
Concentration Limit = 	
MAC	
	
 
Rinse Sampling Volume
5.7	 Consolidated Expressions
While the calculations in Sections 5.3 to 5.6 are presented to explicitly show the steps in quantitative 
calculations for limits, it is common for companies, based on an understanding of their cleaning vali-
dation practices, to combine several equations together to simplify calculations. For example, compa-
nies that set limit for a drug active primarily on a fraction of the therapeutic dose may address all the 
factors in Equation 5A and 5H with an overall equation for MAC as follows:
[Equation 5N]
MAC = MDD × SF × MBS
 LDD
Where:
MAC = Maximum Allowable Carryover
MDD = the minimum daily dose of the active of the cleaned product
SF = the safety factor, which is typically 0.001
MBS = the Minimum Batch Size of the next product
LDD = the largest daily dose of the next drug product to be manufactured in the same equipment
36
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Other companies that set limits for drug active primarily on a fraction of the therapeutic dose may 
address all the factors in Equations 5A, 5H, 5I, and 5K with an overall equation for the concentration 
limit in an extracted swab sample as follows:
[Equation 5O]
Concentration Limit = MDD × SF × MBS × swabbed area
LDD × SSA × SEA
Where:
MDD = the minimum daily dose of the active of the cleaned product
SF = the safety factor, which is typically 0.001
MBS = the Minimum Batch Size of the next product
LDD = the largest daily dose of the next drug product to be manufactured in the same equipment
SSA = Shared Surface Area
SEA = Solvent Extraction Amount
5.8	 Example Calculations
As an example of an overall calculation of a MAC limit based on a fraction of a therapeutic dose, we use 
the case of the cleaned drug product having a daily therapeutic dose of 100 mg of the active. If the next 
drug product to be manufactured in the same equipment has a batch size of 10 kg, and a largest daily dose 
of 800 mg, then using a safety factor (SF) of 0.001, the calculation (using Equation 5N) would be:
 MAC = MDD × SF × MBS 
LDD
= 100 mg × 0.001 × 10,000,000 mg = 1250 mg
800 mg
This is the total limit for all residues of the specified active on all shared equipment between the two 
products.
Below is a second example of an overall calculation of a concentration limit in an extracted swab 
sample, again using the case of the cleaned drug product having a daily therapeutic dose of 100 mg 
of the active. The next drug product to be manufactured in the same equipment has a batch size of 10 
kg and a largest daily dose of 800 mg, and a safety factor of 0.001. If the shared surface area is 250,000 
cm2, the swabbed area 100 cm2, and the amount of solvent used for extraction of the swab is 5 mL, 
then the calculation (using Equation 5O) would be:
Concentration Limit = MDD × SF × MBS × swabbed area
LDD × SSA × SEA
= 100 mg × 0.001 × 10,000,000 mg × 100
800 mg × 250,000 × 5
= 0.1 mg/mL (or 100 μg/mL)
5.9	 Other Considerations
The items discussed below are issues that may be considered as part of any evaluation in establishing limit.
5.9.1	 Multiple Next Products
In many pharmaceutical manufacturing situations, there is not just one product that could possibly 
be manufactured after a given product for which limits are being established. If flexibility is desired to 
manufacture products in any order, calculations should be considered for all “subsequently manufac-
37
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
tured products”, and the resulting lowest limit (typically the lowest limit per surface area) should be 
established for the cleaned product. As discussed previously, relevant factors to consider for the next 
product are dosing, batch size and shared surface area. In this manner, any of the products considered 
may be safely manufactured after cleaning of the first product. In such evaluations, the combination 
of the specific relevant factors for each next product should be considered. However, it is also accept-
able as a worst-case to consider only the most stringent of each of the three relevant factors.
Another option is to restrict the order of manufacturing based, for example, on a specific subsequent-
ly manufactured product causing a limit to be very low. In such cases, procedures should be in place 
to assure that the restricted order of manufacture is consistently followed.
A third option is to operate in cleaning verification mode where the acceptability of each specific 
cleaning event is determining based on a limit for the immediately following next product. In this way, 
the limit for cleaning a given product may vary depending on subsequently manufactured product. 
In this verification mode, residues are measured after each cleaning event and compared to the ac-
ceptance limit calculated based on the product immediately following.
5.9.2	 Next Product in Verification Approach
In a cleaning verification protocol, only the actual immediately following product is required for estab-
lishing limits. Particularly in development or clinical manufacturing, where a verification approach is 
commonly used, the next product may not be known at the time of  the cleaning verification evaluation. 
In such cases, one approach is to measure residues following cleaning, and then not to release the 
equipment until the next product is determined. At that time, a carryover evaluation is performed to 
determine whether the residues measured are acceptable. If the measured residues are not accept-
able, the equipment may be recleaned and cleaning verification performed again. A second approach 
is to establish, based on the types of products manufactured, some worst-case values for the relevant 
factors for the next product. These worst-case values are used for establishing limits, and the equip-
ment is cleaned to meet those values. When the next product is determined, it is appropriate to verify 
that the relevant parameters of the next product are within the worst-case values. 
5.9.3	 Default Limits
As used in this document, default limits are one of two types. One type is a default limit which is uti-
lized if the default value is more stringent than what is established by the medically safe calculation (as 
given in Sections 5.3 through 5.8). A second type is a default limit where a medically safe limit cannot 
be established, such as for intermediates in API manufacture. In the latter case, the default limit may 
be established on criteria that are specific to the individual situation, based on process understanding 
and a risk assessment.
One example of the first type of default limit is a default limit used for the ARL. For drug products, 
the most common default limit for the ARL (the limit in the next product) is 10 ppm; however, other 
values may be used. If the ARL calculation (Equation 5A, 5D or 5F) results in a value above 10 ppm, 
then 10 ppm is used as the ARL. If the ARL calculation results in a value below 10 ppm, then that 
lower calculated value is used as the ARL. For API manufacture, more common default limits for the 
ARL are 50 ppm or 100 ppm (18), although other values may be selected and used if they are more 
stringent than what is established by the medically safe calculation.
A second example of this type of default limit is a default limit for the SAL. For either drug product 
or API manufacture, the most typical default value for the SAL used is 4μg/cm2. This level is com-
monly cited as the upper limit for what is considered visually clean. If the SAL calculation (Equation 
38
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
5I) results in a value above 4 μg/cm2, then 4 μg/cm2 is used as the SAL. If the SAL calculation results 
in a value below 4 μg/cm2, then that lower calculated value is used as the SAL. 
It should be understood that in these two examples, the logic is that any value below the medically safe 
value may be used as it represents a more stringent criterion.
5.9.4	 Use of Different Safety Factors
The safety factor applied to a minimum daily dose is typically 0.001 (one one-thousandth), regardless 
of the route of administration. Based on a risk assessment, a more stringent or less stringent safety 
factor may be applied as appropriate for a specific situation. For example, for clinical trial materials 
where the dose is not fully established, a more stringent safety factor may be considered. Since the 
safety factor of 0.001 was originally established for drug product administered chronically, it may be 
acceptable (again based on a risk assessment) to use a less stringent factor for drug products adminis-
tered for a short time (such as cold tablets, which may be administered for only 10 days).
5.9.5	 Different Routes of Administration
If the cleaned product and the next product are administered by different routes (such as the first 
product being an oral dose and the second product being an injectable), a risk assessment should be 
considered. This risk assessment might include an evaluation of hazards of the oral drug if adminis-
tered as an injectable, or it might include a review of data for the extent of systemic availability of the 
oral drug if given orally.
5.9.6	 Different Doses for Adults and Children
For two products where both products have different doses for adults and for children, it is appropri-
ate to determine the ARL based on both products with the adult dose, and then for both products 
using the child’s dose. The lower ARL of the two values should be used for subsequent limit calcula-
tions. In cases where one product may be dosed only for adults and the next product only dosed for 
children, then a risk assessment should be considered.
5.9.7	 Human and Veterinary Products Manufactured on the Same Equipment
For this situation, a risk assessment should be considered to set limits appropriately. In addition to the 
species difference, the body weight difference may also be a significant factor. 
5.9.8	 Residues of Genotoxic and Other Highly Hazardous Active Ingredients
One approach to genotoxic residues is covered in Section 5.3.3, which is to utilize the Threshold of 
Toxicological Concern (TTC) value of 1.5 μg/day as the safe daily intake (16), and utilize conventional 
calculations to set an acceptable limit in an analytical sample. Another approach for genotoxic residues 
(provided the genotoxic residue is the active ingredient and not a degradant), as well as other residues 
of special medical concern, is to dedicate equipment to that one product and thus avoid the issue of 
the genotoxic residue being carried over to a different product. A third approach is to perform clean-
ing validation, with limits based on a toxicological evaluation related to the genotoxic effect (or other 
special toxicity concern) using the principles in Section 5.3.2.2. A fourth approach is to set the limit for 
the genotoxic residue as below the limit of detection of the best available analytical technique. In the 
latter case, a medical risk assessment should be performed to determine whether residues at that detec-
tion limit are acceptable. In this latter case, it may also be possible to include in the cleaning process a 
step which deactivates or degrades the genotoxic material such that genotoxic properties are no longer 
present. Such a determination of deactivation or degradation is preferably performed as a laboratory 
study. These approaches may also be applicable to other active ingredients with special concerns, such 
39
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
as reproductive toxicity hazards, allergenicity, cytotoxicity, and mutagenicity. 
5.9.9	 Limits Based on Analytical Detection Limits
Limits may be established based on the analytical detection limits providing residues at those analyti-
cal detection limits are determined to be safe. It should be recognized that this method is not normally 
recommended because with ever improving analytical methods, the limits will be driven exceedingly 
low so as not be practically achievable. The issue is not whether the residue can be measured, but 
rather whether the residue is medically safe and does not affect subsequent product quality. 
5.9.10		 Degradation of the Active Ingredient
If the active ingredient degrades during the cleaning process (or after the cleaning process during the time 
before sampling), it may not be appropriate to measure residues of that active ingredient using a specific 
analytical procedure in a cleaning validation protocol. The reason is that the relevant residue to measure 
is the degradant. There are at least two approaches to dealing with this situation. One approach is to set 
limits for the degradant, and then measure the degradant in the protocol using an appropriate analytical 
method. This assumes that there is a specific degradant for which limits can be established (e.g., based on 
a toxicity calculation). Another approach is to set limits for the undegraded active based on its dose. Resi-
dues are then measured with a nonspecific analytical method (such as TOC). The residue as measured 
by that nonspecific method is converted to an equivalent amount of undegraded active ingredient and 
compared to the calculated limit. This approach may be acceptable if the safety concerns from residues 
of the degradant(s) are no more serious than the safety concerns of the active ingredient. There may be 
other acceptable approaches based on the specific of the situation and a risk assessment.
5.9.11		 Limits Not Measureable
If calculations for the limit of the active ingredient in the analytical sample result in values that are not 
measurable by available analytical methods, there are several options. One option is to dedicate the equip-
ment to that one product, thereby reducing the need to measure the active ingredient except by a visually 
clean criterion. A second option is to modify the parameters of the next manufactured product such that 
the limit is higher. For example, raising the minimum batch size of the next product will increase the limit. 
It may also be possible to restrict the order of manufacture such that certain products, which drive the 
limit lower, are not manufactured after the cleaned product with the low limit. In such cases, appropriate 
measures should be put in place to insure that only those approved products are manufactured as the next 
product. A third option is to modify the sampling parameters. For example, for swab sampling, sampling 
a larger area (100 cm2 rather than 25 cm2) or extracting the swab with a smaller amount of solvent will 
result in an increased limit in the analytical sample. A fourth option is lower the rinse volume for rinse 
sampling. A fifth option is to concentrate the rinse sample by a technique such as vacuum evaporation.
5.9.12 	 Limits for Organic Solvents
For organic solvents that are typically used for cleaning in small molecule API synthesis, limits may 
be established based on toxicity calculations. Another approach is to use the values in ICH Q3C (R5), 
which establishes acceptable levels for solvents in API’s and in drug products (19). It should be rec-
ognized that Q3C technically applies to solvents used in the manufacture of API’s. While cleaning 
processes are sometimes considered manufacturing steps, they are often considered part of the sup-
porting “equipment and facilities”. Therefore this approach should be carefully evaluated before use. 
Another approach is not to set limits for volatile organic solvents. One situation where this may apply 
is if there is an adequate determination (based on process understanding and appropriate studies) that 
there are adequate conditions for the volatile solvent to evaporate. Note that this latter consideration 
also applies to use of isopropanol or ethanol used as final rinse or wipe for drug product manufacture. 
40
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Another situation where limits may not be required is where the same solvent is used for the final 
rinse as for manufacture of the next product. 
5.9.13		 Dedicated Equipment 
For equipment trains dedicated to manufacture of only one product, the concern about carryover 
of the active ingredient from one batch to the next is minimized. As stated in the U.S. FDA guidance 
document, visually clean may be appropriate to address such a concern (20). However, cleaning vali-
dation may still be required because of concerns about other residues, such as degradants, cleaning 
agent and bioburden, carrying over to the next batch of the same product. 
If only parts of an equipment train are dedicated to one product, then that dedicated part is not consid-
ered as part of the shared surface area for calculating limits for an active ingredient. However, the surface 
area of that part may be relevant for calculating other limits, such as the limit for the cleaning agent.
Another approach is to set limits for the active ingredient and measure residues of the active ingredient 
in a cleaning validation protocol for dedicated equipment for other reasons, such as concerns about 
batch integrity or certain equipment surfaces may not be easily evaluated by visual examination. 
5.9.14		 Dividing a Limit among Various Pieces of Equipment
In order to evaluate a processing operation composed of several unit operations, it is important to 
consider the accumulated residue from each piece of process equipment. The MAC is the sum of all 
target residues that could be present on the various pieces of relevant shared equipment surfaces. A 
common practice is to require the same SAL for each and every surface in an equipment train. An 
alternative is to apportion the total amount (the MAC) differently among the different equipment 
items, such that the total amount present still reflects the MAC amount. For example, for an equip-
ment train comprising three separate vessels each of the same surface area, the SAL limit might be 
1.0 μg/cm2 if the MAC is distributed evenly over all surface areas. In contrast, the MAC might be 
apportioned such that the SAL was 0.5 μg/cm2 for Equipment A, 1.0 μg/cm2 for Equipment B, and 
1.5 μg/cm2 for Equipment C, provided the total carryover limit was still at the calculated MAC value. 
5.9.15		 Limits for Preferential Transfer to a First Portion of the Next Product
An equipment train should be delineated to separate those portions in which the residue would be 
evenly (homogeneously) distributed in the next product (e.g., blender, granulator) from those in 
which the residue could be transferred to an individual dosage unit of the next product (e.g., tablet 
press, vial filler). To address the situation of preferential (non-homogeneous) transfer, the carryover 
calculations can be adjusted based on the surface area subject to preferential transfer and the portion 
of the next batch subject to being potentially contaminated with the transferred residue. This will 
result in using a different, more stringent limit to the equipment surfaces which can preferentially 
transfer to the next product, thus restricting potential carryover to an initially manufactured single 
product dose of the next product. In addition, this preferential transfer can be addressed based on 
production techniques if an adequate first portion of the next manufactured product (e.g., filled vials, 
tablets) is discarded. Another option is to utilize equipment parts dedicated to one product where this 
preferential transfer may occur.
5.9.16		 Limits for Biotechnology Manufacture
More information on limits for biotechnology manufacture is given in PDA Technical Report No. 49, 
“Points to Consider for Biotechnology Cleaning Validation” (2).
41
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.9.17		 Products with More Than One Active Ingredient
In drug product manufacture, there may be more than one active ingredient in the drug product. In 
such cases, there are at least two options. One option is to set limits for all active ingredients and mea-
sure each active ingredient in a cleaning validation protocol. Another option is to determine a “worst 
case” among the different active ingredients, and to only set limits for that worst-case active ingredi-
ent based on the lowest limit of any active ingredient in the group. Considerations for determining 
the worst-case active ingredient include difficulty of cleaning, solubility in the cleaning solution, and 
concentration of the active. 
5.10	 Bioburden Limits
In considering bioburden limits following cleaning, it is not expected that the cleaning process itself 
results in sterile equipment. If limits are established for bioburden in a cleaning validation proto-
col, those limits can be established using carryover calculations using the principles in Sections 5.3 
through 5.6. For non-sterile manufacture, the starting point is an ARL in CFU/g or CFU/mL of the 
next manufactured product. The starting point for that ARL value is the bioburden specification of 
that next product. However, since there are sources of bioburden other than the cleaned equipment 
(e.g., from the raw materials of the next product), an adjustment factor is usually applied to the 
product specification to lower the bioburden ARL. These carryover calculations typically result in 
SAL values significantly above 10 CFU/cm2 or a rinse sampling solution limit significantly above 100 
CFU/mL. A risk assessment should be done to determine the acceptability of such values, including 
the nature of the next product (low water activity, which will not allow proliferation in the product 
vs. high water activity which, without preservatives, will allow proliferation in the next product). The 
acceptable bioburden level should also take into consideration effects on bioburden proliferation dur-
ing the clean hold time. For this reason, many companies will establish very conservative bioburden 
limits, such as 1-2 CFU/cm2 for surface sampling methods and the typical purified water limit of 100 
CFU/mL for rinse samples. 
However, even if the process equipment is steamed in place or autoclaved prior to manufacture of 
the next product, or even if the next product is sterile-filtered, it is typically the practice to evaluate 
bioburden to establish that the subsequent process is not overly challenged. Achievement of typical 
bioburden limits for non-sterile manufacturing (1-2 CFU/cm2) is considered more than adequate for 
surface sampling. For rinse sampling that is performed with WFI, one approach is to utilize typical 
WFI values (10 CFU/100 mL), while another approach is to utilize a value of either 100 CFU/100 mL 
or 1,000 CFU/100 mL. The rationale for the higher limit is that the equipment will be subsequently 
steamed. Furthermore the WFI value is the value for the WFI in the recirculating loop; once it is 
removed from that loop and passed through clean equipment, there is not necessarily an expectation 
that it will still meet the WFI value.
An additional consideration for bioburden evaluation is the determination of objectionable organ-
isms. Objectionable organisms are not necessarily limited to the USP specified organisms, but include 
organisms selected based on an understanding of the product and manufacturing situation. What 
makes an organism objectionable is not just the species, but also the number. The degree of iden-
tification may be identification down to the species level, or it may just include methods to exclude 
objectionable organisms. Furthermore, one approach is to identify all colonies that are found, while 
another approach is to only identify colonies if the number is above a certain threshold (e.g., 50% of 
the acceptance limit). 
42
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
5.11	 Endotoxin Limits
Endotoxin carryover to the final product is a concern for any product with endotoxin specifications. 
In this situation, it is common practice to measure endotoxin in the final rinse water, with limits typi-
cally set at the WFI limit of 0.25 EU/mL. If the equipment is depyrogenated by heat, endotoxin will 
be deactivated and measurement of endotoxin for cleaned equipment may not be required.
5.12	 Visually Clean Criterion 
Visual appearance of production surfaces is a direct measurement that verifies removal of residuals. 
The most common use of a visually clean criterion is to supplement swab and/or rinse testing for 
residues for cleaning validation protocols. In such cases, it is common practice not to establish a quan-
titative visual limit.
If visual examination is used without swab and rinse sampling, it is required to establish a quantitative 
visual limit for a residue on a specified surface under specified viewing conditions. If visual examina-
tion supplements swab and/or rinse sampling, such a visual limit determination may be done to fur-
ther refine and/or limit what visually clean means. A discussion of that methodology for establishing 
a visual limit is given in Section 7.7.3. Provided the quantitative visual limit is more stringent than a 
SAL carryover limit (see Section 5.5) and provided that the equipment surfaces can be viewed in the 
cleaning validation protocol under conditions that are the same or more stringent than the viewing 
conditions established for the quantitative limit, then this visually clean criterion may be used without 
swab or rinse sampling. If this approach is used, a second-person verification in protocol execution 
should be utilized. Typical visual limits reported in the literature are 1-4 μg/cm2. However, it should 
be recognized that this limit depends on factors or conditions such as the nature of the residue, the 
nature of the surface, the lighting, the distance of viewing, the angle of viewing, and the visual acuity 
of the operator. 
The requirement for “visual cleanness” usually applies to equipment surfaces. It is not necessarily a 
requirement that swabs be visually clean after a surface is swabbed, due to the fact that residue which 
is not visible on a larger surface may become “visible” when concentrated on the smaller area of the 
swab head.
43
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
In order to evaluate cleaning effectiveness, it is necessary to sample the surfaces of the equipment 
to establish the level of residuals present. It is essential for a cleaning validation program that the 
appropriate sampling methods are utilized. This section discusses issues that might be addressed in 
determining the appropriateness of types of sampling methods, sampling recovery validation studies, 
and training and qualification of samplers.
6.1	 Sampling Method Selection
Selection of a sampling method depends on the nature of the equipment, the nature of the residue 
being measured, the residue limit, and the desired analytical method. Sampling methods discussed 
here are:
• Direct surface sampling
• Rinse sampling
• Swabbing
• Placebo sampling.
It should be noted that while regulatory documents refer to swabbing as “direct” sampling and to 
rinse sampling as “indirect” sampling, it is operationally more descriptive to refer to those sampling 
methods as “swab sampling” and “rinse sampling,” and reserve the term “direct sampling” for tech-
niques such as visual inspection.
Swab/wipe sampling, rinse sampling, and visual examination are listed as acceptable sampling tech-
niques in most regulatory documents (20, 21, 22). Each method has its advantages and limitations. In 
a given protocol, multiple sampling methods may be used, such as “both rinse sampling and visual 
examination” or “rinse sampling, swab sampling, and visual examination,” as required to adequately 
determine that the equipment is acceptably clean.
6.1.1	 Direct Sampling Methods
Direct sampling methods (as used in this document) include both instrumental methods and visual in-
spection. It should be recognized that direct surface sampling incorporates elements of both sampling 
and analytical methods.
6.1.1.1	Visual Inspection
It is a well-accepted practice that a cleaning process should remove visible residues from the produc-
tion equipment surfaces. The visual inspection of equipment has limitations in that some equipment 
surfaces (e.g., piping) are usually not accessible for viewing. The use of optical equipment like mir-
rors or endoscopes, as well as the use of additional lighting, can help to facilitate visual inspection. 
Ordinarily surfaces that are visually examined should be dry, as this represents a worst-case condition 
for visual inspection.
Remote inspection techniques (e.g., with fiber-optic probes and a viewing screen) are utilized when 
visual inspection by a trained inspector is difficult to perform. Things that might make visual inspec-
tion difficult include issues related to tank entry, the hazards of a potential residue, or inaccessibility 
of critical equipment surfaces. Additionally, one might use remote inspection techniques to supple-
ment an “unaided” visual inspection procedure. 
Borescopes, Fiberscopes, and Videoscopes allow visual inspection of hard-to-reach areas. Borescopes 
have been used to view the interior of piping and tank welds. A benefit of these scopes is that they typ-
ically can fit into confined spaces not accessible to operators. They are typically very maneuverable, 
