8.0	 Maintenance of Validated State
65
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
process parameters and/or events are typically based on a quality risk approach but there may be 
alarms based on business or safety concerns. In an automated cleaning cycle, alarms may be based 
on a variety of parameters, such as temperature of the wash and rinse solutions, online analytical 
results of the recirculating wash solution, pressure at the spray device, flow through various circuits, 
and online analytical results of the final rinse. These are typically automated alarms, in which a light 
flashes, a buzzer sounds, or the cleaning process is aborted, with the generation of a failure record. 
When using measurement probes for alarm purposes, the device should have appropriate accuracy 
and should be maintained in current calibration. There may also be other “nonautomated” alarms, in 
which observations by an operator trigger a response (e.g., visual observation by an operator that a 
cleaning detergent drum is empty). 
There are a variety of approaches to cleaning the equipment on which an alarm occurred. The cause 
of the alarm should be investigated. This may be done as part of a Corrective and Preventative Ac-
tion (CAPA) program. One strategy is that on specified alarm conditions, the cleaning cycle may be 
restarted. For example, if inadequate cleaning agent concentration occurred (as indicated by an alarm 
on the wash cycle conductivity), the cleaning cycle can be restarted from the beginning after appro-
priate actions are taken to ensure that the alarm does not reoccur and that the cleaning effectiveness 
will not be adversely affected. This is a conservative approach and ensures a complete cleaning cycle is 
performed, but care should be taken that alarms are noted and trended to ensure cycle performance is 
not trending towards being ineffective and to better correct repetitive problems. Alternately, the step 
in which the alarm occurs may be restarted. This approach strikes a balance between ensuring cycle 
performance and minimizing cleaning time as the entire cycle does not have to be repeated. Automat-
ed alarming is generally not done in manual cleaning operations. However, if cleaning agent dilution 
is confirmed by conductivity, or cleaning agent temperature is confirmed by temperature measure-
ment, measurements outside the specified range can serve as an “alarm.” In all cases, it should be en-
sured that cycles performed during validation are not “best case” due to alarm conditions. For example, 
if equipment is soiled and during the validation runs of the cleaning cycle, alarms occur that result in 
multiple additional rinse steps being completed, this cycle may no longer be representative or worst 
case but may be a best case. 
8.3	 Change Control
A change control system is critical for ensuring maintenance of the validated state for cleaning pro-
cesses. The change control system should cover all key parameters and components of the cleaning 
system to ensure that all changes with a potential to impact maintenance of the validated state are 
evaluated. This includes not only changes in the cleaning process but also changes in equipment and 
changes in the manufacturing process (e.g., a change in temperature in a manufacturing process) that 
might affect the performance of the validated cleaning process. Quality preapproval and tracking of 
changes are key requirements for this system. 
The change control system should provide for a review of each change by an interdisciplinary team. 
This should include a review of current validation for the equipment being changed, and depending 
on the nature of the change, may result in laboratory, pilot scale and/or commercial scale evalua-
tions. This may also involve a review of the relevant sections of any risk assessment previously done. 
Significantly major changes may result in the decision that the new cleaning process requires separate 
validation as a new process. There are some important considerations for designing the test plan to 
verify changes; review of the process design considerations will assist in this evaluation. First, con-
trol parameters should stay within their validated ranges. If changes are made to extend or widen a 
validated range, an evaluation should be made to determine the nature and extent of testing (if any) 
necessary to change that range. For example, if the pump on a CIP skid is validated to deliver wa-
66
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
ter between 60 and 70 liters per minute, and the desired change is to increase the flow rate to 70-80 
liters per minute, new validation testing is required to verify that the pump is capable of delivering 
the desired flow before validation of the cleaning cycle can occur. Second, the acceptance criteria for 
analytical methods should remain unchanged from the previous validation unless there is a justified 
reason for the difference. This is to ensure that changes result in maintenance of the validated state 
rather than creation of a new state, which may require significant testing to ensure it is still validated. 
Finally, reduced sample sites and/or fewer analytical methods may be appropriate in many cases to 
confirm validation maintenance based on a change. For example, if the effect of the change is only on 
bioburden then it may be appropriate to evaluate only bioburden in studies that evaluate the effects 
of the change. These differences should be justified in the testing plan/protocol.
8.4	 Routine Monitoring
Another tool for ensuring maintenance of the validated state is a risk-based routine monitoring pro-
gram. A routine monitoring program may provide analytical data to be trended (see Section 8.5 
below), such as by SPC. In most cases involving automated processes, the data are provided by the 
automated equipment itself. For example, data may be generated by the CIP skid on wash-solution 
conductivity, final rinse conductivity, temperatures, times, flow rates and pressure. In other cases, 
separate sampling may be established for data collection, such as rinse analysis by UV/Vis, HPLC, or 
TOC. Visual examination after each cleaning process is another type of routine monitoring. Visual 
inspection after each cleaning process typically does not involve disassembly of equipment solely for 
the purpose of that inspection. 
A documented risk-based approach should be used to optimize compliance in an efficient manner. 
This could include leveraging family or grouping approaches, reduced sample sites and reduced 
analytical methods. Leveraging in this manner is most common on cleaning processes which were 
grouped for qualification purposes but it may also be done for cleaning processes which were quali-
fied separately. In both cases, all members of the group should be considered for routine monitoring 
activities in a risk-based approach. When defining these approaches, the inherent risk associated with 
a given cleaning process and historical experience/data should be considered. For example, when 
performing the initial validation on process equipment, residues of an active ingredient may be mea-
sured via a variety of swab and rinse samples. However, with the proper data analysis, it may be 
appropriate to measure using only rinse sampling during routine monitoring. However, it may be 
appropriate for cleaning of highly hazardous drug active ingredients (as compared to cleaning of 
drug active ingredients that are not highly hazardous) to include more sampling for residues as part 
of routine monitoring after completion of the qualification runs.
8.5 	 Data Trending and Review
Trending of cleaning cycle performance, analytical data from routine monitoring, and alarms are an-
other recommendation to ensure continued cleaning cycle performance. Data that is trended can be 
continuous data (such as final rinse water analysis) or discrete data (“yes/no” data such as occurrence 
of an alarm). When trending any of these data sets, procedures should be in place to initiate an inves-
tigation when adverse trends are observed even if ineffective cleaning cycles have not occurred. Trend-
ing of cleaning cycle performance data is important for identifying potential cleaning cycle issues 
before they result in ineffective cleaning cycles. For example, a slowly increasing trend in the final rinse 
analytical result may not be indicative of an ineffective cleaning process. However, such a trend should 
require an investigation of the cause. In the example given, it may be that the spray device is becom-
ing clogged, in which case it should be cleaned, and appropriate steps should be taken to prevent 
clogging in the future. On the other hand, it may be a result of a fouled sensor, such as a conductivity 
67
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
sensor. Alarm monitoring and trending will help indicate cycle failure although alarm data will not 
proactively identify potential issues. The incidence of all alarms should still be trended to determine if 
additional process controls are required to reduce the frequency of alarming. Data trending may also 
serve as an important input for a continuous improvement program.
For data trending, there should be appropriate criteria established for action and/or alert levels. It is 
advisable to obtain guidance from a statistician to determine the appropriate number of data points 
necessary to obtain a statistically relevant data set. These values are typically less than any pass/fail 
acceptance criteria established for the qualification runs. Statistical process capability studies, based 
on multiple (e.g., 20-25) data points, may be used to establish action/alert levels. Since such extensive 
data may not be available for initial commercial manufacture, data from development runs and/
or sufficiently similar cleaning processes may be used to establish tentative action/alert levels. Ap-
propriate technical judgment should be utilized in establishing action/alert levels that are practically 
significant and not just statistically significant. For example, consistently obtaining “zeroes” for rinse 
bioburden data for the cleaning process may not alone be sufficient to require a “one-time” value of 
3 CFU to be a significant event which needs an investigation. 
8.6	 Evaluation of Cumulative Changes
Review of the cumulative impact of changes on a system should be considered. Such a review may 
be initiated based on data/events from the cleaning process or may be time-based. One approach is 
to include a review of cumulative changes for every change control event. This review should pro-
vide evidence that the cleaning cycle continues to meet specified requirements despite multiple small 
changes, each of which was appropriately approved. It is possible that many minor changes (each 
deemed to have no impact on the validated state) could have an impact when considered in total. This 
review of cumulative changes may involve two approaches. First, a documented analysis (i.e. review 
of the changes and the impact these changes will have on other parts of the process) of the changes 
should be undertaken. Second, process performance and alarms should be monitored to ensure con-
tinued maintenance of the validated state and system performance.
8.7	 Training
Training after the initial qualification runs should be done to help assure maintenance of the validated 
state. One type of training may involve training on a procedure revised for either clarification or for 
a cleaning process change. Another type of training is retraining of a previously trained operator be-
cause of suspected operator error. A third type of training is retraining on a regular basis for manual 
cleaning processes. This latter training may be done on a regular basis to avoid process “creep”. Of 
course, training of any new (previously untrained) operators should also be done. Training should 
cover cleaning process operators, sampling personnel, and analytical personnel as applicable. 
8.8	 Periodic Review
As part of lifecycle validation, it is common practice to perform an overall periodic review of the 
validation state. The frequency of such a review will depend on a risk assessment. Such a review typi-
cally involves a review of data collected as described in Sections 8.1 through 8.7 above. In addition, it 
typically involves a review of any changed regulations as well as any change in common industry or 
inspectional practices that might be considered part of current Good Manufacturing Practice. This pe-
riodic review should be documented and should include a conclusion as to the validation status of the 
cleaning process. It may also include recommended or planned improvements in the cleaning process.
Historically, it was considered acceptable to perform periodic revalidation on cleaning processes in 
68
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
lieu of routine monitoring and periodic review. However, the approach of revalidation yields a much 
less robust picture of the state of control of the cleaning process and may be more resource-intensive. 
Revalidation as a concept is no longer used by some regulatory agencies because of a preference for a 
lifecycle validation approach. Under a lifecycle validation approach, a significant change in a cleaning 
process involves not the revalidation of the previous process, but rather validation of a new process. 
Such validation of a new process, however, may rely on data from the old process based on it being 
sufficiently similar. 
69
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Documentation is pivotal to cleaning process knowledge management. Documentation of cleaning 
validation activities will vary with individual company practices. This is particularly the case in terms 
of where data, reports and other documents are stored and how they are retrieved. There might be 
variations among companies in terms of determining at what stage of validation (i.e., design/devel-
opment, qualification, and validation maintenance) those documents are considered. All data and 
documents relevant to a determination of the extent of control and consistency of a cleaning process 
should be appropriately controlled and consistent with GMP regulatory requirements and with the 
company’s quality system. This system should be such that those documents can be readily retrieved. 
This documentation should be part of, or consistent with, a company’s quality management system. 
A procedure on documentation, with specifics for cleaning validation documents, should be consid-
ered for knowledge management. 
This section will cover documentation for a high-level cleaning validation master plan and/or policy, 
for design/development, for qualification, and for validation maintenance. Figure 9.5-1 contains the 
typical steps in a cleaning validation process flow where appropriate documentation should be con-
sidered. 
9.1	
Cleaning Validation Master Plans
It is good practice to have a document or documents near the top of the cleaning validation docu-
mentation hierarchy that broadly define the expectations for a cleaning validation program. This 
document is often called the “cleaning validation master plan”. Such a master plan is not a regulatory 
requirement but is a practical “requirement” in order to facilitate regulatory inspections as well as to 
ensure consistency of execution within a facility.
The plan should provide a description of responsibilities and activities for the planning and execution 
of cleaning validation. This is best accomplished by a specific cleaning validation master plan. The 
cleaning validation master plan could be described in detail or referenced as a separate document in the 
overall site validation master plan. The cleaning master plan may be all-encompassing. An alternative 
approach is to have a high-level cleaning validation policy and then have a cleaning validation master 
plan that has more detailed explanations of the validation requirements. This approach is common for 
multinational companies where a cleaning validation policy is set at the corporate level. Individual sites 
will prepare master plans consistent with that policy, but with requirements more appropriate for the 
manufacturing situation at that site. If this approach is used, care should be utilized in the higher level 
policy so as not to set policy requirements that may not be appropriate for every site.
These documents are living documents that should be reviewed and updated as needed and on a 
defined frequency specified in the master plan. A report to the plan may be written periodically to 
summarize the major activities executed under the plan during that interval.
The cleaning master plan will describe the overall plan, rationale and methodology to be used in per-
forming cleaning validation. The plan should provide a high-level description of the cleaning valida-
tion philosophy and strategy that will support the validation activities performed at the site. Detailed 
procedures on the execution of cleaning validation will be in individual protocols. The plan will de-
fine the efforts required to ensure the cleaning program complies with current Good Manufacturing 
Practices (CGMPs). The validation activities are documented according to the requirements of the 
plan to provide sufficient scientific rationale to assess the suitability of the cleaning program in order 
to consistently clean equipment to the required specifications. During a regulatory inspection, an in-
spector may ask to review the master plan and then look at the specific validation protocols and final 
reports to determine if the plan is appropriate and to assure that the elements of both the plan and 
individual protocols are being followed.
9.0 Documentation
70
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
9.1.1	 Elements of a Comprehensive Plan
The master plan should address each important aspect of the cleaning validation program. Elements 
of a master plan and the appropriate details provided for those elements will depend on the practices 
of the specific facility. One approach is to include more detail in the master plan while another ap-
proach is to include that level of detail for procedures consistent with the master plan. Elements of a 
master plan may include, but are not limited to, the following topics:
• Purpose of the plan
• Scope of the cleaning validation program
• Designation of responsibilities
• List of equipment to be validated
• Definitions and glossary of terms
• Means of cleaning documentation (e.g., procedures and records) 
• Prerequisites to cleaning validation (e.g., equipment and utility qualifications) 
• Spray device coverage testing
• Use of various cleaning systems (e.g., CIP, COP, mechanical washers or manual cleaning)
• Cleaning reagents and mechanisms
• Cleaning cycle development requirements
• Cleaning equipment lists
• Product list
• Cleaning SOPs
• Precleaning methods
• Conditions for use of artificial or surrogate soils
• Definition and use of “worst-case conditions” associated with a cleaning process (e.g., flow rates or step 
durations)
• Description of family approach and grouping of products/equipment/systems based on similarities, 
including an approach to determine “worst-case product” based upon attributes that impact cleaning (e.g., 
solubility of all components in the “soil”)
• Use of dedicated or shared equipment; single use (disposable) equipment
• Definition of circumstances in which cleaning verification is preferred or acceptable (e.g., clinical stages)
• Strategies and definitions for indirect product contact surfaces
• Cleaning of components and single-use equipment
• Use of quality risk management to determine the scope and extent of validation activities
• Establishment of design space based on cleaning parameters and use in ongoing monitoring
• Use of mock, blank, or placebo runs
• Equipment hold study approaches (e.g., dirty hold, clean hold or storage hold) 
• Microbial contamination (e.g., bioburden and endotoxin)
• Sampling techniques (e.g., visual inspection, rinse sampling or swab sampling)
• Training/qualification for sampling techniques
• Analytical methods (e.g., validation and recovery requirements)
• Rationale for the use of product-specific assays and nonspecific assays
• Rationales and formulas for limits for process residues, microbial contaminants and cleaning agents
• Validation maintenance (including routine monitoring, change control, and periodic review)
71
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
• Attachments/appendices (e.g., various tables or lists of items within the realm of the plan such as a 
responsibility matrix)
• Requirement for reassessment of cleaning validation master plan
• Roadmap or summary of current status and upcoming plans
• References
Note that this is a comprehensive list. Some items listed may not be applicable to a given manufac-
turer. Some items may be maintained by a manufacturer in a system outside the cleaning validation 
master plan.
9.1.2	 Harmonization of Site Cleaning Validation Programs 
For a product made at more than one site, where appropriate, the cleaning requirements should 
preferably be the same. However, if the process equipment scale , the type of cleaning equipment 
available, analytical equipment, and/or cleaning process is different (e.g., CIP skid vs. manual), the 
programs can only be harmonized to a limited degree. The acceptance criteria may differ for any limit 
that is based on batch size and equipment surface area. The same would also apply to some degree if a 
contract manufacturer were making the same product. However, there is an additional consideration 
in that the contractor is also obliged to follow its own master plan. A contract manufacturer may vali-
date their cleaning process using techniques and procedures that differ from those of the sponsor but 
the resulting validation must be compliant and must meet appropriate regulatory expectations. Any 
critical differences should be addressed upfront in a quality agreement with the sponsor. The ultimate 
responsibility for the cleaning validation does reside with the sponsor. 
9.2	 Documentation for Design/Development
In a risk-based environment, it may be appropriate to begin the design/development stage of cleaning 
validation with a risk assessment to provide a rationale for the development plan as well as to identify 
CQAs and CPPs. This assessment will be different for an entirely new cleaning process as compared 
to a consideration of an existing cleaning process for a new product. 
The output of laboratory studies (if any) will typically include initial selection of the cleaning agent, 
cleaning agent concentration (if applicable), temperature and time of the washing step (see Section 
3.0). It may also include stress studies to identify the robustness of those selected parameters. Labo-
ratory studies may also be used to determine the nature and/or characteristics of residues (such as 
degradation of the API) following the cleaning process. Reports for laboratory studies should have 
clear conclusions with references to documentation for supporting data. The output of lab studies 
may also be leveraged to aid in equipment design. 
The output of pilot-scale studies (if any) will typically include a confirmation and/or modification of 
the basic cleaning parameters, plus an evaluation of any engineering issues (such as dead legs) that 
may affect the selection of those cleaning parameters. Reports for pilot-scale studies should have clear 
conclusions with references to documentation for supporting data.
Any studies on full-scale equipment are generally performed to collect data not practical in a pilot-
scale or lab-scale study, to investigate any possible issues where lab-scale data may not reflect ac-
curately performance on full-scale equipment, and/or to confirm the performance of the cleaning 
process on full-scale equipment prior to qualification runs. Reports for full-scale studies should have 
clear conclusions based on documented supporting data references. For studies on full-scale equip-
ment, cleaning verification should be performed in order to release the equipment for subsequent 
manufacture of a commercial product.
72
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Clinical batches may be made on pilot-scale and/or full-scale equipment. The cleaning verification data 
from such studies should also be leveraged to support conclusions of the design/development report.
The output of design/development stage should be both a development report (also called a technol-
ogy transfer report) and a draft cleaning process procedure (SOP). It may also include a risk assess-
ment report based on the cleaning procedure, although this risk assessment may be done as an initial 
step in the Qualification stage. 
9.3	 Documentation for Qualification
Documentation for the Qualification stage starts with Commissioning and IQ/OQ protocols/reports 
on the equipment utilized for cleaning (assuming that Commissioning, IQ and OQ for the equipment 
to be cleaned are already done as part of the process validation). The emphasis for this stage is design 
and execution of the protocols for the validations runs (sometimes called process performance quali-
fication, or PPQ, runs). Validation runs should not be considered experiments to gain new informa-
tion but are a confirmation of what is known. Documentation that may be needed prior to prepara-
tion of the protocol may include:
• Validation strategy, including rationale for product and/or equipment grouping
• Draft cleaning SOP, including CPPs
• Acceptance criteria and how those criteria were established
• Analytical methods and their validation
• Sampling methods and sampling sites (locations)
• Sampling recovery studies
• Selection of protocol challenges, including hold times
• Rationale for the selection of number of validation (PPQ) runs
• How equipment cleaning is to documented
• Responsibilities for execution of the protocol
• Training of operators, samplers and analysts on applicable procedures
• Plans for validation maintenance (see Section 8.0)
• Plans for equipment and product disposition during the protocol execution.
Note that the number of validation (PPQ) runs should be based on cumulative knowledge based on 
data collected during the development and qualification stages, and ordinarily is not based on a statis-
tical evaluation.
The next document developed is the protocol itself. One approach is to include all the documenta-
tion covered in the prior paragraph in the protocol itself while another approach is to only put in 
the details critical to execution of the protocol and have references in the protocol to the supporting 
rationales/data that are in separate documents. 
Interim reports may be written for each validation (PPQ) run. The last document developed for this 
stage is the final report, summarizing the results of protocol execution with a conclusion as to the 
state of control of the cleaning process. The final report should also include documentation of con-
clusions of any investigations of deviations. It may also include recommendations for improvements, 
including changes in the validation maintenance program. 
9.4	
Documentation for Validation Maintenance
Documentation for the validation maintenance stage will depend on activities selected for this stage. 
73
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
It should include reports related to the following activities, as applicable:
• Alarms and alerts, including investigations and corrective/preventive actions
• Routine monitoring, including trending of data and evaluation of such trending (may include statistical 
evaluation)
• Change control 
• Deviations, including investigation and corrective/preventive actions
• Evaluations of cumulative changes (which might be as a result of a deviation investigation or a periodic 
review)
• Training and retraining
• Periodic cleaning process review
• Risk assessments relating to any process changes or shifts.
Cleaning log records (such as cleaning log books or cleaning batch records) are generally a GMP re-
quirement and should also be considered.
9.5	 Other Documentation Considerations
Whenever a risk assessment is performed, it is critical that risk communication be made to depart-
ments and/or functions affected by the risk assessment. Documentation of events, deviations, fail-
ures, and/or investigations involving a cleaning process should follow approved practices within a 
company for such documentation.
Cleaning validation final reports may not be part of a regulatory filing. The requirement for comple-
tion of cleaning validation will vary by regulatory authority and nature of the product. In the USA, 
CDER likes to at least see a plan for cleaning validation as part of the PAI, but CBER requires cleaning 
validation summaries as part of the BLA filing.
Documentation for cleaning verification follows the same principles as for cleaning validation except 
that the extent of design/development may be as appropriate for a one-time cleaning activity.
74
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Figure 9.5-1	 	
Documentation for Process Flow
Documentation for Process Flow
Design/Development
Qualification/Validation
Validation 
Maintenance
Identify Validation 
Needs
Risk Assessment for 
Design
Identify CQAs and 
CPPs
Development Plans
Development Report/Tech 
Transfer Report
Pilot Scale Studies
Risk Assessment of 
Cleaning Process
Draft Cleaning SOP
Full Scale Studies
Lab Studies/
Cleanability studies
Qualification Plan
Finalize Acceptance 
Criteria
Validation of Analytical 
Methods/Recovery 
Studies
Identify Sampling 
Sites
CV Final Reports
Cleaning Validation 
Protocol
Analytical Results/
Investigation Reports
Protocol Execution
Training
Qualification 
Challenges
Validation 
Maintenance Plans
Validation 
Maintenance Data
Data Trending
Periodic Validation 
Maintenance Review
Modifications/
Improvements of 
Cleaning Process
75
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
10.1	 Cleaning Agents
A variety of cleaning agent options is available. These include water, organic solvents, commodity 
alkalis and acids, and formulated detergents.
10.1.1	Types
10.1.1.1 Water
Although the typical use of water is in the prerinsing, post rinsing, and preparation of use-dilutions, 
water is also used as a sole cleaning agent for readily water-soluble residues. As a general rule, the 
quality of water used in the final rinse should be at least as good as the water used in the manufactur-
ing of the drug product. The water quality used in cleaning should also meet the chemical, microbio-
logical and endotoxin levels as appropriate for the application. 
10.1.1.2 Organic Solvents
Organic solvents, such as methanol, are used for cleaning in small-molecule API synthesis processes. 
Solvents are chosen based on the solubility of the manufacturing soils in the solvent. The clean-
ing process typically involves agitating the solvent in the reactor vessel, circulating it through pipes, 
and refluxing the heated solvent through overhead risers and condensers. The issue of flammability 
should be considered for organic solvents. Organic solvents, like isopropyl alcohol, are also used in fin-
ished pharmaceutical manufacturing for manual cleaning of parts and to facilitate drying of surfaces. 
10.1.1.3 Commodity Alkali
A commodity alkali, such as sodium hydroxide, is often used for the alkaline wash step. The high pH 
and alkalinity of sodium hydroxide solutions may enhance solubility of organic process residues and, 
in some cases, facilitate hydrolysis. Sodium hydroxide is also widely available, relatively inexpensive 
and, being a single component containing no organic carbon, is relatively easy to analyze and validate 
for cleaning-agent removal. The higher pH of sodium hydroxide also facilitates the precipitation of 
salts or oxides of such ions as calcium, magnesium and iron if those ions are present during the clean-
ing process. However, commodity cleaners, such as sodium hydroxide, may have limited effectiveness 
for tenaciously adhered or baked-on residues. They also have limited wetting characteristics and soil-
suspending ability. 
10.1.1.4 Commodity Acids
An acid washing step may be used alone for cleaning. The addition of an acid wash step after the caus-
tic wash/rinse may overcome precipitation and buildup of inorganic compounds, improve rinsing, 
and help broaden the spectrum of soils cleaned (although at the expense of adding another cycle). In 
addition, maintaining a clean surface and limiting the deposition and buildup of iron oxides or other 
contaminants may help minimize the potential for stainless steel corrosion and rouge formation.
10.1.1.5 Formulated Detergents
Formulated detergents are multicomponent cleaning agents that take advantage of several different 
cleaning mechanisms, thus providing broader spectrum effectiveness. In addition to the mechanisms 
of alkalinity and hydrolysis offered by a commodity caustic, a formulated alkaline detergent might 
provide improved wetting and soil penetration, emulsification, chelation of calcium, iron oxide or 
other inorganic ions, and might facilitate dispersion of particulates in the wash step. 
