1.0  Introduction
2
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
same goal of a compliant, scientifically sound and practical cleaning validation program. Where op-
tions are given, the rationales for such options are also generally given. Examples are not meant to be 
prescriptive or limiting; they merely illustrate a certain practice. Actual acceptable practices should 
not be considered limited by the discussion in this Technical Report. Based on an understanding of 
the unique nature of any individual situation, different approaches or additional issues should also be 
considered. Sound science based on an understanding of the cleaning and manufacturing processes 
may lead to other equally acceptable practices. The Task Force that developed this document hopes 
that the report will be used in this spirit and will not be solely used as a checklist.
This report should be considered to be a resource to help guide the development or evaluation of a 
cleaning validation program. It is not intended to establish mandatory standards for cleaning valida-
tion. It is intended to be a single-source overview for pharmaceutical manufacturers that comple-
ments existing regulatory guidance and other documents referenced in this document. The reader 
should also be aware that a specific topic may be discussed in several sections of this Technical Report. 
Therefore, a more complete perspective may be obtained by considering all relevant sections about a 
certain topic. Furthermore, while many approaches are presented here, specific approaches utilized 
for a given cleaning process should be selected based on a good understanding of that process, as well 
as the appropriateness of the selected practice for that specific situation. It is not enough to merely say 
that the practice is mentioned as an acceptable one in PDA Technical Report No. 29; each firm should 
be prepared to defend why the selected approach is a valid one for its operations (1). 
3
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Acceptable Daily Exposure
A dose that is unlikely to cause an adverse effect 
if an individual is exposed, by any route, at or be-
low this dose every day for a lifetime.
Acceptable Daily Intake
An amount of a substance consumed on a daily 
basis that is considered at a safe level.
Acceptance Criteria
Numerical limits, ranges, or other suitable mea-
sures for the acceptance of test results.
Acceptance Limit
The maximum amount of residue allowed in a 
product, in an analytical sample, or as an amount 
per surface area.
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) or 
Drug Substance
Any substance or mixture of substances intend-
ed to be used in the manufacture of a drug (me-
dicinal) product and when used in the produc-
tion of a drug, becomes an active ingredient of 
the drug product (also called “drug substance”).
Analyte
Substance (usually a residue) for which an analy-
sis is being performed.
Blank
Analytical sample taken to establish background 
value for the analytical measurement which may 
be subtracted from an experimental value to de-
termine the “true” value.
Campaign
Processing of multiple lots or batches of the 
same product serially in the same equipment.
Changeover
The steps taken for switching multiproduct equip-
ment from the manufacture of one product to the 
manufacture of a different product.
Clean
Having product residues, process residues, and 
environmental contaminants removed to an ac-
ceptable level.
Clean Hold Time
The time from the end of the cleaning process 
until the equipment is used again (which may be 
product manufacture, autoclaving, or a steam in 
place (SIP) cycle).
Cleaning Agent
The solution or solvent used in the washing 
step of a cleaning process. Examples of cleaning 
agents are water, organic solvent, commodity 
chemical diluted in water, and formulated deter-
gent diluted in water.
Cleaning Procedure
The documentation that assures any product and 
process-related material introduced into equipment 
as part of the manufacturing process stream is re-
moved and the equipment is adequately stored.
Cleaning Process
A process that is used to remove any product, 
process-related material and environmental con-
taminant introduced into equipment as part of 
the manufacturing stream.
Cleaning Validation
Documented evidence with a high degree of 
assurance that a cleaning process will result in 
products meeting their predetermined quality 
attributes throughout its life cycle.
Cleaning Verification
A one-time sampling and testing to ensure that 
specified equipment has been properly cleaned 
following a specific cleaning event.
Contamination
An undesired residue or residue level on cleaned 
equipment surfaces or in a manufactured product.
Coupon
A small, generally flat portion of a defined ma-
terial of construction (such as stainless steel or 
PTFE) and of a defined surface finish, typically 
used for laboratory cleaning evaluations and/or 
for laboratory sampling recovery studies
Dedicated Equipment
Equipment used exclusively for the manufacture 
of only one drug product, bulk drug substance, 
or intermediate.
Degradation
Breakdown (usually chemical) of material dur-
ing manufacture (including during and after the 
cleaning process).
2.0  Glossary of Terms
4
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Dirty Hold Time
The time from the end of product manufactur-
ing until the beginning of the cleaning process 
(also called “soiled hold time”).
Dry Equipment
No visible water in the equipment or line when 
viewed under appropriate lighting conditions.
Equipment Train
The sequence of equipment through which a 
product is produced or processed.
Free Drained Equipment
No visible water pool in the equipment or line 
when viewed under appropriate lighting condi-
tions (but may contain water droplets).
Grouping Strategy
A strategy for establishing similar cleaning pro-
cesses, usually based on similar products or 
similar equipment, and to validate the cleaning 
process based primarily on validation data for a 
representative of the group.
Highly Hazardous Drug Active
A drug active that can cause serious adverse effects 
at typical doses. Those adverse effects are gener-
ally not related to the main therapeutic activity 
of the drug, and includes effects such as carcino-
genicity, mutagenicity, genotoxicity, reproductive 
hazards, allergenicity, and cytotoxicity.
Investigational Medicinal Product
A pharmaceutical form of an active substance or 
placebo being tested or used as a reference in a 
clinical trial.
LD50
The dose of a material which results in 50% 
mortality in an animal test
Limit
A value for a residue above which a cleaning pro-
cess would not be acceptable.
Marker
Component of a product or a cleaning agent 
used as an analyte to quantitate the total amount 
of product or cleaning agent present.
Mock Soil
A soil which is used in place of the manufac-
tured product during a cleaning validation pro-
tocol (also called a “surrogate” soil).
Mock Soiling
A process of soiling the equipment for a cleaning 
validation protocol in which soil is applied to the 
equipment surfaces to simulate the condition of 
the soil on those surfaces following typical prod-
uct manufacturing.
Normal Dose
The therapeutic dose of a product as given on 
the approved product labeling.
Product Changeover
Procedural steps taken for switching from the 
manufacturing of one product to another product.
Recovery Study
A laboratory study combining the sampling 
method and analytical method to determine the 
quantitative recovery of a specific residue for a 
defined surface.
Residue
Chemical or microbiological material remaining 
on equipment surfaces after a cleaning process.
Soil
The chemical or microbiological materials left 
on process equipment after completion of pro-
cess manufacturing, but before initiation of the 
cleaning process.
Worst-Case Process Condition
A condition or set of conditions encompassing 
upper and/or lower processing limits and cir-
cumstances, within standard operating proce-
dures, which pose the greatest chance of prod-
uct or process failure when compared to ideal 
conditions (such conditions do not necessarily 
induce product or process failure).
Worst Case Soil
A soil that is the most difficult to clean from pro-
duction equipment based on knowledge gener-
ated from laboratory studies, scientific proper-
ties, and/or production experience.
5
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
2.1	 Definition of Acronyms
AA: Atomic Absorption
ADE: Acceptable Daily Exposure
ADI: Acceptable Daily Intake
API: Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient
CAPA: Corrective and Preventive Actions
CBER: Centers For Biological Evaluation and 
Research
CDER: Centers for Drug Evaluation and Research
CFU: Colony Forming Unit
CGMPs: Current Good Manufacturing Practices
CIP: Clean-In-Place
COP: Clean Out-of-Place
CPP: Critical Process Parameters
CQA: Critical Quality Attributes
CZE: Capillary Zone Electrophoresis
DOE: Design of Experiments
ELISA: Enzyme Linked Immunosorbant Assay
EPDM: Ethylene Propylene Diene Monomer 
Rubber
EU: Endotoxin Units
U.S. FDA: Food and Drug Administration
FMEA: Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
FTIR: Fourier Transform InfraRed
HPLC: High Performance Liquid Chromatography
ICH: International Conference on Harmonisation
ICP: Inductively Coupled Plasma
IMS: Ion Mobility Spectrometry
LOD: Limit of Detection
LOQ: Limit of Quantitation
MAC (or MACO): Maximum Allowable 
Carryover
NOEL: No Observable Effect Level
NOAEL: No Observable Adverse Effect Level
NIR: Near Infrared
LD50: Lethal Dose 50 Percent
PAI: Pre-Approval Inspection
PAT: Process Analytical Technology
PIC/S: Pharmaceutical Inspection Cooperation 
Scheme
PLC: Programmable Logic Controller
PPQ: Process Performance Qualification 
PTFE: PolyTetraFluoroEthylene
PW: Purified water
QA: Quality Assurance
QbD: Quality by Design
QC: Quality Control
OIT: Operator Interface Terminal
RSD: Relative Standard Deviation
SAL: Surface Acceptance Limit
SEM: Scanning Electron Microscopy
SIP: Steam-In-Place (or Sterilization-In-Place)
SPC: Statistical Process Control
SOP: Standard Operating Procedure
SUPAC: Scale Up and Post Approval Changes
TACT: Time, Action, Concentration and Tem-
perature
TLC: Thin Layer Chromatography
TNTC: Too Numerous To Count
6
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
TOC: Total Organic Carbon
TTC: Threshold of Toxicological Concern
UPLC: UltraPerformance Liquid Chromatography
UV/Vis: Ultraviolet/visible Spectrophotometry
WFI: Water for Injection
WHO: World Health Organization
7
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
