3.0	 Cleaning Process Design and Development
This section describes the application of operational parameters and measurements, design of laboratory 
scale experiments, selection of appropriate test soils, and scale-up for the cleaning of the manufacturing 
equipment. Additionally, the concept of “Design Space,” a Quality by Design approach to the develop-
ment of pharmaceutical processes, is discussed and applied to the development of cleaning processes.
The cleaning process requires design and development prior to implementation in a manufacturing 
plant to ensure the cleaning process and equipment are acceptable for use. 
The operational parameters that describe the cleaning process include:
• Cleaning agent 
• Concentration 
• Contact time
• Cemperature
Factors which affect the cleaning process include: 
• Product characteristics
• Product condition
 Relevant specifics about the cleaning equipment include:
• Automated cleaning pathways 
• The sequence of manual or automated cleaning steps 
• Flow rates during each step
These operational parameters should be determined prior to implementation.
Generally, establishment of acceptable cleaning processes (or confirmation of acceptable processes 
for new soils being introduced to the manufacturing plant) follows a standard progression of activi-
ties, beginning with identification of control variables, cleaning measurements, and performance cri-
teria. Laboratory (scale-down) experimentation, analogous to laboratory experimentation for process 
characterization, along with specific equipment requirements may provide data to establish cleaning 
parameter control ranges.
3.1 	 Cleaning Process Design
Design starts with a consideration of the Critical Process Parameters (CPPs) and Critical Quality At-
tributes (CQAs) of the cleaning system. Table 3.1-1 lists representative CPPs and CQAs that might be 
applicable to a cleaning process.
Table 3.1-1	 CPP and CQA Considerations that have Potential Risk Impact to a Cleaning Process (2)
Critical Process Parameters
Critical Quality Attributes
• Process temperature
• Process pressure
• Process flow
• Process time
• Cleaning agent concentration
• Dirty hold time (soil condition)
• Clean hold conditions
• Visual detection or limits
• Cleaning agent residues
• Product residues
• Microbiological residue limits
• Drainability/drying
• Conductivity/resistivity
8
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Table 3.1-2 describes the factors in the cleaning spectrum. For each factor, there is a range of pos-
sible operating differences utilized within the industry. The development of a specific process should 
consider the number and complexity of issues surrounding the cleaning process and the variety of 
facilities, products and equipment in use. 
The cleaning spectrum helps manufacturers to establish the factors which are critical for individual 
processes, thereby enabling them to set priorities, develop grouping philosophies and establish the 
‘‘scientific rationales’’ that will govern the cleaning program. The cleaning spectrum can be used 
during the initial phases of defining a cleaning validation program or during a new product cleaning 
process development.
The cleaning spectrum includes cleaning program criteria, equipment characteristics, quality attri-
butes of equipment design, formulation/product attributes, and manufacturing/process attributes. 
All of the factors in the cleaning spectrum directly affect the ability to clean; however, their relative 
importance and criticality may be different in different situations.
Table 3.1-2	 The Cleaning Spectrum
Automated Cleaning
Manual Cleaning
In-place Cleaning
Out-of-Place Cleaning
Dedicated Equipment
Non-Dedicated Equipment
Indirect Product Contact Surfaces
Product Contact Surfaces
Low Risk Site
High Risk Site
Minor Equipment
Major Equipment
Low Risk Drugs
High Risk Drugs
Highly Characterized 
Poorly Characterized
Liquid Formulations
Solid Formulations
Easy to Clean Product
Difficult to Clean Product
Materials with a Smooth, Non-porous Surface
Porous Materials
Single Product Facility
Multiple Product Facility
Non-Campaigned Production
Campaigned Production
3.2	 Cleaning Process Overview	
Cleaning processes generally contain multiple steps. Each step in the process has a function and a set 
of parameters that are controlled within defined ranges to ensure effective soil (and cleaning agent) 
removal. Steps in a typical cleaning cycle for a cleaning process are outlined below in Table 3.2-1. De-
tails of the cleaning processes may vary from site-to-site and for different types of process equipment. 
Differences may include the use and type of detergents and/or solvent, presence of an acid cleaning 
step, concentration of cleaning agents, contact time of cleaning agents on equipment, feed pressure or 
flow rate, cleaning temperature, and required length or volume, length and/or number of rinse steps.
9
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 3.2-1	 Cleaning Process Steps (Examples)
Step
Function
Comments
Vacuum 
or Pre-
Rinse
Removal of readily soluble and/or non-adher-
ing residues
Reduction of soil load prior to washing step. 
Wash 
with 
Cleaning
Solution
Removal of soluble and dried residues, solu-
bilization of soils by degradation, heat, and/or 
wetting with detergents 
Primary step for soil and bioburden removal. 
Often performed at elevated temperatures.
May include alkaline detergents or alkali 
hydroxides, acid detergents or acids, com-
binations of the two, or may be a solvent or 
solvent mixture.
Rinse
Removal of suspended or solubilized soils 
and, if applicable, of cleaning solution
May include a series of pulse rinses, and 
may include final rinse with higher grade of 
rinse solvent.
Dry
Removal of water and other solvents
May be done by air or nitrogen flow or by 
heat. Water removal may be assisted by an 
organic solvent final rinse.
3.2.1	 Physical-chemical Aspects 
There are four principal cleaning input parameters that can be varied for each step in the cleaning 
process. These four parameters are typically referred to as TACT (Time, Action, Concentration, and 
Temperature). These four variables are interrelated and have a direct relationship on the success of 
each phase in the cleaning cycle. For example, cleaning agents may be heated to increase their effec-
tiveness. The effect of each of these variables on soil removal should be determined and acceptable 
ranges established as part of the cleaning development effort. (Soil type and condition is an additional 
input that is discussed in Section 3.3.3.)
Time is defined as the length of time for the cycle step. There are two typical ways, direct and indirect, 
of defining and measuring contact time during a cycle step. Using the direct method, a cycle step 
counter is used to measure the cycle step time. Time also may be measured indirectly. For example, 
for a rinse step, volume is sometimes tracked instead of time because the volume and flow rate define 
a time. For final water rinse, it is also common to add more requirements, such as achieving a speci-
fied conductivity level.
Action is the mechanism used to deliver the cleaning agent. This mechanism may be characterized as 
soak, scrubbing, impingement or turbulent flow. Agitation often enhances the chemical actions of the 
cleaning agents and helps to increase the effectiveness of the cleaning process, such as by shortening 
the required contact time. Manual cleaning typically includes soaking or scrubbing as the action to 
achieve cleaning. Automated cycles typically employ impingement and/or turbulence as a cleaning 
action. The mechanisms of action should be understood for each cleaning process step. If critical, the 
flow rate of the cleaning and rinse fluids traveling through the equipment should be specified and 
verified in the cleaning process. Spray devices have minimum and maximum flow rate requirements, 
and piping should be flushed at a velocity sufficient to assure adequate coverage and turbulence. 
Cleaning agent concentrations directly affect the performance of the cleaning process. Selection of 
10
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
the cleaning agent should consider various aspects including soil type, ease of removal, and need for 
chelating agents. Cleaning chemicals are available in concentrated forms that are diluted and used in 
cleaning cycles. Effectiveness of the cleaners may be related to their concentration. Too low of a con-
centration may result in failure to remove the soil from equipment; too high of a concentration may 
result in difficulty in removal of cleaning agent residues and may require excessive rinsing. Chemicals 
may be costly, both in their purchase and disposal, and thus determining the correct concentration 
of cleaning agent required to ensure cleanability should be considered. The automated dilution and 
addition of the cleaning agent to the cleaning equipment system must be designed for reproducibility. 
Regardless of the method of addition, confirmation or verification of the cleaning agent concentra-
tion helps verify consistency. For automated cleaning processes, the easiest means to verify cleaning 
agent concentration for highly alkaline or acidic aqueous cleaning agents is by conductivity. Other 
considerations in the use of cleaning agents include a toxicity/safety evaluation and the possible need 
for surfactants, chelants and other functional aids in formulated detergents. 
A process should be in place to detect anomalies in detergent concentration based on the mechanism 
by which chemical make-up is performed. For example, some systems control chemical addition by 
volume and use conductivity as a confirmation. An alarm would be triggered if the conductivity is 
outside a preset range. The allowable range should be supported by cleaning development data.
The optimal temperature ranges will vary for the different steps of the cleaning process. Initial solvent 
rinses are typically performed at ambient temperatures to minimize any denaturation or degradation 
effects and to maximize the dilution effects. Cleaning solutions may be heated to increase their effec-
tiveness. Final rinse solvent steps may be performed at high temperatures to increase the solubility of 
cleaning process residues and to increase the drying rate of rinse solvents. 
3.3	 Design Considerations
3.3.1	 Location of Cleaning
Equipment may be cleaned at its installed location, or it may be disassembled and moved to a central 
location for cleaning. 
3.3.1.1	In-Place Cleaning
The cleaning of large pieces of equipment may be performed in the equipment’s permanent location, 
generally in a configuration very similar to that in which it is utilized for production. In this docu-
ment, in-place cleaning can be either for automated or manual cleaning processes.
3.3.1.1.1 Clean-in-Place (CIP) Systems
The term ‘‘Clean-in-Place’’ usually refers to an automated system that consists of a system which uses 
various tanks and piping to deliver a cleaning solution through the equipment to be cleaned. There 
may be a prerinse tank and a final rinse tank. The CIP system utilizes spraying devices to provide cover-
age and physical impingement of the cleaning solution on the process equipment surfaces. The spray-
balls may be stationary or moving (e.g., rotating, oscillating). These systems are commonly used to 
clean large pieces of equipment, such as manufacturing tanks, blenders, fluid bed dryers, reactors and 
fermentation tanks. The CIP system may be a recirculation system or it may be a single-pass system.
Centralized CIP systems can provide a single location for handling cleaning agents and reduce the plant 
requirements for cleaning-related equipment (pumps, tanks) and instrumentation. However, central-
ized systems often require interconnected piping designs and may complicate desires to segregate 
parts of the process. Some process equipment may require special cleaning agents that are different 
11
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
than those used for the rest of the process equipment. For these situations, dedicated CIP systems that 
are integrated into the process skids may be desirable.
Design of centralized CIP systems should consider the potential for carryover of product residues 
between process steps; between products being manufactured concurrently in multiproduct facilities; 
and between different products after a product changeover. To address the potential for product car-
ryover, central CIP systems are often dedicated to one part of the manufacturing plant. Non-recircu-
lating systems also reduce the potential for product carryover via the CIP equipment itself. 
Piping of the equipment being cleaned and of the CIP skid should be sloped continuously to a physi-
cal low point to ensure acceptable draining of the lines. If supply and/or return loop headers are used, 
the loop must be designed such that liquid flows in both parts of the loop at adequate speeds. If this is 
not achieved, one part of the loop may become a functional deadleg. The pressure drop in the piping 
also needs to be considered. The CIP skids are often located remotely from the process area, and the 
length of the distribution piping results in a total pressure drop that can be significant. The greatest 
challenge is sizing the distribution piping when the supply flow rates in the system have high variabil-
ity. This has been addressed in some facilities by installing pumps in distribution piping before major 
equipment to control flow rates. For CIP systems, diameters of drains should be adequate to ensure 
adequate drainage without a buildup of cleaning or rinse solution in the vessel.
3.3.1.1.2 Solvent Reflux Cleaning
For small-molecule API manufacture by organic synthesis, cleaning may involve boiling a volatile sol-
vent (such as methanol) in the reactor vessel. This is a type of in-place process (but not a CIP system 
as defined in 3.3.1.1.1). The solvent vapors rise to other portions of the equipment, and condense on 
those cooler surfaces. The condensed solvent may dissolve residues on those other surfaces, and carry 
the dissolved residue back to the boiling solvent in the bottom of the reactor vessel. Such a process is 
called solvent reflux cleaning. Key issues in solvent reflux cleaning are to make sure that the residues 
are soluble in the chosen solvent, and the solvent vapors contact and condense on all intended surfaces. 
The cleaning should also provide an effective rinse of the reactor vessel that held the boiling solvent. 
3.3.1.1.3 Placebo Batches as a Cleaning Method
Placebo cleaning is another type of in-place cleaning. For certain highly viscous ointments or products, 
it may be feasible to use a placebo run as a method of cleaning equipment. This approach requires 
the use of a placebo that has no detrimental quality impact on the next product manufactured in the 
equipment. The principle of using a placebo batch for cleaning is that the action of the placebo run-
ning through the equipment would clean the equipment of drug residues or process residuals from 
the previous batch. The advantage for this type of cleaning is that the placebo is processed through 
the equipment in the same fashion as the manufactured product. Therefore, the material would touch 
the same surfaces and in the same manner as the next product batch. Disadvantages of this method 
include the cost of cleaning and the difficulty of demonstration of the effectiveness of the process. 
3.3.1.2	Out-of-Place Cleaning
Smaller equipment items and portable process equipment that are difficult to clean as installed are 
often disassembled and transported to a designated cleaning or wash area where the cleaning proce-
dure is performed, either manually or automated. The additional activities involved with transport of 
equipment to and from the wash room, component identification, and the elimination of the potential 
for cross-contamination during transfer, reassembly, and storage prior to use makes the validation of 
these procedures somewhat more complex than the comparable in-place activity. Care should be exer-
cised for routes and means of soiled equipment entering a washing area and routes and means of clean 
12
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
equipment exiting the washing area, as well as storage of cleaned equipment in the washing area. Care 
should also be used to assure contact and/or flow of the cleaning agent through all parts of the equip-
ment, such as for lumens or hoses. The need for manual manipulation is an integral part of out-of-place 
procedures, and generally requires both more detail in the procedures and appropriate training. The 
manual manipulation makes these concerns similar to those of manual in-place cleaning. 
3.3.1.2.1 Clean-Out-of-Place Systems
Clean-out-of-place (COP) equipment includes items such as wash tanks used to clean small parts or 
parts removed from large equipment. Examples include a recirculating bath used for cleaning small 
parts, pump components, gaskets and other parts removed from larger equipment. COP systems 
may also include dishwasher type cabinets where small manufacturing vessels, drums, filter housings 
or hoppers can be loaded inside the cabinet and cleaned. The placement of the parts, disassembly of 
equipment and loading patterns are critical to the success of cleaning when using COP systems. The 
use of these systems significantly reduces the differences between CIP cleaning and COP cleaning, al-
though issues related to disassembly and transport of equipment to the parts washer are still present.
3.3.2	 Automated vs. Manual Systems
Three broad definitions of cleaning processes follow, although it should be recognized that they repre-
sent points on a continuum. The distinctions between these processes are important to the establish-
ment of an appropriate cleaning process.
3.3.2.1	Manual Processes
Manual cleaning is typically defined as the direct cleaning of equipment by a trained equipment op-
erator using a variety of hand tools and cleaning agents. Although some process parameters may 
be monitored by gauges, the regulation and control of these parameters is the responsibility of the 
cleaning personnel.
Important cleaning parameters for manual cleaning may include: 
• Volume of cleaning agents
• Volume of rinse water
• Temperature of wash and rinse solutions
• Sequence and duration (contact time) of soaking, wash and rinse steps
• Scrubbing action
• Pressure of solutions
• Detergent concentration
It is important to specify in writing the extent of the equipment disassembly to ensure the reproduc-
ibility of the cleaning process. Consistency of manual cleaning over time is accomplished by operator 
training, adequate supervision, and a well-defined, documented cleaning procedure. 
3.3.2.2	Semi-Automated Processes
As opposed to manual cleaning, semi-automated cleaning includes various levels of automatic con-
trol. At one extreme, this could consist of simply manually removing gaskets/fittings for manual 
cleaning prior to the automated CIP of a tank, or disassembly of a pump or filter housing prior to 
cleaning in an automated COP system. At the other extreme, the operator may use a high pressure 
spray device to clean a surface or may simply open and close valves supplying spray balls inside a ves-
sel. This type of cleaning is intermediate between fully automated and fully manual cleaning. 
13
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.3.2.3	Automated Processes
Automated cleaning typically does not involve personnel intervention (except perhaps to select a cycle 
and the start/stop of the operation). The system is usually programmable for the various cleaning 
cycles. Use of automation provides consistent and robust control and monitoring of the automated 
cycles and parameters (such as time, flow rate or pressure, cleaning agent concentration, and tem-
perature). 
Important cleaning parameters for automated cleaning may include the volume of cleaning agents, 
volume of rinse water, flow rates and temperature of wash and rinse solutions, duration of wash 
and rinse cycles, pressure of solution, operating ranges and detergent concentration. Disassembly of 
equipment may still be necessary to allow for complete cleaning or to allow for the separate cleaning 
of delicate parts. 
In an automated cleaning system, the cleaning may be controlled through relay logic, a computer or 
programmable logic controller (PLC). The control system is an integral and critical part of the overall 
cleaning process. The control system regulates the cleaning cycles, addition of cleaning agents, tem-
perature, time and other critical cleaning parameters. 
There may also be a control interface or operator interface terminal (OIT) to start the process, stop 
the process, monitor various stages of the process and change the process sequence. Given the in-
creased complexity of the newer PLC and computer interfaces, training and validation are important 
issues that impact the ability of the system to provide consistent cleaning. The validation of control 
systems is critical to the success of automated cleaning processes.
3.3.3	 Soil Evaluation and Categorization
3.3.3.1	Soil Categories
There are a large variety of substances that contact process equipment surfaces during the manufac-
ture of pharmaceutical products. They include manufactured products, degradation products, pro-
cess aids, solvents, and cleaning agents. Cleaning processes and cleaning validation should be designed 
and tested to address this wide variety of potential process soils. These tasks may be simplified by 
creating categories of soils and selecting representative soils for testing and tracking during the devel-
opment and validation of cleaning processes. 
The final selection of a representative soil within a process stream should be based on the similarity of 
the physiochemical properties of the soils. In many circumstances, categories may be combined and 
the number of representative soils used for development activities further reduced. 
3.3.3.2	Soil Removal
Soils may be removed by physical and/or chemical means. Physical removal may be accomplished 
by putting energy into the cleaning process through use of high pressure spray, high velocity flow, 
manual scrubbing, or vacuuming in order to remove soils from the equipment. Physical removal may 
be dependent on solubility, soil amount and its degree of adhesion to the equipment surface.
Chemical cleaning mechanisms include solubility, emulsification, wetting, chelation, dispersion, hy-
drolysis and oxidation. Cleaning agents are generally chosen for their ability to remove process soils 
by one or more of these mechanisms. In some cases, multiple cleaning steps may be used in order 
to take advantage of different chemical cleaning mechanisms. For instance, alkaline detergent for 
solubilization and emulsification may be followed by a sodium hypochlorite solution for oxidation 
of protein soils. It should always be kept in mind that the more aggressive the cleaning solutions are 
14
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
(e.g., solutions with high concentrations of sodium hypochlorite), the more corrosion may occur. 
The right choice of materials for cleaning purposes is part of the development phase.
Factors affecting “cleanability” also include the surface geometry, the surface type, the soil type, and 
the soil level. The ease with which a soil is released from the equipment surface by one of the mecha-
nisms described above determines its cleanability. Soil response to a particular cleaning mechanism 
may influence the choice of cleaning agent and cleaning conditions. Attachment to surfaces can be 
by a combination of van der Waals forces, electrostatic effects, and other forces. The time that the 
soil resides on the equipment can also influence the difficulty of soil removal. Fresh soils are generally 
easier to remove than soils that have been allowed to dry on the surface. The time between soiling and 
cleaning must be considered when designing the cleaning studies to simulate the dirty hold time, if ap-
plicable. In some cases, difficulty of cleaning does not change with increased dirty hold time. If this is 
the case and any dirty hold time can be used in a protocol, it must be clearly justified and documented.
High soil amounts can complicate removal by saturating the cleaning solvent or depleting surfactants 
or other components of the cleaner (such as oxidizers or emulsifiers). This may impact the mini-
mum cleaning solution volumes and should be considered in the cleaning cycle design when high soil 
amounts are anticipated.
3.3.4	 Equipment Considerations
Equipment usage during production is another important aspect to consider in designing a clean-
ing process. It is important to understand the role that the equipment plays in the production train. 
Equipment design characteristics, as established during product development, are often driven by 
equipment functionality and the requirements of the process. With the current emphasis on cleaning 
validation, it makes sense that ‘‘cleanability’’ be an important criterion in the design of equipment. 
Equipment should be free-draining and have limited intricate or complex parts. Sanitary designs em-
ploying principles such as appropriately finished surfaces, lack of crevices, absence of dead legs and 
suitable construction materials are recommended. 
Cleaning equipment should be designed to ensure adequate coverage of all process equipment sur-
faces to be cleaned, and to not contribute possible contamination. In tankage and enclosed piping sys-
tems, the volume of cleaning solution available must be sufficient to clean all interior surfaces of the 
pipe. For spray ball or nozzle spray apparatus, all equipment surfaces should be available for contact 
with the spray. The concern here is that areas can be ‘‘shadowed’’ by the presence of dip tubes and 
mixer baffles, blades, and shafts. Spray patterns may be originally designed by computer simulation, 
but should be confirmed by a spray coverage test, such as one using a dilute solution of riboflavin.
3.3.4.1	Dedicated – Nondedicated Manufacturing Equipment
Dedicated equipment is used solely for the production of a single product, or in some cases, of a 
single product line (e.g., containing the same active ingredient). Concerns over cross-contamination 
with other products are markedly reduced. However, consideration must be given to residues of 
cleaning agents, degradants, bioburden, and endotoxin. 
Where the same piece of equipment is utilized for different product formulations (i.e., nondedicated 
equipment), the prevention of carryover of active ingredients between products becomes a major fo-
cus of the cleaning process. For nondedicated equipment, a design consideration is whether a unique 
cleaning process will be developed for each manufactured product, or whether one cleaning process 
will be designed to address all (or a group) of manufactured products.
Certain products (such as beta-lactams) may require segregated production areas. A risk-based analysis 
15
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
should be performed on other products which may be highly hazardous (e.g., mutagenic active ingredi-
ents) in order to determine whether dedicated facilities should be used. For other products, dedication 
of equipment may be made not on a patient risk basis, but rather as a practical business decision. 
3.3.4.2	Nonproduct Contact – Product Contact Surfaces
Validation of cleaning has focused on product contact surfaces. However, indirect product contact 
surfaces (“nonproduct contact” surfaces with close proximity to open product) may be included in a 
cleaning validation program. An example of an indirect product contact surface for which cleaning 
validation is commonly done is a lyophilizer shelf used in lyophilization of vials. Nonproduct contact 
surfaces such as floors and walls typically have cleaning processes, but those cleaning processes are 
lower risk, are controlled consistent with GMPs, and are outside the scope of a cleaning validation 
program. However, cleaning of floors and walls may be addressed as part of an overall cross-contam-
ination program, particularly for highly hazardous drug active ingredients.
3.3.4.3	Low-Risk Sites – High-Risk Sites
Risk is a function of the identification of hazard, the ability to detect that hazard, and the potential 
exposure of the hazard on product quality and patient safety. Those locations where there is the dan-
ger of a residue affecting a single dose with a high level of contamination are high-risk sites. Examples 
of such sites are a filling needle and a tablet punch. Sites which are difficult to clean are also high-risk 
sites. Those difficult-to-clean sites may include ports, drains, baffles, and the undersides of agitator 
blades. These high-risk sites may require special disassembly, cleaning, and/or inspection emphasis. 
Other sites which are easier to clean and uniformly transfer residue to the next product are generally 
considered lower risk.
The distinction between ‘‘major’’ and ‘‘minor’’ equipment is not a definitive one. The Good Manu-
facturing Practice (GMP) (6) make mention of ‘‘major’’ equipment, but are silent on the subject of 
‘‘minor’’ equipment except with regard to items described as utensils. Major and minor designations 
do not generally reflect the challenge of cleaning, nor define whether the equipment surfaces are a 
lower or higher risk for cleaning processes. Both major and minor product contact equipment items 
require cleaning verification or validation for multiproduct equipment. 
3.3.4.4	Materials of Construction
Factors affecting “cleanability” include the surface type and the surface finish. The most common 
surface types encountered are stainless steel and glass, but surface types may include other metals and 
a variety of plastics and elastomers. Surface finish also affects the removal of soils. Rough surfaces 
provide more area for soil contact and may contain cracks and crevices that are difficult for the clean-
ing agent to penetrate. The interior surfaces of stainless steel process equipment may be modified 
to smooth and/or polish rough surfaces. The materials of construction of the equipment should be 
considered carefully when designing a cleaning validation program. 
Porous materials may require special cleaning processes. Items such as filter bags and filter mem-
branes are typically dedicated to a given product.
3.3.5	 Operational Considerations
Operational issues such as the use of campaigns, the utilization of equipment, and the complexity of 
the equipment impact the design of the cleaning validation program.
A campaign is a series of batches of the same product manufactured one after the other. Consider-
ation should be given to the need to clean, and the extent of cleaning, between batches in a campaign. 
16
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Depending on the product, there may be no cleaning between batches or some level of cleaning is 
done between batches. If the cleaning between batches is simply a vacuuming (for solid products) 
or a solvent or water rinse (for liquid products), such cleaning is sometimes called “minor” cleaning 
or “in-process” cleaning. Such minor or in-process cleaning steps do not require separate validation. 
However, consideration should be given to the effect of such minor or in-process cleaning steps on 
the efficiency of the “full” cleaning process done at the end of a campaign for changeover to a new 
product or campaign. 
If only the cleaning process at the end of the campaign is to be validated, consideration should also be 
given to the number of batches and/or the total elapsed time for a campaign. For example, elapsed 
time might be critical if the active ingredient left on equipment surfaces degrades over time due to 
exposure to heat or light. Furthermore, the repetitive production of a single product without vali-
dated cleaning between batches might also result in the penetration of materials into a location where 
single lot production might not present a problem.
3.3.6 	Cleaning Agent Selection
Cleaning agent selection should be based on a scientific rationale. Cleaning agents should be selected 
for their suitability to remove the product residues; their compatibility with equipment; their ease of 
cleaning agent removal; and low toxicity. Solvents, formulated detergents, and commodity chemicals 
should be acceptable for the process and for use with pharmaceutical products. Water alone or or-
ganic solvent alone may be used as the cleaning agent, particularly for readily soluble soils. 
At the time of design of the cleaning process, it is important to review and document information 
about any cleaning agents to be used. The established cleaning agents should be reviewed against the 
vendor’s current specification sheets and descriptions, including material safety data sheets. Those 
documents should be available as a minimum requirement for use of those cleaning agents before 
evaluating the cleaning process. When selecting a new cleaning agent or utilizing an established clean-
ing agent for a new process, it is important to know all of the ingredients, as well as the percentage 
each constituent comprises, that are in the cleaning agent. This allows for the establishment of the 
consistency of cleaning agent formulation over time, as well as for selecting a possible marker com-
ponent for analysis of cleaning agent residues. 
Cleaning agents and their vendors should be qualified in much the same way as a raw material and 
raw material vendor is qualified. Change control of the cleaning agent formulation, as well as notifica-
tion of significant changes, should be required of the cleaning agent vendor. 
During the development of the cleaning cycle, quantities of cleaning agents, their concentration and 
their addition mode should be studied. Methods of storage, expiration dating, inventory control, and 
change control of the cleaning agents will help establish and maintain a reproducible process.
Water used to prepare cleaning agents and for equipment rinse should be of suitable quality (7). Gen-
erally, water used for final rinse should be the same grade as used for the manufactured product, e.g., 
parenteral products should utilize WFI and oral products should employ purified water.
3.3.7 	Product Considerations
Chemical and physical attributes of the product should be taken into account when establishing a cy-
cle development program for a specific product. Characteristics such as the solubility, concentration, 
physical properties of the active ingredients and excipients, possible degradation products and the 
effect of the cleaning agent are important factors in establishing that the cleaning method is appropri-
ate. The interaction of the product with all surfaces with which it will come into contact is critical.
17
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.3.7.1	Product Risk Considerations
The cleaning of equipment is closely tied to the type of materials being removed from the surface. 
The product formulation (including the active ingredients and excipients and formulation aids), in-
cluding the nature of the product at various intermediate steps of manufacture, should be considered. 
Because limits for highly hazardous drug active ingredients (e.g., those with serious allergenic, cyto-
toxic and mutagenic properties) are generally more stringent, more robust cleaning processes may 
have to be designed. Such highly hazardous drug active ingredients may be manufactured on nondedi-
cated equipment provided an appropriate risk analysis and cleaning validation is performed. Some 
firms may choose to use dedicated facilities and/or equipment for such highly hazardous drug active 
ingredients even though that might not be a regulatory requirement. Another approach for such 
highly hazardous drug active ingredients is to include in the cleaning process a deactivation or degra-
dation step such that residues from the active ingredient do not have those properties that make the 
active ingredient highly hazardous. In addition, any unusual hazards of degradation products (either 
unintended or intended degradation products) should be considered.
The route of administration of a product may affect the acceptable residue limits, and may therefore 
affect the nature of the cleaning process. Generally speaking, injectable products, intra-ocular formu-
lations, and some inhalants which provide direct access to the systemic circulation systems of patients 
are a much greater concern if cross-contamination occurs. 
Another risk factor to consider is the amount or extent of information available on the product to 
be cleaned. For example, the amount of information available for a marketed product may be much 
more extensive than information on a new drug active ingredient being manufactured for human 
clinical trials. In addition, in such early clinical manufacturing, a cleaning verification approach may 
be utilized. With such an approach, the cleaning process may be significantly overdesigned so that 
after the cleaning process, residue levels are well within acceptance limits.
3.4	 Cleaning Development Laboratory Experiments 
Laboratory testing often includes screening a combination of soils and relevant process surfaces. 
Screening experiments are designed to test soil removal capability using representative soils and cou-
pons of relevant surface materials. Cleaning conditions can be selected based on the soil-surface com-
bination encountered in the production equipment.
Laboratory evaluation of the interaction between product and surfaces can be performed using test 
coupons made of the surface of interest under simulated cleaning conditions. Based on the process 
details, appropriate materials of construction with the appropriate surface finish characteristics should 
be selected for use in lab-scale cleaning experiments. To minimize the number of experiments, it may 
be sufficient to include only those surfaces that are expected to be the most difficult to clean (based on 
prior knowledge and risk assessment tools). Stainless steel coupons are the most common choice as 
they often represent a majority of equipment surfaces in a production facility. Non-electro-polished 
stainless steel coupons with a representative or worse surface finish compared to equipment surfaces 
may be preferred for lab evaluations. 
3.4.1	 Soil Selection 
Care should be taken in the choice of soils and soil conditions used for selection of cleaning agents 
during laboratory evaluation. The soils should be representative of the soils on equipment in the 
manufacturing plant, including the chemical and physical (dried, baked) nature of the soils. 
18
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Solutions or suspensions of soils selected for experimentation are generally coated on coupons repre-
senting the process contact surfaces and dried to simulate the soil condition on the process equipment 
prior to testing for removal with cleaning agents. The number of representative soils will vary with an 
organization’s experience and history, as knowledge about the content and cleanability of the various 
process steps.
Preparation of coupons typically involves use of a cleaning procedure in order to ensure that all cou-
pons are uniformly cleaned at the start of the experiment. This also helps to ensure that any foreign 
material deposited on the coupon surface during the fabrication process is removed to minimize 
interference with the process soils or cleaning agent. The coupons are then completely dried before 
spotting them with soils. It is important that the spotting of soil onto each coupon be kept consistent 
to minimize experimental variability. The coupons are then dried for a fixed time to simulate the 
soiled equipment surfaces at the time of cleaning, before they are subjected to the lab-scale cleaning 
process. That fixed time is generally the desired dirty hold time, or a longer time.
The purpose of the experiment could be to make one or more determinations related to cleanabil-
ity, including comparison of the various materials of construction for a given soil; different process 
streams for a given surface; different cleaning conditions (such as concentration of cleaning agent and 
temperature); different products for the same process step and surface; or a combination of these. 
The outcome of these studies can be analyzed to create the “design space” for cleaning. In any case, 
it is important that the performance of the cleaning process in the laboratory represents, as much as 
practical, the performance in the pilot plant or larger scale process. Important operational parameters 
such as temperature, time, mode of action and concentration are controlled to mimic what is used 
in the manufacturing plant. If it is difficult to simulate the actual process conditions in the laboratory, 
conditions representing a worst-case scenario should be employed. The laboratory studies can also 
be used to challenge the cleaning process by modifying different variables of the cleaning process to 
further outline the design space.
Evaluation of performance for cleaning design space studies can utilize the various analytical meth-
ods listed in Section 7.0.
3.4.2	 Parameter Selection
A variety of parameters can impact the performance of a cleaning regimen. These include: nature and 
strength of the interactions between the product and the surface; nature of the interaction between 
the cleaning agent and the soil; time (dirty hold time, time for each cleaning cycle); cleaning agent 
and concentration; temperature; cleaning action [flow properties (stagnant, laminar, turbulent) and 
pressure]; and properties of the cleaning solution (such as ionic strength, pH, components, viscosity, 
and density). All of these, except the cleaning action, are independent of the equipment. Selection 
of parameters to be examined in an experimental study should be done on a case-by-case basis. The 
larger the number of parameters evaluated, the more the number of experiments may be required 
to understand the impact of the parameters and their interactions. On the other hand, if critical pa-
rameters are not picked, the resulting conclusions in terms of identifying the important operational 
parameters and their ranges are likely to be erroneous, since important effects might be overlooked.
Use of a risk analysis tool, such as Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), may assist with priori-
tizing the various operational parameters for further examination. Single parameter studies that vary 
one parameter at a time can be designed to identify the parameters that have significant impact on 
the performance. One such study conducted at the bench scale reported concentration and tempera-
ture of the cleaning solution to be the parameters with predominant effects (8). As discussed in the 
following section, single-parameter studies can then be followed by Design of Experiments (DOE) to 
19
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
investigate the interactions between these parameters. Alternatively, if only a few parameters need to 
be examined, just performing a DOE to measure both the main effects and the interactions may be 
more resource- and time-efficient. 
3.4.2.1	Parameter Interactions 
The use of DOE style experiments helps to determine the effect of varying individual parameters on 
cleanability as well as providing an indication of their interaction. Statistical tools including regression 
analysis, leverage plots, response surface analysis and interaction profiles can be used to study both 
main and interaction effects. Relationships and interactions between parameters, such as temperature 
of cleaning solution and the concentration of the cleaning agent, may be determined. Such DOE 
analyses can be used to construct a multi-parameter design space for the cleaning process and to es-
tablish the ranges of operational parameters that provide acceptable cleaning process performance.
3.4.3	 Measurements to Determine Cleaning Effectiveness
Cleaning effectiveness may be determined by the sampling and analytical methods described in Sec-
tions 6.0 and 7.0. They include visual inspection, and analytical techniques for measuring any res-
idues, such as of manufactured product, degradant, cleaning agent, bioburden and/or endotoxin. 
Depending on the purpose and the design/development phase, these may be online and/or offline 
measurements of rinse or swab samples.
Using existing knowledge and a risk-based approach, cleaning experiments can be reduced or elimi-
nated, e.g., for transfer of a manufacturing process from one facility to another.
3.5	 Cleaning Process Scale-Up
Following selection of cleaning agents and cleaning parameter ranges (such as temperature, contact 
time, cleaning agent concentration, and flow stream hydrodynamics) from historical plant data (if avail-
able) and laboratory development work, the cleaning process can be implemented for use on larger-
scale manufacturing equipment. Determination of soil and cleaning agent residue removal is generally 
performed prior to formal cleaning validation protocols. Adjustments to cleaning parameters may be 
made during the scale-up process based on plant experience and laboratory development studies. 
3.5.1	 Setting Process Controls
It is both prudent and consistent with current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) to establish 
control ranges for the cleaning process operational and performance parameters. As appropriate, 
operational parameters for cleaning processes include:
• Dirty hold time for equipment (time between completion of use and initiation of cleaning)
• Clean hold time for equipment (time between completion of cleaning and next use)
• Flow rate and/or delivery pressure of the cleaning stream (proof of flow for any parallel flow paths)
• Cleaning agent concentration
• Duration of each step in the cleaning process (by time or volume)
• Temperature of washing solutions and rinses
• Air flow verification during any water removal or drying steps
Instrumentation for each of these parameters should be included in the system design. Alert and/
or action levels can be set for each critical cleaning process parameter in order to maintain proper 
operation. Parameters may be significant for business or economic reasons, as well as for patient and 
product quality reasons, as long as the parameters set for business and economic reasons are more 
20
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
“stringent” than for patient and product quality reasons. Alert levels may be set based on expected 
variability of the equipment and instrumentation in the cleaning system. Action levels should be set 
at values that permit adjustment to the equipment to avoid jeopardizing acceptable operation. Both 
alert and action levels should be within the acceptable ranges for each parameter. It is also reasonable 
to establish check times, so that if parameters do not reach their set points (e.g., volume flow, conduc-
tivity) within that time, then an alarm or notification occurs.
Performance parameters should also be evaluated during scale-up. As applicable, performance param-
eters may include:
• Final rinse solvent analysis for active ingredients/
degradants
• Final rinse solvent analysis for cleaning agent
• Final rinse water bioburden
• Final rinse water endotoxin
3.6	 Applying the “Design Space” Concept to Cleaning 
Processes 
“Design Space” is the multidimensional combination and interaction of input variables and process 
parameters that have been demonstrated to provide assurance of quality. The Design Space concept 
has been introduced by the International Committee on Harmonization (ICH) (3) to describe an ap-
proach to the development and control of pharmaceutical manufacturing processes. An analogous 
approach can be applied to cleaning processes.
The cleaning design space for a manufacturing facility is defined through a risk- and science-based 
approach relying on cleaning process knowledge, product/equipment knowledge, regulations and 
quality practices (requirements). Similar to manufacturing process development, control, and valida-
tion, cleaning process operational parameters (inputs) can be controlled to ensure predictable and 
acceptable performance as evidenced by appropriate measurements (outputs). The cleaning design 
space is represented by the range of each of the operational parameters that results in acceptable 
performance of the cleaning process.
Steps in defining the design space for a cleaning process may be slightly different from steps taken to 
define design space for a manufacturing process, in that the design space for a manufacturing process 
is unique to a given process (e.g., a granulation process). However, many manufacturers may want to 
design one cleaning process for a specific equipment train that is used regardless of the manufactured 
product. This may be accomplished by identifying the “worst-case” soils and defining the design space 
around cleaning process performance using these soils.
Specifications are developed to support the design, installation and operation of the cleaning system. 
Risks are identified and assessed for impacts to safety and cleaning effectiveness (e.g., severity, prob-
ability of occurrence, detectability). Parameters may be categorized based on their level of criticality, 
with the most critical parameters monitored closely so that the cleaning operation can be corrected 
if parameters are not kept within their predetermined ranges. The criticality of cleaning process op-
erational parameters is based on laboratory studies and other data/experiences that document the 
influence of each parameter on cleaning effectiveness.
Cleaning effectiveness may be influenced by the following factors:
• Soil type or family
• Nature of the soil on the surface 
• Equipment and contact surface type and finish
• Cleaning technology and functional specifications 
for the cleaning process.
21
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
This information is used to drive the design requirements for the cleaning method. Cleaning validation re-
quires consideration of the worst-case operating conditions. Field conditions such as the flow rate, clean-
ing agent concentration, contact time, process temperature, and dirty hold time are conditions that are 
considered when developing an effective cleaning process. The assumption is that any cleaning process 
that is performed within the space defined by these conditions will be effective, reliable and consistent.
3.7	 Standard Operating Procedures
One of the outputs of the design and development of a cleaning process should be a draft Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP). That draft SOP should reflect sufficient detail to ensure process consis-
tency. For the draft SOP, the following issues should be considered:
• The maximum allowable hold time for a piece of equipment:
• after use, but before cleaning
• after cleaning, but before reuse, sanitization, or sterilization.
• The steps to be taken for disassembly of equipment. Disassembly should be such that the equipment is broken 
down in a manner that will allow all parts to be effectively cleaned.
• Critical sites or difficult-to-clean areas that may require special cleaning emphasis or a specific inspection
• Cleaning process parameters
• Assignment of responsibility for cleaning of equipment
• Cleaning schedules, and where appropriate, sanitizing schedules
• Removal or obliteration of previous batch identification
• A description in sufficient detail of the methods, equipment, and materials used in cleaning
• Sampling and testing that is part of the routine cleaning process
• The steps to be taken for reassembling equipment (as necessary) for storage and subsequent use
• Visual inspection for equipment wear, product residuals and foreign materials
• Protection of clean equipment from contamination prior to use
• Batch records as appropriate for the cleaning process. For fully automated processes, the batch record 
information may be collected and stored as part of the control system. For fully manual processes, the level 
of detail to be collected for a batch record will depend on the complexity of the process.
3.8	 Operator Training for the Cleaning Process
Operator training is critical. During cycle development, operators should be trained in the requirements 
of the evolving or existing SOPs. Proper training consists of understanding the SOP, demonstration of 
the correct procedure by a trained operator and demonstration of the correct procedure by the train-
ee. Operator training for manual cleaning may also include qualification and/or requalification of the 
trainee by measuring residues on equipment cleaned by the operator. Operator training should be done 
on a more frequent basis for manual cleaning processes as compared to automated cleaning processes.
Training practices will vary from one company to another, but operator training may be improved by 
some of the following suggestions: 
• Clearly written, understandable and detailed SOPs
• Use of checklists to determine that all operations are 
carried out in the proper sequence and are documented
• Periodic monitoring of cleaning processes to 
ensure proper training of operators and continued 
compliance with SOPs
• Dedicated or assigned cleaning personnel
• Feedback from operators to modify procedures
• Use of video to demonstrate proper cleaning 
operations and techniques.
22
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
The operators should understand the process of cleaning and the operation of the equipment they 
are cleaning. In addition the operators should be aware of the cleaning process impact on the quality 
and safety of the next product manufactured in the same equipment.
3.9	 Introduction of New Products to a Validated Cleaning 
System
When new products or significantly different raw materials are introduced to the plant, a system must 
be in place to ensure that the cleaning process will remain effective.
Generally, the cleaning effectiveness of the existing system for new products can be tested by perform-
ing laboratory experiments using coupons of relevant materials (see Section 3.4 on Cleaning Devel-
opment Laboratory Experiments). These experiments can be designed to test both the effectiveness 
of the proposed cleaning regimen and the relative difficulty of cleaning the new soils compared to 
soils that have already been introduced to the plant. If the new soils are easier to clean than the most 
difficult soil already being cleaned, introduction of the new material using existing cleaning proce-
dures can be made with confidence. If the material is more difficult to clean than each of the present 
soils, some modifications to the current cleaning process may be required, and cleaning validation for 
the new product is an expectation. However, if the new soil is easier to clean, then based on a risk as-
sessment, the number of confirmatory runs needed (if any) is determined.
23
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
