6.0	 Sampling
44
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
have additional lighting attached, and may come with optional magnification and/or zooming capa-
bilities. The major drawbacks of these scopes are the difficulty of use, controlling lighting/brightness, 
and that the operator still has to make the determination if the area viewed is visually clean. 
A Remote Visual Camera allows operators to view remote areas on a screen. The camera has most 
of the same strengths and weaknesses as the scopes, but the added benefit that operators can typi-
cally also record video or take pictures. Multiple operators can, at the same time, view what is on 
the screen. The potential to record video and allow multiple operators to view the screen may help 
support a site’s visual inspection training program. Pictures printed from the camera may distort the 
actual amount of residue present since operators will typically zoom in on a particular area when 
taking a picture.
It should be noted that the basic regulatory expectation is that the equipment be visually clean by 
viewing with the unaided eye. Use of aids to magnify or otherwise improve visibility of residues 
should be seen as a more stringent use of visual examination. 
6.1.1.2	Instrumental Methods
Instrumental methods typically involve a surface probe connected to an analytical instrument by a 
fiber-optic cable. For example, this may involve an attenuated total reflection probe connected to 
an FTIR instrument by a fiber-optic cable. The advantage of this type of sampling is that it is not 
necessary (as in swab and rinse sampling) to remove the residue from the surface for analysis. It also 
therefore does not require a separate sampling recovery study. The main disadvantages of this tech-
nique are limited length of the fiber-optic probe and the requirement that surfaces be relatively flat 
(therefore, many worst-case locations may not be sampled by this technique).
6.1.2 Rinse Sampling
Rinse sampling involves sampling the equipment by flowing solvent (which may be water, an aqueous 
solution, an organic solvent, or a water/organic solvent mixture) over all relevant equipment surfaces 
to remove residues, which are then measured in the rinse solvent. Collection of rinse samples should 
consider solubility, location, timing and volume. One type of rinse sampling technique is to take a 
“grab” sample from the final portion of the rinse solvent during the final rinse of the cleaning process. 
A “grab” sample is a single sample collected from a rinse solution that represents the composition of 
the rinse solution at that time. As used in this document, a grab sample generally refers to a single 
sample withdrawn from the final portion of a CIP rinse. 
A second type of rinse sampling is to utilize a separate sampling rinse after completion of the process 
rinse. This separate sampling rinse may involve filling the equipment to an appropriate level with solvent 
and agitating that solvent to make the composition of the residue in the sampling rinse is homogeneous. 
Then a sample of that solvent is taken and analysed. This separate sampling rinse may alternatively be 
a separate CIP sampling rinse, which may involve a once-through sampling rinse or a recirculating sam-
pling rinse. For a once-through separate sampling rinse, it is necessary to collect the entire volume of the 
separate sampling rinse, agitate it until it is homogeneous, and analyze a sample from the homogenous 
rinse. For a recirculating separate rinse, homogeneity is generally achieved by recirculation.
45
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Advantages and disadvantages of both methods for rinse sampling are shown in Table 6.1.2-1.
Table 6.1.2-1		
Comparison of Grab Sampling versus Separate Sampling Rinse
“Grab” Sampling from Final Process Rinse
Separate Sampling Rinse
Advantages
• Represents the normal cleaning process
• Requires no additional amounts of rinse solvent
• Equipment can be used for further processing 
without additional steps
• Results can easily be used for carryover calcula-
tions
• Represents what is left on surfaces after comple-
tion of cleaning process
• More likely to result in an acceptable result if done 
correctly
• Recirculating rinse likely to provide higher recovery 
• Allows use of a sampling solution other than the 
process rinse
Disadvantages
• Sample represents a worst case carryover to 
the next batch in that it reflects residue in the 
final rinse, not residue on surfaces after comple-
tion of the final rinse (but can demonstrate ro-
bustness of cleaning process)
• Need to make assumptions about sampling for 
carryover calculations
• Utilizes an additional step
• Require additional amount of rinse solvent 
• Possible contamination due to method of rinse 
solvent addition
Advantages and disadvantages of rinse sampling are given in Table 6.1.2-2.
Table 6.1.2-2		
Advantages and Limitations of Rinse Sampling
Advantages
Limitations
• During rinsing, the entire product-containing sur-
face is wetted. One analysis result represents the 
sum of all removed residues for the flow path.
• The sampling procedure may not contaminate the 
equipment if process solvent is used.
• Re-cleaning may not be required after sampling.
• This method allows for conclusions on the cleanli-
ness of areas that are not accessible for swabbing.
• Adaptable to on-line analysis.
• Less technique dependent.
• Applicable for actives, cleaning agents, and bio-
burden.
• Allows sampling of unique (e.g., porous) surfaces 
such as membranes and resins.
• Useful for cleaning process design/development.
• Only residues soluble in rinse solvent can be de-
tected.
• Must assure that rinse sampling solution contacts 
all surfaces to adequately measure residues.
• Does not deal with residues that preferentially 
transfer from one part of the equipment to the 
next product.
• May dilute out the residue to be undetectable by 
the analytical method.
• Limited information about location of areas that 
contributed to residues.
• Knowing the rinse volume is critical to ensure ac-
curate interpretation of results.
• Usually limited to rinsing an entire piece of equip-
ment, such as a vessel (except for extraction 
sampling).
• Accessibility or presence of sampling ports for 
legacy equipment may be problematic.
46
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Rationales for the use of rinse sampling include the following:
• 
Equipment not accessible for other types of sampling
• 
The residue is volatile, so measuring it on dried surfaces is not appropriate
• 
Rinse sampling adequately measures residues on surfaces.
6.1.2.1 Extraction Rinse Sampling for Small Parts
One special case of rinse sampling is sampling of small parts. Those parts may be sampled by swab-
bing but there are two options for rinse sampling. One type of rinse sampling is extraction from small 
parts. In an extraction procedure, the extraction solvent is placed in a clean vessel large enough to 
hold the sampled part. The small part is then placed in the extraction solution and agitated or soni-
cated for a fixed time. The sampling solution is then analyzed for potential residues. A second type of 
rinse sampling for small parts is typically used for items with an orifice, such as filling needles. In this 
procedure, a fixed volume of sampling solution is passed through the lumen and collected in a clean 
collection vessel. The sampling solution is agitated for uniformity, and then analyzed for the potential 
residues. Because the surface area and sampling volume are precisely known, limits can be accurately 
calculated for such situations.
6.1.2.2	Solvent Reflux Sampling
A second special case of rinse sampling is organic solvent reflux sampling. In this process, volatile 
organic solvent is added to the reactor of a manufacturing vessel. The solvent is heated to vaporize it. 
The solvent vapors condense on various upper parts of the manufacturing equipment, dissolve any 
soluble residues and carry it back to the reactor. While the technique for distribution of the solvent to 
the surfaces for sampling is different, the principles of rinse sampling are still present. 
6.1.3	 Swab and Wipe Sampling
Both swab sampling and wipe sampling involve wiping a surface with a fibrous material (most com-
monly). During the wiping procedure, the residue on the surface may be transferred to the fibrous 
material. The fibrous material is then placed in a solvent to transfer the residue to the solvent. The 
solvent is then analyzed for the residue by an appropriate and validated analytical method. For swabs, 
the fibrous material is some kind of textile (knitted, woven or nonwoven) attached to a plastic handle. 
Wipes are fibrous materials, usually woven or non-woven textiles, which are applied to the sampled 
surface by hand. A special case of swabs is the use of cotton balls or pads, which are moved across a 
surface with forceps. The selection of swab or wipes to be used requires an evaluation of the swab 
properties, such as extractables and shedding properties. Recovery of residues from surfaces also de-
pends on the size and shape of the swab head or wipe, as well as the properties (such as flexibility and 
length) of the swab handle.
In most cases, the swabs and wipes are wetted with a solvent prior to sampling the surface. The 
solvent selected should be able to assist in dissolving the residue and also be compatible with the 
analytical method. For example, for HPLC analysis, the solvent could be mobile phase. For TOC and 
conductivity, the solvent is almost always water. For sampling the same site, companies may choose 
to sample the same surface area with multiple swabs or wipes in order to provide a higher percent 
recovery of residue from the surface. In such cases, the additional swab(s) or wipe(s) utilized may be 
either dry or wetted with the same solvent.
Wipes are typically larger pieces of textile material, and may be used to sample larger equipment areas. 
The swab or wipe that has been applied to the surface is then extracted with a suitable solvent to 
47
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
remove the analyte from the swab into the extraction solvent for analysis (see Table 6.1.3-1 for ad-
vantages and limitations). The extraction solvent may be the same or different solvent as that used for 
wetting the swab.
Table 6.1.3-1		
Advantages and Limitations of Swab/Wipe Sampling
Advantages
Limitations
• Enables the analysis of residues found on the spe-
cific surfaces. 
• Allows for sampling of areas that are more dif-
ficult to clean (i.e., worst cases).
• Allows both dissolution and physical removal of 
residues.
• Adaptable to a wide variety of surfaces
• Economical and widely available.
• Allows sampling of a defined area.
• Applicable to active, microbial, and cleaning 
agent residues.
• Small extraction volumes may provide for greater 
detectability.
• Only discrete sampling areas can be analysed to 
represent the entire equipment – sampling must 
include worst case locations.
• The sampling itself can potentially contaminate 
(from fibers or solvent) the equipment. Re-clean-
ing may be required after sampling.
• Some areas are not accessible for swabbing (e.g., 
piping systems).
• Results may be technique dependent (such as 
surface area sampled).
• Results may be location dependent (such as dif-
ficult to access surfaces)
• Swab material and design may inhibit recovery 
and specificity of the method
6.2	 Placebo Sampling
Placebo sampling can be used to detect residues on equipment through the processing of a placebo 
batch subsequent to the cleaning process. Placebo sampling is used primarily to demonstrate the lack 
of carryover to the next product. The placebo should mimic product attributes. The equipment char-
acteristics also impact the choice of the placebo batch size. Placebo sampling may present analytical 
challenges for measuring residues in a true placebo. Placebo sampling may also be called “mock runs” 
or “blank runs”, which in biotechnology generally involves processing only with water. This latter 
concept is different from rinse sampling, in that the water is processed through the equipment much 
as the product would be processed.
In this sampling process, the equipment is first cleaned. Following cleaning, a manufacturing process 
is performed (to the extent feasible) using only a placebo product. Following processing, the placebo 
product is evaluated for residues as for any other cleaning validation sample as measures of possible 
contamination of a manufactured product with those residues. Placebo runs can be performed to 
demonstrate actual carryover to the processed material, but if done, are typically done to complement 
swab/wipe and/or rinse sampling. 
6.3	 Sampling for Microbial and Endotoxin Analysis
Sampling for bioburden may involve rinse-water sampling and/or swabbing, but may also involve 
contact plates. Consideration should be given to the sampling solution for swabbing and rinsing. For 
swabbing, a sterile solution, such as phosphate-buffered saline, should be used. For rinse sampling, it 
is generally not practical to sample large equipment items with sterile water; however, for extraction 
of small parts, the use of sterile water or a sterile solution is preferred. For large equipment, rinse 
sampling is generally done with purified water or WFI, and results may be compared to a blank taken 
from the same use point. Rinse-water sampling for bioburden should involve use of sterile sample 
48
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
containers. “Aseptic” sampling technique, much like is used for cleanroom bioburden sampling, is 
required for any microbial method to avoid external contamination of the sample. 
Sampling for endotoxin is almost always a rinse water sample, preferably with low endotoxin water.
6.4 Additional Considerations
It is preferred to have a separate sampling SOP (apart from any special instructions in a cleaning vali-
dation protocol). This helps prevent “procedure drift”, which might occur if the swabbing procedure 
text is just repeated in every protocol. It also helps insure that the same sampling procedure is used in 
recovery studies as in protocol execution, and thus simplifies training. The rinse sampling procedure 
may be the same procedure that is used for sampling water systems, appropriately modified to cover 
sampling of process equipment. 
In selecting sampling techniques, considerations should be given to the compatibility of the sampling 
materials (such as vials, swabs, sampling solutions) with each other, with the nature of the residue, 
and the nature of the analytical method. Furthermore, any requirement for cleaning or removing 
sampling materials from the sampled surface in a cleaning validation protocol should be addressed in 
the design/selection of sampling methods, materials, and parameters.
Finally, in taking samples in a protocol, consideration should be given to the impact of a given sample 
on subsequent samples. This includes the order in which samples are taken. This “order” includes 
consideration of the type of sampling method (e.g., visual, rinse, swab) as well as the type of residue 
(e.g., active, cleaning agent, bioburden, endotoxin).
6.5	 Sampling Recovery Studies
Sampling recovery studies are generally required to adequately demonstrate that a residue, if pres-
ent on equipment surfaces, can be adequately measured or quantified by the combination of the 
analytical method and the sampling procedure. These studies provide a scientific basis for utilizing 
those sampling and analytical methods to measure residues. The objective should be to establish a 
reproducible level of recovery from the equipment surfaces. Three types of sampling recoveries are 
discussed below: swab sampling recovery, rinse sampling recovery and “visual examination” recovery. 
For swab and rinse sampling, recovery studies may be performed as part of the analytical method vali-
dation or they may be performed as separate studies once it is determined that the analytical method 
can appropriately measure residues in solutions. Sampling recovery studies are laboratory studies in-
volving coupons of sampled equipment of different materials of construction (such as stainless steel, 
glass, PTFE, and EPDM) spiked with residues to be measured.
6.5.1	 General Considerations
Recovery studies may not be required for certain residues that are known to be readily soluble (e.g., as 
defined in the USP or Merck Index and used well below the solubility limit (such as sodium hydroxide 
or phosphoric acid used as cleaning agents), provided the residues are not reactive with or absorbed 
into the surface. 
In performing recovery studies for swabbing and rinse sampling, the amount of material spiked onto 
coupons should represent an amount equal to what could be present at the residue limit. If addi-
tional levels are spiked, levels should represent levels of actual values present in cleaning validation 
protocols. It should be recognized that spiked levels at extremely low levels may give lower recovery 
percentages due to the inherent variability of the analytical method at those low levels. 
49
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The spiked residue should represent the same residue present at the end of the cleaning process. In 
actual fact, the residues present at the end of cleaning may include a combination of active ingredient, 
cleaning agent, excipient, and/or degradation products. It is common practice, however, to only spike 
the active ingredient when doing recovery studies for the active ingredient, and to only spike with 
cleaning agent when doing recovery studies for cleaning agent. Spiking of the active ingredient in its fi-
nal formulation may be considered when spiking of the active ingredient alone is not practical. Finally, 
drying and/or holding times of spiked coupons should be appropriate for the nature of the residue.
If the active degrades during the cleaning process, it is common practice to perform recovery studies 
by spiking with the active ingredient itself, unless there is information that indicates the degradation 
products may have a significantly different recovery level from the active ingredient itself. Further-
more, if the degradation product has unusual safety or solubility concerns, recovery studies by spiking 
directly with that degradant should be considered. Because of possible concerns about degradation 
of the active ingredient after completion of the cleaning process, but before sampling, that maximum 
time interval between spiking and sampling should be considered in performing recovery studies.
Recovery values should be established for all surfaces sampled. For swab and rinse sampling, one ap-
proach for this is to perform recovery studies on all surfaces. An alternative is to perform one residue 
study on a surface which through documented evidence is equivalent (in terms of percent recovery) 
to other surfaces for which a formal recovery study is not performed. This is essentially a grouping or 
family approach for recovery studies. Equivalence for establishing the group or family may be estab-
lished based on published studies or in-house data. Another approach is to exclude formal recovery 
studies for sampled surfaces constituting less than a small percentage (such as 1% or 2%) of the total 
equipment surface area; in such cases, the recovery value used for that excluded surface is the lowest 
recovery of any other surface type for which a formal sampling recovery study was performed, or the 
minimum acceptable recovery percentage required by the company’s procedures.
6.5.2	 Swab/Wipe Recovery
For this section, the term swab or swabbing is used; however, descriptions for swab recovery studies also 
apply to wipe sampling, except as noted. For swab recovery studies, coupons are spiked in a controlled 
manner with solutions of the sampled residue, allowed to dry, and sampled with the swabbing proce-
dure to be utilized in the cleaning validation protocol. The swab is extracted in a suitable solvent and the 
amount of residue measured in that solvent sample. The amount recovered is compared to the amount 
spiked on the coupon and the result is expressed as percent recovery. Because swabbing is a manual pro-
cedure, typically each person performs a recovery study with three replicates. It is preferable to have at 
least two people perform swabbing recovery studies for each combination of residue and surface type. 
The recovery percentage established by the study may be defined in different ways, but typically is defined 
as the lowest average recovery of any one swab operator. An acceptable swab recovery depends on how 
that swab recovery is being used. If the recovery is performed to qualify the sampling method without 
correction of either a limit or an analytical result then a recovery percentage such as 70% or more is typi-
cally required. If the recovery percentage is used to correct a residue limit or an analytical result then a 
recovery of 50% or more is typically required. An upper limit for percent recovery should be established 
to deal with studies where the measured recovery is greater than 100%. Recoveries of less than 50% typi-
cally require a written rationale of why that percentage is appropriate.
As part of the swab method development, spiking of residue directly onto the swab head to deter-
mine recovery (release) from the swab head material may be done. Such a study should also be con-
sidered if recovery levels from spiking of surfaces is unacceptable, and it is desired to find the cause 
of the low recovery. 
50
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
At a minimum, recovery values are generally performed at the residue limit on the surface (e.g., in 
μg/cm2). While it is possible to perform recoveries at different spiked levels, in general there is little 
value to such additional spiked levels because of the variability of the sampling procedure. It is prefer-
able to perform additional replicates at the one residue limit rather than studies at additional levels. 
Acceptable variation for recovery results at one spiked level is typically on the order of 15-30% RSD. 
If recovery studies are done by more than one swab operator, it is also appropriate to have a criterion 
for determining acceptable variation between operators. Examples of criteria used include variation 
of no more than a maximum amount between average percentage values, or variation of no more 
than a maximum relative percentage between average percentage values. Use of statistical tests for 
significance is generally not necessary for such determinations. 
Swab recovery studies are typically performed on a nominal coupon surface area using the same area 
as is swabbed during sampling for protocol execution. This area is typically either 25 cm2 or 100 cm2 
while wiping studies are done on larger areas. In sampling manufacturing equipment for a protocol, 
it is not always possible to swab a 10 cm X 10 cm area (it might be necessary to swab a 5 cm X 20 cm 
area). Furthermore, it might not be practical to swab exactly 100 cm2 (an area of 60 cm2 or 128 cm2 
may be required because of the specific equipment geometry). In such cases, the recovery percentage 
based on sampling 10 cm X 10 cm may be applied to each of those cases. If such an approach is used, 
a range of acceptable surface area (such 25% to 150% of the nominal sampled area) should be estab-
lished. However, if the sampled area for equipment surfaces in a protocol varies from the nominal 
value, the residue limit for that sample should be adjusted based on the actual surface area swabbed.
6.5.3	 Rinse Recovery
Rinse recovery studies address the validity of rinse sampling for that residue. They demonstrate that if 
the residue were on a surface, that residue would be effectively removed and could be analyzed in the 
rinse solution. Rinse recovery studies address the U.S. FDA’s “dirty pot” and “baby/bath water” analo-
gies (20). Rinse recovery studies, like swab recovery studies, can be performed on coupons that have 
been spiked with solutions of the target residue and then allowed to dry. For swab recoveries, it is neces-
sary to perform the exact swabbing procedure to be used in the cleaning validation protocol. For rinse 
sampling, in contrast, the exact rinsing procedure (except for the special case of extraction sampling) 
cannot be duplicated in the laboratory. However, it is possible to simulate the rinsing procedure in the 
laboratory. Where possible, the conditions of the simulated rinse should be the same as the equipment 
rinsing situation. This includes selection of rinsing solvent as well as the temperature of the rinsing sol-
vent. In other cases, the rinsing conditions should be selected as the same or a worst case as compared 
to the equipment rinsing situation. For example, the ratio of solvent to sampled surface area should be 
the same or lower in the recovery study as compared to the equipment rinsing situation. 
One method of simulating the rinse process is to suspend a spiked coupon above a clean collection 
vessel, and cascade rinse solution across the surface into the collection vessel. Another method is to 
spike the bottom of a beaker of the appropriate material of construction, allow the residue to dry, 
add rinse solution to the beaker and apply gentle agitation for a time which approximates the time of 
the final rinse. The rinse solution is either pipetted or decanted from the beaker and analyzed. A third 
option, used in cases where a beaker of suitable material of construction is not available, is to place 
a spiked coupon in the bottom of a beaker and perform a simulated rinse as in the second method.
Since laboratory rinse sampling studies are generally not operator dependent, three replicates by one 
operator may be adequate to determine the percent recovery. Acceptable percent recoveries are typi-
cally established at the same levels and conditions as for swab recovery studies. 
51
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.5.4	 “Recovery” in Visual Inspection
This process is actually the determination of a quantitative “visual detection limit”. If visual exami-
nation is used to supplement swab or rinse sampling, such determination of a visual detection limit 
may be done but is not required. A visual detection limit under specified viewing conditions can be 
determined by spiking coupons of the equipment surface materials with solutions of the residue at 
different levels (in μg/cm2), and having a panel of trained observers determine the lowest level at 
which residues are clearly visible across the spiked surface. The significance of such a visual detection 
limit is that if equipment surfaces are determined to be visually clean under the same (or more strin-
gent) viewing conditions in a cleaning validation protocol, the level of the residue is below the visual 
detection limit. Appropriate viewing conditions include distance, lighting and angle. The visual limit 
depends on the nature of the residue as well as the nature of the surface (e.g., stainless steel vs. PTFE) 
and the visual acuity of the inspector. Typical values reported in the literature for a visual detection 
limit are 1-4 μg/cm2 (23). For this determination, a percent recovery is not established; the purpose is 
to establish a value where residues are clearly visible so that any surface observed as visually clean is 
clearly below that value. 
6.5.5	 Recovery for Bioburden and Endotoxin Sampling
Recovery studies to determine percentage recovery from surfaces are not appropriate and are not nor-
mally done for microbiological sampling. One reason for this is the question of enumeration in mi-
crobiological tests – “colony forming units” are typically counted as opposed to individual organisms. 
A second reason for this is that vegetative organisms will die or lose viability when dried on a coupon 
in a standard sampling recovery procedure. A third reason is that it is unclear which species should be 
used for a recovery study. A fourth reason is that typically the limits set for bioburden are significantly 
below what could possibly cause either product quality issues or process performance (e.g., SIP) is-
sues; therefore, even though recovery may be low (<50%), product quality and/or process perfor-
mance is not impacted by not including a recovery factor. 
Endotoxin recovery studies from surfaces using the sampling method are not ordinarily performed. 
One reason is related to the low levels that are typically present on cleaned surfaces. Additionally, only 
standard endotoxin from LAL test kit suppliers can be used for recovery studies and these may not be 
indicative regarding detection and/or removal of endogenic endotoxins present from a manufactur-
ing process. Finally, the largest quantity of endotoxin present in a manufacturing vessel typically is 
endotoxin within a soil matrix. The cleaning process itself is very effective in physically removing this 
endotoxin along with other manufacturing soils.
6.6	 Training and Qualification of Samplers
Training involves the steps taken to assist the prospective sampler in learning the technique of sam-
pling/inspection. For purposes of this section, “sampling” and “sampler” also include “inspection” 
and “inspector” for visual evaluation. Qualification involves the process of “certifying” that the pro-
spective sampler can appropriately sample. 
Training always precedes qualification. At a minimum, training involves reading of the sampling pro-
cedure and demonstrating the correct procedure by a trained sampler. During the reading and dem-
onstration, the trained sampler provides commentary on the rationale for certain practices or aspects 
of the sampling procedure. Demonstration of technique may also utilize a visual indicator on the 
swabbed surface which assists the trainee in seeing consequences of poor technique. The last step in 
training is demonstration of the correct procedure by the prospective sampler.
52
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
Qualification processes used for sampling will depend on the type of sampling performed. Qualifica-
tion may involve merely demonstration of correct technique (that is, the last step of the training 
process), or it may involve a “test” that challenges the trainee’s ability to perform the activity correctly 
(e.g., perform visual inspection using an array of coupons where some are soiled and others are not 
or perform swab sampling for a known soil residue level on coupons). Either type of qualification 
may be repeated on a regular basis or upon any retraining of a sampler. Retraining may be conducted 
based on suspected operator error in a swabbing process, or it may be done because an operator has 
not performed a swabbing event over a certain time frame.
6.6.1	 Key Issues for Training for Swab Sampling
Note that what is written in this section about swab sampling applies appropriately to wipe sampling. 
Four keys to consistency in swab sampling training are emphasis on consistency of wetting the swab 
head, consistency of the swabbing motion (including overlapping strokes), consistency in applied 
pressure, and consistency in swabbing of the correct surface area. It is assumed, of course, that the 
correct swab, the correct number of swabs, and the correct wetting solution (if any) for the swab are 
utilized. A fifth factor for some types of swab sampling (such as sampling involving TOC analysis) is 
the emphasis on preventing external contamination of the swab, such as from the presence of volatile 
organics in the atmosphere around the sampling location. 
Since swab sampling is not unlike manual cleaning processes in that it depends on a person for a 
high degree for consistency, consideration should be given to have swab samplers retrained and/or 
requalified on an established basis. Retraining may involve the same process as for initial training or 
may involve only portions of that initial training. Requalification generally involves a repeat of the 
initial qualification process. The need for retraining and/or requalification should also be addressed 
as part of change control for the swabbing procedure as well as when swab sampling “operator error” 
is suspected in the investigation of a nonconforming result.
6.6.2	 Key Issues for Training for Rinse Sampling
The major concern for accuracy in rinse samples is to prevent contamination of the rinse sample. This 
contamination may come from for example, the sampling port, environment around the sampling port, 
and/or the operator. Steps to prevent contamination may include adequately flushing or cleaning the 
port prior to taking a sample, as well as avoiding sample contamination due to the use of isopropanol 
on gloves or use of isopropanol to clean the port (prior to sampling) if TOC is the analytical procedure. 
In training rinse samplers to take a grab sample for the final rinse of a CIP cycle, timing of the sampling 
process is critical. Typically, the very last portion of the rinse is sampled but it may be acceptable to sample 
before that time if such sampling represents a worst case. However, once process rinsing is complete, 
there is no way to go back and collect a rinse sample (unless a separate sampling rinse is performed). 
Since the consistency of rinse sampling is less operator dependent, there may be no need for routine 
retraining and/or requalification of operators; however, the need for retraining and requalification 
should also be addressed as part of change control for the rinse sampling procedure as well as when 
rinse sampling “operator error” is suspected in the investigation of a nonconforming result.
6.6.3	 Training for Visual Inspection
Training for visual inspection depends on whether the visual inspection is part of a protocol execu-
tion, routine monitoring, or laboratory “limit of detection” determination. In any case, it is preferred 
to have a visual inspection SOP so that training can be for that SOP. Visual acuity of visual inspectors 
for either type of visual examination should be addressed.
53
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
For training of visual inspectors in a protocol execution, key issues are access to sites for viewing, appro-
priate lighting, and the ability to discern the difference between residues on the surface and surface 
imperfections. An important element of visual inspection training is to know when to call for further 
analysis to determine the nature of the residue. For example, if what appears to be rouge is seen 
on the equipment, the presence of that residue should be noted. Determining whether that residue 
causes a failure in the cleaning process is a separate decision.
The procedure for visual inspection for laboratory “limit of detection” determination is generally dif-
ferent from that of visual inspection during protocol execution because the objective is different. The 
objective is to determine at what level a certain residue can be consistently seen across a spiked surface 
in order to correlate a visual detectability limit with a level of known residue(s) below that spiked 
level. This procedure may be in a separate SOP or may be incorporated in an overall SOP for visual 
inspection. In addition to the same elements that are included in training for protocol execution, a key 
consideration for training in this procedure, which involves viewing spiked coupons, is a careful dis-
tinction between a visually clean surface, a partially soiled surface (in which residue is apparent only 
over a portion of the spiked area), and a “fully” soiled surface. Furthermore, the determination of a 
“visual limit” in the laboratory should be done under conditions similar (or worst case) as compared 
to visual examination of equipment in a protocol. This includes considerations of lighting, distance, 
and angle of viewing.
54
© 2012 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 29 (Revised)
It is essential to a cleaning validation program that the appropriate analytical methods are utilized. 
Analytical methods must be appropriate in that they can adequately detect and measure the residue(s) 
of concern. It is also important to understand what can be concluded from the analytical result (e.g., 
was the product or cleaning agent measured and were the results acceptable?). The results of testing 
will determine if the cleaning cycle is acceptable or needs improvement. This section discusses con-
siderations in selecting the appropriate test methods, including information on the applicability and 
use of both chemical and microbial test methods, and test method validation.
The emphasis in this section will not be so much on describing the features and limitations of meth-
ods (although that will be done to a limited extent), as it will be on the thought process of deciding 
what information is obtained and when a certain analytical method will be useful. Cleaning process 
understanding is the key to selecting the appropriate analytical method for various stages of cleaning 
validation 
7.1	 Purposes of the Analytical Methods
In a lifecycle approach to cleaning validation, different analytical methods may be appropriate for 
evaluation of residues at the different stages of the cleaning validation lifecycle. The lifecycle stages 
of cleaning validation are design/development, qualification, and validation maintenance. Analytical 
methods may also be used as part of investigations during any lifecycle stage. It is important to con-
sider and evaluate what information one wants to obtain and what information can be obtained from 
use of a given analytical procedure. 
For example, in early development work, there may not be adequate information on the nature of 
residues (e.g., is the active ingredient degraded?) and a specific analytical method may not have been 
validated. However, nonspecific methods may give a reasonably accurate picture of the overall ef-
fectiveness of the cleaning process for cleaning process development, even though that nonspecific 
method may or may not be the analytical method chosen for the cleaning validation protocols. 
Another example involves the selection of analytical methods for investigations. For the validation 
runs (qualification runs), it is usually preferred to have an analytical method that can appropriately 
determine whether the target residue (e.g., the active ingredient) is at or below the predetermined ac-
ceptance limit for that residue. But for an investigation into a deviation (nonconformance), in certain 
circumstances (such as with the use of a nonspecific method in a validation protocol) it may be more 
important for the investigation to have an analytical method that can qualitatively determine the na-
ture of that residue (e.g., is it active ingredient, cleaning agent or excipient?).
It is important to emphasize that the thought process of why an analytical method is being used is 
critical for having a robust, science and risk-based approach to cleaning validation. Just because a 
method has been used in the past does not necessarily mean it will useful for a new application.
7.2	 Practical Considerations in Selecting Analytical Methods
In an ideal world, the best method for a given task could be chosen; in the real world, selection of 
analytical methods may be limited by practical considerations. In many cases, it is important not that 
the analytical method be the best method available but that it be adequate for the intended purpose. 
In selecting analytical methods, one must consider readily available methodologies within a given 
company. For example, it is not likely that a company will invest in a new analytical method if existing 
methods are adequate for the intended purpose. New methods may mean capital equipment pur-
chases, training of analysts and maintenance of the equipment; the related costs should be weighed 
against the expected benefits. For example, total organic carbon (TOC) was not widely considered for 
