
--- PDF Page 115 (doc p101) ---
5.0 Designs for Dose Control Systems
To ensure that the delivered parenteral dose to the patient is highly accurate, the filled volume must be
controlled during the filling process. Whether filling a SU container (e.g., a prefilled syringe in an
autoinjector or a vial where all the contents are fully withdrawn for injection) or a multi-use container (e.g.,
a cartridge in a device or a multi-use vial), the amount of drug product filled into the container is of the
utmost importance. To ensure this CQA for each container, the system must be designed to accommodate
either 100% weight checks or intermittent (statistical) weight-check for IPC of dosing accuracy. Sections
5.1-5.1.4 explore the benefits and risks of both approaches, design options, and factors that influence system
stability.
Note: This section does not discuss Quality Control methods such as United States Pharmacopeia <697>
Container Contents for Injections (harmonized with European and Japanese Pharmacopeia). Such methods
are typically designed for off-line use, are destructive tests, and are not typically employed for in-process
control purposes.
5.1 Dose Control Systems Risks and Benefits
Whenever possible, 100% of container doses should be checked as an integral part of the filling process, as
long as line speed and line design permit this approach. If this is not possible, an intermittent statistical dose-
check should be done automatically on-line. Both approaches have advantages and disadvantages that will
be described in this section.
Quarantine buffers are required for all intermittent on-line weight check systems to ensure that the
automation is accurately tracking any container between the last good weight check and a failing weight
check. For filling systems that make use of nested components, part of the design approach for on-line
intermittent weight checks should be to ensure the quarantine buffer enables the identification of entire nests
between weight checks so that they can be easily segregated for further investigation or discard.
Typically, off-line IPC, which is not automated, has the disadvantage of introducing a high degree of human
error either during the weight-check procedure or the documentation of the results. Off-line weight checks
are commonly required to be destructively tested (e.g., emptying the product in the container for weighing
on an external laboratory balance), which also makes this process undesirable. Throughout the remainder of
this section all check-weigh descriptors will describe on-line techniques unless specifically identified.
A thorough risk assessment, such as that described in the International Council for Harmonisation’s Quality
Guideline Q9(R1): Quality Risk Management, PDA’s Technical Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality
Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations or PDA/ANSI
Standard 03-2025, Standard Practice for Quality Risk Management of Aseptic Processes might be
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 101

--- PDF Page 116 (doc p102) ---
employed to assess the risks associated with the various weight-check approaches for a specific filling
configuration (7-9). See TR 54-2 for applied examples of packaging risk assessments (10).
The benefits and risks of on-line intermittent and on-line 100% weight-check approaches are described in
Sections 5.1.1–5.1.4.
5.1.1 Benefits of Intermittent Weight Checks
The benefits of intermittent statistical weight-check approaches include:
• For RTU primary packaging material, the containers can remain within the nest, and no denesting
process is needed.
• Filling lines can run at a higher speed as samples are only taken statistically, depending on the IPC
rate.
5.1.2 Constraints of Intermittent Weight Checks
The risks of an intermittent (statistical) weight-check approach include:
• Potential missing detection of underfills between the IPC sampling points
• Quarantine handling between the IPC sampling points (e.g., with a 10-fill station RTU filling line
running IPC at a 1% rate with 100 containers per nest, 1 row of 10 syringes in each of 10 nests will
be weighed; in this case, 10 nests must be held in a quarantine buffer awaiting results of subsequent
check-weigh results)
• Filling control strategy must take bias between the measurements tare and gross into account,
whether two scales or a single scale are used, potentially resulting in a smaller filling range to
compensate (see Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 for additional details on dose control).
5.1.3 Benefits of 100% Weight Checks
Typically, 100% IPC weight checks are accomplished using a tare scale (which weighs the empty container
prior to filling) and a gross scale (which weighs the container after filling). Tare and gross scales are
provided for each filling station so that each dosing path is verified for weight. (Configurations with a single
scale per dosing path are also available for low-throughput applications, where the single scale is used for
both tare and gross.) The benefits of 100% weight checks include:
• Possibility to dose-in, re-dose, and dose-out for maximizing product yield:
̶ Dose-in means the filling set is primed, where air is expelled into the container until a
constant flow of product is achieved, on the gross scales until the correct filling volume is
achieved. After priming is accomplished for the initial setup of the filler, this dose-in
process will generally not need to be repeated, unless there is downtime where prime is
lost. Normal filling operations will follow the dose-in (priming) step.
̶ Re-dosing means that there is the ability to add small increments of product to an individual
container if the net weight is lower than the target to bring the container to volume before
acceptance. When re-dosing is performed, it should be performed (or simulated) as a
standard part of the APS, as the extended filling time has the potential to increase risk. Re-
dosing is generally not practical for very small fill volumes.
̶ Dose-out means the line will be run until the filling path to each needle is completely empty
on the gross scales; underfilled containers will be rejected, but any containers that achieve
target weight before reaching empty may be retained. For high-value products, the increase
102 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 117 (doc p103) ---
in time to execute the dose-out is compensated with the savings achieved by minimizing
scrap. The dose-out process will typically start when the intermediate vessel is below the
lower replenishment level and there is no further product to be supplied. For specialty
products, like suspensions, dose-out may not be advisable as mixing may no longer be
sufficient.
• Constant final dosing is possible where two-step filling is performed; the first filling step fills more
than 80-95% of the volume, with a second dose provided by the filler to provide a fine-tuned
quantity of product. This conserves product by not requiring an excess fill, while providing a highly
precise final volume within the container. The two-step filling approach is especially valuable for
rare or expensive products, or for products where the dose must be very precise due to clinical
effect.
• Data is available for each container, and each container can be rejected directly after the net-
weighing; as a consequence, there is no quarantine handling.
• Detection of low or high doses due to undetected special-cause variation is possible at the filling
process (e.g., an air bubble in the filling hose).
• Constant feedback will be provided to the filling system, which may be beneficial to systems such
as PP for correcting drift (see Section 2.0).
• A 100% check-weigh enables the filling target to be closer to the lower limit, maximizing product
yield.
Historically, mass flowmeters were used for some continuous motion, high-speed machines as a 100% IPC
for dosing management; however, the mass flowmeters were poor options for low-volume fills, which
resulted in the need for overfilling. Mass flowmeters are capable of withstanding CIP and SIP; however, it is
difficult to verify their cleanliness and sterility, so the validation can be challenging. As a result, the
gravimetric approach is by far the more common approach.
5.1.4 Constraints of 100% Weight Checks
The risks of 100% weight checks include:
• Limited filling speed
• Denesting is typically required for RTU containers that are provided in nests
• Filling control strategy must take bias into account between the two measurements, tare and gross,
whether a single scale or two scales are used, potentially resulting in a smaller filling range in order
to compensate (see Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 for additional details on dose control).
• Depending upon system design, 100% weight checks can result in additional handling and/or
exposure time prior to stoppering
Finally, concerning risks for both intermittent and 100% IPC, weight-check systems are much more robust
than earlier generations of equipment, and therefore are much less likely to be damaged should mishandling
of containers on the line occur. Nevertheless, care should be taken to ensure that the container transport and
movement is aligned. To facilitate aligning these elements, ergonomic devices such as locating pins can be
used. Confirming alignment during setup avoids incurring costly replacement or repairs or product-reject
losses.
5.2 Dose Control System Design Options
For some filling lines with singularized containers, especially in filling rooms with limited size and required
high throughput, a 100% check-weigh is not possible. In this case, a statistical dose-control model must be
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 103

--- PDF Page 118 (doc p104) ---
used. Statistical dose-control is also used on a majority of nested filling lines. In statistical check weighing,
every container fill-weight is not known, and extra protection must be incorporated to protect for the filling
variability for containers not checked for dose. Typically, this results in target-fills set farther away from the
lower fill-reject limit, and filling reject-limits set farther away from the maximum and minimum filling
limits. Practically, this results in a smaller operating window for products with both upper and lower filling
limits and in more overfill for products with only a lower filling limit.
The greatest disadvantage of statistical dose-control is the handling of rejects. Should a dose-check for a
filling pump or needle exceed the reject limits, all filled containers from the last good dose-check to the
current failing dose-check must be discarded for that pump position. In a nested line, it is relatively simple
to segregate underfilled containers based on position in the nest (which correlates to the filling needle);
nevertheless, a quarantine system must be in place to ensure that the “faulty” containers can be rejected,
whether the nests are fully held on the line or have exited the line. For a line that handles individual
containers, such as a vial line, segregation is more difficult depending on container-handling and shift-
register control, and it is often simpler to discard all units filled for all pump positions back to the last good
dose, resulting in more rejects.
Figure 5.2-1 provides an example of statistical dose-control in a nested filling-machine, where one row out
of every six nests is tare-weighed, filled, and then gross-weighed. Figure 5.2-1 shows the removal of the
syringes from the nest, the filling of the units, and the dose numbering-system needed to associate the units
in each tub to the last good dose-check. This association is critical for handling rejects.
Figure 5.2-1 Statistical In-Process Control for Nested Containers – All Doses Within Limits
104 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 119 (doc p105) ---
Figure 5.2-2 depicts the same nested filling process but, this time, a dose-check fails either high or low
reject-limits. In this case, the filler will reenter a dose “in process” to center and control the dose for each
pump, and all containers back to the last passing IPC check will be discarded (either per pump position or
for all, depending on the reject control strategy).
Figure 5.2-2 Statistical In-Process Control for Nested Containers – Dose Outside of Limits
There are two main methods to control the dose in parenteral containers—gravimetric and volumetric fill—
to a physical stopping point (e.g., laser-fill endpoint detection on a cartridge).
5.2.1 Method 1: Gravimetric Dose Control Process
The basics of gravimetric dose control are simple and well understood. An empty container is weighed on a
load-cell to obtain tare weight; the container is filled, and then the filled container is weighed again on a
load-cell to find gross weight. The net weight is calculated from those numbers.
The tare and gross load-cells can be the same, as is the case in many nested filling lines. However, on many
bulk or singularized filling lines, two separate load-cells are used to measure tare and gross weight.
5.2.1.1 Gravimetric Dose Control Considerations
To ensure the dose delivered to the patient is correct, several sources of uncertainty need to be considered.
These sources of uncertainty, when applied to the label claim and maximum- and minimum-fill weights, can
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 105

--- PDF Page 120 (doc p106) ---
be used to calculate the filling-machine’s adjust and reject limits. However, some parenteral products do not
have maximum-filling weight limits (e.g., a multi-use cartridge or a vial in which the patient uses a syringe
to determine the dose delivered).
Below are the sources of uncertainty that must be taken into consideration when applying a gravimetric
dose-control strategy:
1. Container Holdup – Container holdup is the undelivered volume that cannot be dosed to the
patient due to such features as container geometry, device limitations, or plunger compliance.
Container holdup can be empirically determined with a Gage Repeatability and Reproducibility
Study or using the relevant U.S. Pharmacopeia estimates. Because the label claim is the mandatory
lowest volume (or weight) that can be delivered to the patient, protections must be built into the
dose-control strategy to account for container holdup.
2. Scale Bias – In filling machines with separate tare and gross scales, the bias between the two scales
must be considered to protect the maximum and minimum fill-weight. In filling machines with only
one scale for both tare and gross weights, an analogous calculation for the two measurements that
are taken on the single scale is applicable. To ensure no units exceed the minimum or maximum
fill-weight, the upper and lower filling-machine reject limits should be protected against scale (or
measurement) bias by including guard-banding from the minimum and maximum fill-weight limits.
A guard-band is an adjustment or offset to the pass/fail process limits that include known
uncertainties (such as the potential bias between the two measurements).
3. Scale Measurement Uncertainty (sMU) – Measurement uncertainty of the scale must be known in
the range of the weights being considered. To ensure that no units exceed the minimum or
maximum fill-weight, the upper and lower filling-machine reject limits should be protected against
sMU by guard-banding in from the limits by a correction factor of k , shown in Figure 5.2.1-1. The
1
scale calibration should be checked periodically to ensure its uncertainty does not exceed the value
used for the dose limit. Checking the scale calibration before and at the end of the batch, at a
minimum, is also recommended. It is also common for machines equipped with IPC to periodically
tare (i.e., zero) the weighing cells at defined intervals, especially for long fills. If this feature is not
included, then the scale-calibration checks should be executed more frequently.
4. Filling Standard Deviation (sFill) – The standard deviation of the fill process must be empirically
determined for the dose and the container being filled. The filling standard deviation, when
multiplied by correction factors k and k , is used to set the target of the dose a distance away from
2 3
the upper and lower reject limits. In Figure 5.2.1-1, the target is centered between the upper and
lower reject limits, when the target most often is closer to the lower reject limit to minimize
overfills. The filling standard deviation is also multiplied by correction factor k to set the adjust
4
limits for the filler. This adjustment is discussed further in Figure 5.2.1-1.
106 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 121 (doc p107) ---
Figure 5.2.1-1 Gravimetric Dose-Control Range Determination Depicting K Factors and Standard Deviation
Key for Figure 5.2.1-1:
• k = Controls the risk that a container determined to have an acceptable weight is actually within the minimum- and maximum-fill weight
1
requirements. Recommended that k is set to have a high statistical confidence of containers meeting the weight requirements.
1
• k = Controls the number of containers that will fail the lower reject limit by controlling how close the average fill weight can be to the lower
2
reject limit. The larger k is, the lower the risk of rejecting containers; also, a larger k raises the target and allows more product to be put into
2 2
each container, which increases the cost. Rejection risk vs. overfill must be balanced to choose the appropriate k.
• k = Calculated value of the number of filler standard deviations between the target and the upper reject limit, it determines the number of
3
containers that will fail the upper reject limit by determining how close the average fill weight is to the upper reject limit. The larger k is, the
3
lower the risk of rejecting containers. If the difference between the maximum and minimum fill-weights is large compared to filler variability,
then the target can be closer to the minimum fill weight requirement to minimize overfill. In this case, k will be larger than k ; otherwise, k
3 2 3
will be equal to k .
2
• k = Controls the average container weight so it is near the target. The smaller k is, the more adjustment will occur to keep the filler on
4 4
target; if adjustments are manual, it could slow down the line. If k is too large, the filler could drift significantly far from the target before an
4
adjustment occurs.
• σ = Scale measurement uncertainty (standard deviation). (See k above.)
MU 1
• bias = Measurement bias between tare and gross. (See k above.)
1
• σ = Filling standard deviation. (See k , k , and k above.)
Fill 2 3 4
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 107