
--- PDF Page 85 (doc p71) ---
Table 4.0-1 Functionality Requirements and Their Influence on Liquid Filling System Selection
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Continuous Durability of setup Good, provided that Good for Very good for May not be very
Filling/ (ability to process in a tubing is shifted or continuous/ continuous/ well suited if the
Campaign stable manner for a replaced prior to campaign filling. campaign filling. length of the
long time as would reaching pre- continuous/
Filling
If pump is to be Location of fill pump
be required for determined tubing campaign filling
Operations vs. changed with outside of the barrier
continuous/ failure point. necessitates having
Batch Filling another size can be a benefit to
campaign filling). to replace the
Minimal aseptic CIP/SIP, typically campaigns.
diaphragm mid-
SU Sterile connections required between
Capable of CIP/SIP, process/mid-
Components in Fluid required. PPs can be batches, the rest of
which may require campaign after its
Path or Ability to located outside of the setup may still
aseptic connections wear-and-tear time
Perform CIP/SIP. containment to be able to be
to be made and (number of cycles)
support the retained and used.
Minimization of broken, but generally has elapsed.
necessary handling.
number of aseptic CIP/SIP may require fewer connections
In this case, only
connections required numerous aseptic than with RPPs.
needles have to be
for setup. connections be
introduced to the
broken and
Format parts, such as aseptic
reestablished.
hoses and needles, environment.
need to be
considered to
accommodate the
different filling
volumes of the
individual batches
within the campaign.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 71

--- PDF Page 86 (doc p72) ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Speed of Number and type of Speedy and easy Slower setup at Fast setup, but Excellent speed of
Setup/ format parts required line setup for SU. beginning of batch, CIP/SIP is line setup for SU.
Changeover (fewer parts or more efforts to recommended,
For non-SU, fast For non-SU, fast
greater range of clean and sterilize, which is time-
setup is also setup is also
capability, or each although different consuming.
common as only the common as entire
part is faster). materials of
intermediate vessel, fluid path may be
construction may be
SU fluid path is faster manifold, and preassembled and
faster for CIP/SIP
than CIP/SIP. needles have to be sterilized offline.
(e.g., ceramic
cleaned and Only aseptic
pumps).
sterilized. connection to
product vessel and
mounting to
machine are
necessary.
72 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 87 (doc p73) ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Speed of Filling Number of cycles per Capable of Dedicated size Modifying pressure Dedicated size
vs. Control minute defines modifying fill-curve pumps for the during the filling pumps for different
Aspects speed, including within a single different fill volumes cycle (i.e., fill curve) is fill volumes to
conveyance (e.g., container through to achieve optimal not performed; achieve optimal
walking rake servo pump rate speed with the only modest speed with the
motion), number of modification. required accuracy. modifications to the required accuracy.
pump cycles required fill curve are available
May require a
to hit volume, and through the timing
different fill-pump
weight check. As and distance of
head size and/or
long as fill-time is less opening of the pinch
formats for different
than cycle-time, the valve. Therefore,
fill volumes to
speed is maximized. product
achieve the
characteristics may
Acceleration and necessary speeds.
limit rate.
deceleration may
influence maximum
speed permissible.
Balance between
required fill accuracy
and speed. Product
characteristics (e.g.,
foam, dripping) may
drive maximum
speed limits, while
fill-curve profile may
also influence speed
(i.e., slower at the
end of the cycle).
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 73

--- PDF Page 88 (doc p74) ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Foam Foam may be Axial flow is good Placement of vessel TP will be less Placement of
Prevention dependent on the for foam prevention. must be balanced sensitive to the intermediate vessel
product and, with head pressure positioning of the should be very
Larger-diameter
therefore, is to avoid pump vessel than other close to the point
tubing may reduce
unavoidable. leakage (without systems, but the end of fill in order to
foam.
placing it so low that of the aseptic fill-unit minimize tubing
Placing vessel a little
Dual-tube PPs end of the aseptic operation may be lengths, while still
higher than filling
minimize pulsation, fill-unit operation critical for foam if gas allowing gravity
pumps (ideally with
which can reduce results in drawing in is entrained in the feed.
bottom outlet).
foaming (although air that may product.
Filling formats (e.g.,
Optimal sizing of fill- dual-tube systems enhance foaming
Fluid pathway valves tube and needle
path components to often employ characteristics).
(e.g., pinch valve or diameter and/or tip
reduce overpressure. smaller tubing,
Filling formats (e.g., weir) geometry and geometry) and
which may be
Adjustment of filling tube and needle opening speed can filling-curve
counterproductive
curve (rate of fill diameter) and filling- be modified to parameters
to foam control).
start, midpoint, end curve parameters provide a curvilinear adjustable.
of each container) Filling formats (e.g., adjustable. opening and to open
Diving-needle
will minimize foam. tube and needle at an optimal rate to
Larger tube-sizing designs available.
diameter) and filling- reduce back pressure
Minimizing distance curve parameters and harder materials and potential for
from the outlet of adjustable. of construction for foam.
filling needle to the tubing may improve
liquid height. Diving-needle foaming but may be Filling formats (e.g.,
designs available. detrimental to drip tube and needle
control and diameter) and filling
accuracy. curve parameters
adjustable.
Diving-needle
designs available. Diving-needle
designs available.
74 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 89 (doc p75) ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Drip Control Matching fluid Liquid retraction Liquid retraction by No active liquid Liquid retraction by
characteristics to the (i.e., suck back) by design: small stroke retraction possible design: small stroke
appropriate technical design: small in the opposite with a reverse in the opposite
characteristics. rotation in the direction of stroke; however, direction of
opposite direction dispensing achieves some drip control dispensing
Needle design is one
of dispensing the required liquid can be managed with achieves the
of the most
achieves the retraction to avoid speed of pinch-valve required liquid
important features.
required liquid dripping; however, closure. retraction to avoid
Length and hardness
retraction to avoid the filling formats dripping; however,
of tubing is very
dripping; however, (needle and tubing the filling formats
critical.
the filling formats selection) play a (needle and tubing
(needle and tubing role. selection) play a
selection) play a role.
role.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 75

--- PDF Page 90 (doc p76) ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Need to Introduce a For SU, it is not Ceramic pumps may The pressure No additional risks
Maintain recirculation and/or common to find be better than requirement is to be if critical attributes/
Homogeneity mixing capability for systems with inner stainless steel for kept constant in the enablers have been
the vessels and fluid recirculation loops suspensions. intermediate vessel considered.
in Filling Loop
pathway (see Figures (e.g., valves). for dosing accuracy,
and Filling Close tolerance of
4.6.1-1–4.6.1-5); which might
Vessel the piston pumps
ensure that the compete with the
may not be
product can recirculation forces
appropriate for all
withstand applied to keep the
particle sizes; pump
continuous product in
clearance should be
recirculation (e.g., not suspension. To
assured to not
shear sensitive) to prevent this, a
damage any
determine whether manifold
particulate in the
recirculation is downstream of the
product.
continuous or only intermediate vessel
when the filler stops. Small dead-volume can be installed to
at the base of the ensure constant
The design of the
piston pump may pressure on the
buffer vessel is
mean the settling valves.
customized; the
occurs within the
decision whether to No additional risks if
pump (depending
recirculate at the critical
on settling time);
manifold or even attributes/enablers
trials will need to be
right before the have been
conducted to test
filling needles should considered.
the dynamics with
be studied.
the individual
Consider the trade- suspension.
offs between line
Poor choice for
length and
products with
complexity of
viscosity over 100
piping/recirculation
mPa-s.
pathways.
Limit interruptions in
the filling process,
76 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 91 (doc p77) ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
especially
interruptions in
recirculation or flow.
Have a defined
process for recovery
after stoppages (e.g.,
line clearance,
duration of resumed
recirculation before
restart of fill).
Defined quantity
should be scrapped
at the end of aseptic
unit operation when
recirculation / mixing
becomes ineffective.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 77

--- PDF Page 92 (doc p78) ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Need to Generally, No influence on No influence on TP filling requires Highly insensitive
Control temperature is product product temperature control to product
Product controlled at the bulk temperature directly temperature directly for accurate dosing. temperature;
holding vessels (e.g., caused by the caused by the however, changes
Temperature
With extremes in
jacketed vessel, pumps. pumps; if the to temperature
during Filling temperature, more
cooling coil, cold product during filling may
For extremes in detail in the design of
room). temperature have a marginal
temperature, the system is needed
negatively affects negative effect on
Impact on viscosity consideration due to the nature of
the stainless-steel dosing accuracy.
and flow should be should be given to some products that
pump (e.g.,
understood through changes in tubing expand or contract
tolerance on pump),
the dynamic stiffness. with Δ T, eventually
an alternative could
temperature range causing Δ P.
be ceramic or glass.
encountered during
Temperature
the cooling and
compensation for
filling.
pressure can occur
Consideration should through PLC control,
be given to the if required to ensure
environment to filling accuracy.
prevent
condensation on
vessels and fluid
pathway.
Effect of
temperature on
filling accuracy and
weight checks should
be understood.
78 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 93 (doc p79) ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
For Large Transfer vessels are If the hydrostatic If the hydrostatic If there are large If the hydrostatic
Batches, common, which will pressure or head- pressure or head- volume changes in pressure or head-
Mechanisms to require venting and space pressure is space pressure is the intermediate space pressure is
possibly pressure too high, it can too high, this can vessel, control of too high, it can
Supply the
control. induce leaks in the induce leaks in the hydrostatic pressure induce leaks in the
Product to the
connections and in pump. and head-space barbed tubing
Filler, including CIP/SIP capability for
between the rollers. pressure may need connections to the
All Necessary vessels and fluid Sensitive to vessel
to be taken into pump.
Intermediate path. Sensitive to vessel position (too high
account.
Steps and position (too high above the pumps
above the pump will will induce leaks).
Controls
induce leaks in the
connections and
potentially in
between the rollers).
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 79

--- PDF Page 94 (doc p80) ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Head Space Inert gas overlay in No additional risks if No additional risks if Use an inert gas for No additional risks
Management/ bulk, transfer, and critical critical the pressurizing of if critical
Head Space intermediate vessels. attributes/enablers attributes/enablers the TP vessel. attribute/enablers
have been have been have been
Replacement
Inert gas to be used
considered. considered. considered.
for any bulk transfer
that relies on
pressure rather than
a transfer pump.
Discard initial flush of
product as it
displaces air in lines
for oxygen-sensitive
products. Vacuum
can be applied to
enhance air removal
(except for low-
viscosity products).
Inert gas can be
applied through
jacketed needle,
separate needle,
and/or inert gas
tunnels.
Locations of gassing
vary, with gassing at
the closing station
being most effective.
80 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.