
--- PDF Page 40 (doc p26) ---
Product Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Rolling Diaphragm
Examples (RPP) Pump (DP)
Large- Yes, considerations should For LVPs, pump sizes up to Yes Yes, may require the largest
Volume be given to batch size and approx. 250 mL are pump size and may require
Parenterals number of revolutions per routinely available, multiple strokes.
fill in order to evaluate the otherwise multi-stroke
(LVP)
rate of tubing wear. filling is necessary. In order
to deliver large volumes, in
addition to splitting the
dosing, the possibility of
using multiple pumps (at
single stroke) to fill a single
container may be feasible.
The larger the pump
diameters, the more
awkward handling which
risks contamination or
damage.
Antibody Yes, highly recommended, No, creates too much shear Yes Yes
Drug especially in SU execution; force.
Conjugate some would opt against
having the pump outside
(ADC)
the isolator in this case, to
contain leakage should that
occur.
26 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 41 (doc p27) ---
Product Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Rolling Diaphragm
Examples (RPP) Pump (DP)
Solvent- Not ideal if the Yes, see the additional Yes, use of a housing to Yes, as the volatile
Based concentration of solvent considerations under low- cover the pinch valves may materials do not come in
Products leads to brittleness, viscosity products. Solvent be required for safety contact with the
weakening, swelling, or effects on tubing before reasons to prevent the mechanical parts of the
other negative effects to and after the pump should pinch-valve drive from pump. Additionally, pump
the hoses as this could be evaluated. coming into contact with components are available in
shorten tubing life or lead any flammable vapors. a variety of materials for
to dosing inaccuracies. Solvent effects on tubing, durability under a variety of
especially at the pinch chemical conditions (e.g.,
valve, should be evaluated. acidic, caustic, oxidizing).
Solvent effects on tubing
before and after the pump
should be evaluated.
Vaccines/ Depending on batch size; it Yes Yes Yes
Heparins may not be ideal if running
long campaigns (e.g., flu
vaccines with three-week
long campaigns) due to
frequent hose replacement.
Ophthalmics* Yes, provided the viscosity Yes Yes, provided the viscosity Yes, provided the viscosity
is in the suitable range. is in the suitable range. is in the suitable range.
*Historically, mass flowmeters were implemented for ophthalmic products. See Section 5.1.3 under 100% IPC Controls for discussion of mass
flowmeters.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 27

--- PDF Page 42 (doc p28) ---
2.1 Aseptic Filling Technologies: Peristaltic Pumps
The principle of operation for the PP is the dynamic rotational squeezing of a flexible tube (in most cases, a
silicone tube) placed between a backplate and rollers mounted on a rotor and driven by a servo motor to
create positive displacement in the closed system (tube), thereby moving liquid products from product
infeed side to product dispensing side. The pump tubes are fixed on the suction side to avoid the tubes
travelling within the pump. The filling volume is governed by the number of revolutions executed by the
rotor (degrees). The distance between the rollers and the backplate is called the occlusion-bed distance and
is critical to minimize tubing wear for a given pump-tubing wall thickness.
Note: Linear peristaltic pumps are also available which provide the compressive force on the tubing at right
angles to the direction of flow. These systems can provide excellent accuracy in filling with capabilities to
fill microliter quantities (5). However, these systems are less common, therefore the focus in this section
will be on peristaltic pumps with rotary heads. Many of the same risks and benefits apply to both
technologies.
The rotating motion of the rotor moves the dynamic squeezing point along the tube and moves the product
along, at the same time, creating a vacuum at the inlet and drawing in the product (see Figure 2.1-1). The
product to be filled only comes into contact with the filling tube and the filling needle. The tube represents a
closed system from the inlet of the product to the outlet through the filling needle.
Figure 2.1-1 Illustration of Progressive Rotary Motion of Rotor Along Backplate
When the product is not viscous (typically less than 60 milliPascal-second (mPa-s; equivalent to 1
centipoise), the choice of using a PP is highly appropriate, as the cleaning and sterilization efforts needed are
significantly less than with other technologies such as the RPP. PP systems are highly compatible with SU
fluid pathways.
Figure 2.1-2 provides a schematic of a possible PP fluid pathway. Notably, this image depicts the pumps
within the aseptic boundary; however, it is possible to install the pumps outside of the aseptic boundary,
thereby removing the primary mechanical components from the critical zone. As discussed in Section 2.1.5
there may be reasons that installation within the boundary is preferable for potent or toxic products.
28 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 43 (doc p29) ---
Figure 2.1-2 Peristaltic Pump Fluid Pathway Configuration
2.1.1 Peristaltic Pump Design Configurations
There are two different PP design configurations available: a single-tube PP and a double-tube PP.
Examples from one manufacturer of both roller configurations are depicted in Figure 2.1.1-1. In the roller
set for the single-tube PP, in this particular design, the tube is threaded around the roller unit twice. In the
offset rollers for double-tube PP, two separate tubes of the same diameter are wrapped around the upper and
lower roller sets a single time. In the double tube configuration, the rollers on the top and on the bottom
have an offset to minimize the pulsation of the system, such that the rollers in maximum compression are
offset from the rollers in minimum compression. Different filling systems are equipped with more rollers
than depicted below (up to six per rotor channel). The advantage of additional rollers is better control of
pulsation and therefore additional filling accuracy.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 29

--- PDF Page 44 (doc p30) ---
Figure 2.1.1-1 Roller Configurations for Single-and Double-Tube Peristaltic Pump
In a single-tube PP, one silicone tube must be placed in between the backplate and the rotor (although it may
be wrapped around the rollers twice). Special care has to be taken to ensure that the pulsation of the system
is minimized. Pulsation is usually impacted by the number of rollers and the available space for the tube to
retract. The pulsation can have an impact on the filling accuracy and may generate pulsation at the
sterilizing filter if there is no sterile intermediate vessel between the filter and the PP. In rare applications, if
filling speeds are low and required accuracy is not demanding, an intermediate vessel may not be necessary.
The pump tubes are fixed on the suction side to avoid the tube travelling.
Single-tube pump heads provide the ability to use one complete tube from intermediate vessel to filling
needle without any connection pieces installed within the rotor. This gives three advantages: less handling,
which means potentially less risk of contamination; fewer parts to be delivered by tube suppliers, which
means reduced costs; and less component integrity risk.
While a single tube may be extended from the vessel through the pump to the filling needle, there are other
designs for single-tube pump heads, such as that depicted in Figure 2.1.1-2, where the tubing assembly is
designed to support long campaign lengths. For example, the tubing inside the pump may be of a special
wear-resistant design, and the tubing between the pump and the filling needle may be of a higher rigidity
than the pump tubing to prevent axial pulsation expansion of the tubing at the outlet side of the pump. To
support these features, the design will result in at least one (if not two) connectors in the tubing, as shown in
Figure 2.1.1-2.
30 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 45 (doc p31) ---
Figure 2.1.1-2 Schematic of a Single-Tube Sterile Fluid Pathway with Connectors
2.1.2 Peristaltic Pump Setup
The setup for the fluid pathway for a double-tube PP is shown in Figure 2.1.2-1. The suction tube is split by
a Y-connector into two pump tubes, which are installed between the backplate and the rollers. Both pump
tubes are joined by an identical Y-piece to one filling tube at the outlet and connected to the filling needle.
The tubes may be of differing diameters (e.g., the two pump tubes may be half the volume of the upstream
suction and downstream filling tubes).
Figure 2.1.2-1 Schematic for a Double-Tube Sterile Fluid Pathway
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 31

--- PDF Page 46 (doc p32) ---
Innovations are being made all the time to improve the capability of traditional technologies. For example,
alternative PP designs exist that provide linear flow to reduce shear force and line losses. These designs are
beyond the scope of this document, but keep in mind that any upgrades to technology should be proven and
validated.
When selecting tubing for PP applications it is important to think about the required attributes of three
distinct sections of tubing:
1. Upstream of the pump
2. Within the rollers of the pump
3. Downstream of the pump
The factors to be considered when selecting the tubing for each section include, but are not limited to:
• Functionality within the distinct position of the pumping system (e.g., effective transport without
deformation, required level of flexibility)
• Prevention of reactivity or harm to the product (e.g., adsorption of API or preservatives, shear
forces, leachables)
• Method of sterilization of the tubing (e.g., to avoid changes in texture, adsorption of sterilant,
generation of free radicals)
• Performance over time to prevent distortion (e.g., tubing integrity, wear and the formation of
particulate, permanent changes in dimension)
The selection of tubing for each position must consider the respective pumping operation role, as well as
each of the four attributes listed above. In general, materials of construction upstream of the pump are less
critical for the filling operation. Within the rollers, the tubing must be flexible to permit effective reaction to
the rollers, but without distortion that can result in changes in the volume of transfer over the intended
period of use. Downstream of the pump, the materials of construction should be less flexible as this section
of tubing does not need to interact with the rollers. The lower flexibility will ensure that the tubing does not
distort from the pressure of the transferred liquid. Distortion in the downstream section can result in changes
in the delivered dose or dripping.
The interior diameter of the tubing and connectors throughout the entire fluid pathway should be designed to
ensure that there is no back pressure or significant pressure drop along the fluid path. This includes any
connectors such as the Y-connectors and the filling needle.
Due to the softening of the pump tubing due to tubing wear (Figure 2.1.2-2), the PP system will eventually
show a drift in delivered dose over time, therefore, a correction value needs to be applied. The correction
value (algorithm) is statistically based on the weight-check results of the inline process control scales.
Therefore, using a statistical or 100% IPC check-weighing method when using PP filling systems is highly
recommended (see Sections 5.1-5.1.4). The usable life of PP tubing depends on fill volume, product
characteristics (e.g., solvents, corrosives, abrasives), pump-tubing robustness, filling speed, and start/stop
curves, as well as the general design of the pump. It is recommended to validate the filling time/filled-dose
count of the tubes as, at some point, the wear and tear will generate particles that will contaminate the
product. The PP tubing will certainly wear on the exterior but, in extreme cases, factors such as a high
number of doses or high pump acceleration or deceleration can lead to internal tubing wear, potentially
32 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 47 (doc p33) ---
releasing particles into the product. Figure 2.1.2-3 includes microscopic images of tubing with external and
internal wear.
Figure 2.1.2-2 Diagrams of External Tubing Wear
Figure 2.1.2-3 Microscopic Examination of Worn Tubing
2.1.3 Peristaltic Pump System Positioning
During the design phase of PP systems, the position of the intermediate vessel relative height to the filling
needles should be evaluated in detail so air gaps in the tube are not created. If the pump has to work to pull
product from a vessel positioned lower than the filling needle, air bubbles are a common result. Likewise,
other parameters such as choosing the right tube diameters for the target fills and the length of the tubes
between the PP and the needle should also be considered. This consideration is due to the well-appreciated
fact that a PP, being a closed system, can be placed outside of the isolator or RABS, which would position it
farther away from the filling needles in some cases.
There are different methods to prime the pump to remove air from the system and to ensure the target fill
volume is achieved without air gaps at the beginning of the batch. The approach to priming should be
considered depending on the application, product characteristics, and the execution of the pump (see
Section 12.2 for priming discard).
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 33