
--- PDF Page 31 ---
• Shutdown Allowances – How many days per year will the line be operated, accounting for such
factors as shutdowns, aseptic process simulations (APS), testing, technical studies, recapitalization,
and changes?
• Campaign Strategy – Will multiple batches be campaigned to reduce changeover time? (See
Section 1.5 for additional considerations for campaigning.)
• Changeover Time – What amount of time is required between campaigns and between batches
within a campaign, measured from the last good container (current batch) to the first good container
(next batch)?
• % Yield – How much scrap can be tolerated?
• % Line Efficiency – When filling, what is the expected line efficiency (i.e., the tolerance level for
stoppages/downtime)?
• % Facility Efficiency – Of the available hours in a year, what percentage of these will the line
operate (i.e., how much allowance for unforeseen events will be built into the production plan)?
• Capacity Flexibility – Should the initial capacity plan be established for low filling-line utilization
so there is ample time to make changes, if needed (e.g., plan for staffing more shifts than needed to
meet the capacity plan, select a faster line than needed to meet the plan)?
• Facility Suitability – In an existing facility, does the facility design (e.g., footprint, cleanroom
classifications, utilities) support the selected filling line?
Only after creating a capacity model that takes the above factors into consideration can a filling speed target
be set.
1.5 Aseptic Filling Campaign Requirements Driving Selection and Design
Campaigning is a filling strategy where multiple batches are produced back-to-back on a line without a
complete teardown and setup between batches. Campaigning is most commonly encountered when the same
product is filled at the same or differing fill volumes or into different primary containers and/or closures.
However, there may also be circumstances where different formulations are filled into the same container
and closures within a campaign if the product-contact filling pathway is fully changed. This latter approach
requires assurance that there is no risk of cross-contamination from spills or splashes with appropriate
control strategies and risk assessments. In either case, the intent is to minimize the number of interventions,
fine-tune and stabilize the line, and improve the cost-and-capacity utilization of the line.
Campaigning is the preferred operating mode when managing a high-volume product on a filling isolator
line that is set up and staffed to operate on a 24/7 basis. Lines that are required to fill multiple small-volume
products, which may require different primary component types and sizes, are more suited to operate in
batch mode.
Attributes that might differ under various campaign approaches include:
• Changeover of fluid pathway
• Changeover of format parts
• Line clearance requirements
• Changeover of containers and closures (e.g., hoppers, bowls, and/or tracks, provided these changes
can be accomplished under fully closed barrier conditions)
• Bulk changeover
• Operator shift changes
The specific protection offered by a fully closed and decontaminated environment means that campaigning
is commonly undertaken in isolators. In this case, the expectation for the campaign would be that the
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 17

--- PDF Page 32 ---
isolator is not opened for equipment changes between batches. Campaigning is also possible in restricted
access barrier systems (RABS) but in general the duration of the campaign is typically shorter than in
isolators because of the increased risks due to the more “open” nature of RABS.
With the advent of more rapid changeover technology and, for isolators rapid decontamination (and
aeration) processes, the time savings that originally drove much of the focus on campaigning is reduced. All
variables that influence SA should be weighed carefully when making the decision on whether to campaign.
The variables that impact SA risk include, but are not limited to:
• Technology in use for barrier protection of the process (i.e., isolator or RABS, open or closed) and
the overall expected quality of the environment throughout the intended use period
• Length of processing times and the risks associated with the higher numbers of manipulations and
interventions (routine and non-routine) in prolonged processing
• Frequency and types of disinfection and/or biodecontamination
• Waste accumulation (including packaging/wrap waste and any spills, breakage or dropped
components) within the operating environment over prolonged processing times
• Duration of use of sterilizing filter and/or sterile bulk hold conditions and times
• Simplicity or complexity of change over and setup including the number and complexity of the
required interventions and frequency of the required change over or setup events (this evaluation
should consider the environmental conditions under which these activities are performed as well
such as open-door, with or without post-intervention biodecontamination, etc.)
A careful risk-benefit analysis is recommended based upon the specific technologies in use and the risks to
SA. Controls should be designed to mitigate sterility assurance risks regardless of the selected mode of
operation.
To mitigate risks associated with prolonged processing, the intended operational approach should consider:
• Partial or total clean-in-place/sterilize-in-place (CIP/SIP) of fluid pathway or replacement between
batches
• Biodecontamination of all, or of high-risk, parts of the environment between batches
• Glove integrity-testing intermittently (but regularly) throughout the processing
• Inclusion of new filter setups with new pre-use post-sterilization integrity-testing (PUPSIT) test
results for each batch
When campaigning is selected, the aseptic process should be validated under the conditions associated with
the campaign, to ensure that conditions and activities that may pose a risk to producing a sterile product are
challenged in the APS. For example, the maximum time between biodecontamination events, while
conducting the maximum number of interventions representing a routine campaign, should be evaluated.
Operational conditions and periods of no-filling activities should be representative of the campaign.
Similarly, the maximum duration of use of the fluid pathway between CIP/SIP events should be included in
the APS design. Companies may also include a strategy of performing piggy-back APS, which is an APS
that is conducted immediately after the final batch of a campaign to demonstrate the quality of the aseptic
conditions after typical prolonged processing, provided that the setup phase is also represented within the
APS strategy. See PDA Technical Report No. 22: Aseptic Processing Simulations (Revised 2025) for
additional details on appropriate APS strategies.
If designed and executed properly, campaigning should not introduce additional SA risk when compared to
conventional batch-based models. However, an analysis of prior-line performance (on the same or
18 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 33 ---
equivalent lines) should be undertaken to fully understand the rates of batch failure-modes that could impact
the production in campaign mode, for example, isolator-glove integrity-test failure rate.
1.6 Aseptic Filling Line Future-Proofing Requirements Driving Selection
and Design
Flexibility for the future is, of course, desirable and has a long history in manufacturing—parenteral and
otherwise. Engineers and technical services staff will seek many options and design choices to plan for
future changes. The changes foreseen may ultimately not be the ones that are needed; however, providing
for no future flexibility may create avoidable obsolescence when reasonable flexibility can most easily be
designed into the project during the design phase. Project managers and financial staff may wish to avoid
overly ambitious future-proofing a new filling line due to the increased project timelines and the potential
additional costs that are encountered with building in flexibility, so a careful balance with agreed-upon
objectives for the project must be identified. A thorough understanding of the most likely future products,
capacity flexibility, and alignment of risk (including current GMP compliance risk such as the need for
increased barrier protections, the greater prevalence of biodecontamination, higher degrees of automation
and/or robotics that comply with First Air principles) with strategic planning and finance is the surest path to
incorporating flexibility successfully.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 19

--- PDF Page 34 ---
2.0 Aseptic Filling Technologies
There are four commonly used filler technologies in the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical industries
for the aseptic filling of liquids. These technologies include:
• Peristaltic pump
• Rotary piston pump
• Time pressure filler
• Rolling diaphragm pump
Note: Mass flowmeters, as a mechanism of dose control, are discussed briefly in Section 5.1.3 Blow-Fill-
Seal / Form-Fill-Seal technologies and the filling of sterile gels and ointments are out of scope.
The selection criteria for the most appropriate filling technology should include:
• Understanding and balancing the capabilities of each technology
• Recognizing features and limitations related to primary components and product characteristics
• Determining which filling system can support the required business objectives (e.g., speed of filling,
yield, efficiency, initial capital cost, lifecycle cost, ease of operation)
As noted in Section 1.0, trade-offs are often required when selecting a filling system technology (e.g.,
desired line speed may not be achievable at the required dosing accuracy, a higher complexity filling system
may be required to fill a product with high viscosity). Therefore, careful evaluation of the features, benefits
and risks of the various technologies are required to select the most appropriate system design. The control
strategy for the filling process should identify any features, limitations and risks associated with the selected
technology and control for them. Design risks might include, but are not limited to, the complexity of set up,
presence or absence of CIP/SIP capability, number/type/location of mechanical parts, and wear parts.
Special attention should be given to any system design elements with a higher risk to SA.
Section 2.0 describes and contrasts the attributes of each liquid filling technology. Table 2.0-1 compares
some of the key design features of the four major liquid filling technologies, providing a high-level
summary of the key contrasting elements for the different system types.
20 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 35 ---
Table 2.0-1 Comparison of Attributes of Four Major Filling Technologies
System Attribute Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Pump (RPP) Time Pressure (TP) Rolling
Diaphragm
Pump (DP)
Dosing Accuracy Very accurate Very accurate Very accurate Very accurate
Pulsation, when present,
can adversely influence
dosing accuracy.
Pulsation is more
prevalent with single tube
execution.
Single-Use Fluid Well-suited for SU (vast Possible with some vendors At present, option not Possible with some
Pathway majority of PP are SU) available vendors
Clean-In-Place Possible but rare Possible Possible Possible
(CIP)/Sterilize-In-
Place (SIP)
Execution
Campaign Wear of hoses is a Compatible Compatible Compatible
Compatibility limiting factor, so hoses
Wear of hoses due to a Wear of hoses due
must be either changed
single point-of-pinch to single point-of-
or repositioned for very
wear is a limiting factor, pinch wear may be
large/long batches based
so studies must be a limiting factor.
on studies carried out to
carried out to qualify
qualify hose durability.
hose durability.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 21

--- PDF Page 36 ---
System Attribute Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Pump (RPP) Time Pressure (TP) Rolling
Diaphragm
Pump (DP)
Filling Range Typically, 0.1 mL* to 100 Typically, 0.1 mL to 250 mL; while Typically, 0.1 mL to 100 Typically, 0.2 mL to
mL (up to 500 mL larger volumes are possible and mL (up to 500 mL 250 mL (up to 500
possible) available commercially, the trade- possible) mL possible)
offs with the handling of the
*Reports of 0.012 mL Ranges are limited.
oversized pumps aseptically often
low-end filling capability Pump selection
drives the selection of another
for linear peristaltic based on operating
filling technology); Multi-shot or
pumps (5). range.
multi-stroke filling can be used to
Potentially, a different enable larger volumes with smaller
pump head for higher fill pumps.
volumes.
Ranges are limited. Pumps typically
cover decimal-factor ranges.
Viscosity Range Up to 60 mPa-s Up to 300,000 mPa-s Up to 100 mPa-s Up to 100 mPa-s
(depending on product
(higher mPa-s
characteristics)
exceptions may be
possible with
heating of fluid
prior to filling and
changes to tubing
selection)
Installation Possible Not possible as the pumps are Possible Possible
Outside Isolator/ "open" at the interface between
Restricted Access the piston and cylinder.
Barrier System
(RABS)
22 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 37 ---
System Attribute Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Pump (RPP) Time Pressure (TP) Rolling
Diaphragm
Pump (DP)
Product Could potentially be Due to shear forces and long Could potentially be Could potentially
Compatibility difficult with solvent- residence times inside the pump, difficult with be difficult with
based products as the may not be the best system for temperature-sensitive highly viscous
tubes could become long-chain protein products products (expansion and products.
brittle. (though some recent studies show contraction [e.g., due to
potential compatibility). cooling] could affect
dosing volume if the
pressure is directly
affected).
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 23

--- PDF Page 38 ---
Table 2.0-2 provides a list of different container types and the capabilities of each technology to work with
the different primary package types.
Table 2.0-2 Containers Used with Each of the Four Major Filling Technologies
Container Peristaltic Rotary Piston Time Rolling Diaphragm
Pump (PP) Pump (RPP) Pressure (TP) Pump (DP)
Vial Yes Yes Yes Yes
Cartridge Yes* Yes* Preferred* Yes*
Syringe Yes Yes Yes Yes
Ampoule Yes Yes Yes Yes
Bag Yes Yes Yes Yes
Eyedrop Yes Yes Yes Yes
*TP is the preferred method for cartridge-filling as it is compatible with sensor (non-gravimetric) filling, thus
ensuring the cut-off is highly accurate. Reaction time for sensor-filling cut-off with PP, RPP, and DP may be
too slow.
Nested components may be used for all four filling technologies. The choice of using nested components
will influence other control strategies such as 100% IPC for single-container handling vs. statistical IPC for
nested components (see Section 5.0). If using a multi-needle/multi-pump system, the need to deactivate a
single faulty filling station with a nested configuration will result in challenges in reject management unless
automatic reject and reject verification is part of the line design (see Section 12.0).
Table 2.0-3 compares the performance of the various filling technologies with different product types.
24 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 39 ---
Table 2.0-3 Comparison of Filling Technologies Based Upon Common Product Types
Product Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Pump Time Pressure (TP) Rolling Diaphragm
Examples (RPP) Pump (DP)
Proteins Yes No, creates too much shear Yes Yes
force.
Suspensions Yes, as long as the viscosity Yes, as long as particles do Yes, provided the particle Yes, with restrictions
is below approximately 60 not disturb the pump size is compatible with the related to recirculation.
mPa-s, and as long as surface. orifice geometry.
settling of the suspension is
considered during potential
downtime.
High- No, as gaps will form in the Yes, up to approximately No, limited to No, limited to
Viscosity hoses and cause underfills 300,000 mPa-s. A closing approximately 10-100 approximately 100 mPa-s
Products needle may be chosen mPa-s without extreme measures
depending on how high the (e.g., heating).
viscosity is (see Section
3.0).
Low- Yes, up to approximately Yes, the intermediate Yes Yes
Viscosity 60 mPa-s. vessel-level maintenance
Products may be critical, and it may
require ventilation of that
vessel.
Small- Yes, very suitable and very Yes, very suitable and Yes, very suitable and Yes, very suitable and very
Volume accurate. highly accurate. highly accurate. accurate.
Parenterals
(SVP)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 25