
--- PDF Page 108 (doc p94) ---
Figure 4.6.1-4 Double-Loop Recirculation Without Mixing
Figure 4.6.1-5 depicts a system where there are no mixers that also utilizes a double-loop design. In this
scenario, there are two major differences compared to the example depicted in Figure 4.6.1-4:
• A decision has been made to use the product-infeed pump to feed product from the product vessel
to the dosing system, but also to recirculate back to the vessel in case of a machine stop. This is
executed by implementing a three-way valve that either feeds the product to the intermediate vessel
or switches to feeding back to the product-vessel in an external loop should the filler stop for any
reason (e.g., exceeding a predefined time).
• The recirculation of the inner loop takes place after the dosing pumps by using another three-way
valve design. When there is no stoppage of the line, the product will flow directly through the filling
needles into the containers. In case of a machine stop, the dosing pumps will continue to run, but the
product will be directed via the three-way valve back to the intermediate product-vessel using the
product recirculation pump in the inner loop. This is typically executed for high-cost products
where avoiding product rejection, as much as possible, is required.
94 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 109 (doc p95) ---
Figure 4.6.1-5 Use of Three-Way Valves in Recirculation Loop and at Filling Needles
4.7 Functionality for Controlling Temperature
Products that require temperature control during filling commonly have a restrictive “temperature budget,”
that is, a specific limited duration that the product is permitted to be outside of active temperature control
during manufacturing, filling, and packaging. This ensures that the entire time out of temperature through all
transport, handling, and patient administration steps (or through end of shelf life) does not adversely affect
product quality. For products with a temperature-control requirement, the temperature budget (both time and
temperature range) will drive the technical requirements for the filling operation.
Product that is affected by temperature can be cooled, in most cases, by cooling the product-vessels. For an
intermediate product-bag, a cooling plate can be applied to maintain the temperature, and stainless steel
intermediate product-vessels can be cooled by a vessel jacket (a double-walled vessel where cooling liquid
is pumped around the outside of the “inner vessel”), or cooling coil.
As a consequence of the cold temperatures within a warmer external environment, condensation may form
on the outside of the vessels, hoses, manifolds or, even more critically, on the filling needle, which could
result in droplets that dilute the product and compromise sterility. To combat condensation, relative
humidity of the environment should be closely controlled (without inducing an electrostatic charge to
components due to low %RH which could have negative effects such as impact to gravimetric weighing
results, dripping, component handling difficulties, etc.). Condensation is a particularly high risk for the
portions of the vessel or piping that is within the Grade A environment. In an isolator, there may be the
opportunity to more tightly control the relative humidity of the environment to reduce the risk of
condensation. Isolators, however, will encounter a different challenge in getting cooling liquid for double-
walled vessels inside and back outside of the containment.
If using a PP filling system, in addition to cooling the intermediate vessel, it could also be considered to cool
the pumps (and therefore the fluid pathway) within a refrigerated enclosure.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 95

--- PDF Page 110 (doc p96) ---
Temperature may influence the flow of the product due to temperature-induced changes in viscosity. This
may be particularly critical for TP filling systems. For these products, the temperature must be carefully
managed to optimize the balance between temperature and flowability. The effects of the product
temperature on filling accuracy and on weight checks should be understood and addressed within the design
and controls.
4.7.1 Filling Speed, Filling Time, and Temperature
Filling speed should be designed to ensure that filled containers can be returned to refrigerated conditions
within a controlled duration of time. Accumulation points that serve to buffer capacity on the line (e.g.,
accumulator tables before lyophilizer loaders or before cappers) should be minimized to ensure that the
exposure of every unit does not exceed the maximum allowed time (keeping in mind that accumulation
points are using randomized handling where individual containers are not traceable). For lyophilizer loading
consider whether the filler can continuously run while the lyophilizer loader is changing shelves. Cold
loading of lyophilizers may need to be accommodated with additional controls, such as low %RH, special
closing doors on the lyophilizer, or nitrogen blanket, to prevent the possibility of condensation on the
outside of the containers from affecting the loading.
For all temperature-restricted products, the validation must include demonstration that the time-out-of-
temperature period is well controlled and acceptable to the product quality for all containers along the line.
4.8 Design and Functionality for Large Batch Sizes
The fluid pathway for large batches commonly will include an intermediate holding-vessel that is a fraction
of the size of the bulk vessel. This is especially true for designs where the bulk vessel is some distance away
from the filler. The intermediate vessel is able to moderate the head pressure between the vessel and the
pumps or pinch valves. The positioning of vessels above the filling needles is critical due to the head
pressure that this provides. The deeper the vessel, the greater the head pressure. If the vessel is placed too
high, relative to the fill pumps, this can induce leaks.
The intermediate vessel is typically located after the sterilizing filter. The bulk vessel, upstream of the
intermediate vessel, will have a sterilizing-vent filter to assist in the compensation of the pressure as the
vessel empties. If the headspace pressure in the intermediate vessel is too variable, dosing control can suffer.
To manage that level in the intermediate vessel, a product transfer pump is sometimes employed to feed the
bulk from the manufacturing vessel to the intermediate vessel. Other transfer controls are also possible, such
as overpressure with pinch valves. The size of the intermediate vessel may be a consideration when
determining the frequency of replenishment and to better enable a constant flow.
Large batches lend themselves to fixed piping systems with CIP/SIP rather than SU. The ability to switch to
a new filter pathway during the batch, should the first filter become blocked with product, may be a
consideration with large batches. There is no practical difference in the design of the fluid pathway(s) based
on the type of filler.
4.9 Functionality to Control Oxygen Exposure
Additional controls are required for the filling step for oxygen-sensitive products. Products that are sensitive
to oxygen are typically stored in vessels in an overpressure condition with an inert gas, such as nitrogen,
prior to filling, as well as during formulation/compounding. Any intermediate vessel in the filling process is
96 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 111 (doc p97) ---
also blanketed with nitrogen. When biodecontamination of the environment is performed prior to filling,
extreme care should be taken to control residual levels of the biodecontamination agent (e.g., vaporized
hydrogen peroxide) in the environment and absorbed in the materials to be used during the filling operation
(e.g., tubing). The former is reduced through effective aeration cycles and the latter through protective
packaging, through flushing or performing CIP and/or SIP after biodecontamination. The initial flush of
product through the fluid pathway is commonly discarded as the air is displaced from the lines by the liquid
and steps may be taken to eliminate residual oxygen in the container after closing, as described below.
Since liquid will displace air, the benefits of pre-gassing of containers, as well as gassing during filling
(common historically), are typically not as effective as gassing after filling during closing to reduce the
residual oxygen in the headspace of the container. Studies have demonstrated that gassing during closing is
the most efficient and effective way of reducing oxygen in the headspace. Thus, newer equipment designs
have an inert gas overlay only at the closing position; however, older product registrations may have
additional details that make it necessary to include gassing at other positions, and it is possible to source
filling systems with any of the desired positions for gassing.
For hypersensitive products, it is also possible to apply vacuum to the container to augment the gassing
steps through a vacuum bell at the required positions along the line. For example, a vacuum can be applied
prior to filling to ensure a complete fill on containers such as cartridges and syringes to ensure complete
filling at the tip. This evacuation has an added benefit of reducing atmospheric air from the tip that might
remain in the product for oxygen-sensitive products. Vacuum can be applied during the fill as well,
especially for viscous products, where the evacuation helps to ensure that no air is trapped within the
product. Vacuum can also be applied after filling before introduction of inert gas to the headspace. The
evacuation sequence depends on the product sensitivity, the oxygen-reduction target, and the viscosity of the
product. Sequence of operation may include evacuation, inerting, evacuation, and then closing to completely
remove the oxygen from the headspace (see Section 7.3.2 for use of a vacuum bell during closing process).
Low-viscosity products may boil under vacuum; therefore, vacuum sequences may be limited for these
applications.
To enable the supply of inerting gas to the container, the gas may be supplied through a separate gassing
needle or a jacketed needle (needle within a needle) (see Section 3.0). SU needles are not currently available
with a jacketed design. Cleaning validation is complicated for jacketed needles. For post-filling gassing
(performed between filling and stoppering), it is possible to include an inert gas tunnel above the containers.
The tunnel will also provide additional protection in the headspace in case of brief-duration line stoppages.
However, when considering the design of the tunnel, the potential for the tunnel to disrupt First Air must be
evaluated and the approach justified.
For a lyophilized product, the lyophilizer chamber is typically filled with nitrogen after vacuum steps are
completed to ensure low residual oxygen in the container prior to stoppering or closing.
Once the container is sealed (with plunger, stopper and cap, or disc seal) for headspace-controlled products,
the sealed-container residual oxygen must be verified. This may be accomplished through a suitable
validation and quality control sampling, or through validated instruments that provide 100% on-line or off-
line verification. The approach taken must be appropriate to the critical quality attributes (CQAs) of the
product and justified within the product’s overall control strategy.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 97

--- PDF Page 112 (doc p98) ---
4.10 Enhancing Functionality with Robotics
People are the greatest source of contamination associated with aseptic filling. Therefore, robotics offers an
enormous opportunity to improve SA when designed and implemented properly. Recent advances in
robotics and isolator designs have enabled the implementation of gloveless isolators which are a significant
enhancement in SA for aseptic filling. This section does not provide comprehensive design or
implementation guidance for robotics (nor for gloveless isolators) but rather lists some of the points to
consider for this type of installation.
Robots are machines capable of automatically performing complex tasks that would otherwise be performed
by humans. Typical robotics designs are four- or six-axis armatures. The definition of robots may
conventionally be extended to programmable rakes, X-Y tables, and other machine movement such as
magnetic levitating conveyance, all of which can offer benefits to SA as they improve handling and limit the
risk of contamination, disruption of unidirectional airflow, or the needed interventions of personnel.
However, this section focuses on the more complex robotics associated with numerous degrees of motion.
When using robotics in the aseptic environment for aseptic filling, the design and operating principles must
be carefully evaluated for suitability to operate within a cleanroom environment. Robotic systems,
regardless of type, bring a certain risk to the unidirectional airflow due to a tendency to generate turbulence.
Therefore, robots should not be used for the sake of using robotics but rather should bring a benefit for the
aseptic-filling process. CFD and air flow visualization (i.e. smoke studies) should verify the impact of the
robot on the unidirectional airflow and the robot’s potential to create excessive turbulence or to introduce
contamination.
Implementation of robotics adds complexity to filling system automation and motion control unless careful
integration with the filling machine is executed as part of the filling-machine design. In some cases, robotics
may present a limitation on the speed and accessibility (e.g., for interventions, for cleaning and disinfection)
of the line, which may be an unacceptable tradeoff in the design of the aseptic operation. However, robotics
may provide enhancements in reliability and reproducibility for complex tasks that provide a significant
aseptic advantage. Therefore, companies should carefully and thoughtfully assess whether robotics are the
right solution for process automation.
Contamination control strategies would require that manual aseptic assembly is to be avoided. Therefore,
robotics is commonly sought as a solution; however, robotic assembly of filler components can be very
difficult. For example, the geometry and design of the RPP or TP fillers make robotic setup difficult. In
contrast, PPs can be set up with robots, as the tubing installation is in a fixed position with a relatively
simple geometry. It is commonly not required for SA purposes, however, as it is possible to have the PPs
outside of the isolator or RABS. In all cases, robotics may be useful for the installation of tubing and
needles downstream of the fill pumps within the sterile boundary. This is especially appropriate when the
tubing and needles are extended through a transfer port system into an isolator. The robotics can remove the
needle assembly from the port and install them in the needle receptable.
Companies should also be aware that additional skill sets may be required for operations and maintenance
personnel that are not needed for conventional filling and conveyance.
98 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 113 (doc p99) ---
Design considerations include:
• Selection for service should be for operations where human intervention presents a greater SA risk
than to the robot
• Robotic handling of filled containers should be designed to be smooth (i.e., minimize rapid change
in acceleration, braking, and turning) and to minimize the risk of stopper displacement, sloshing,
and splashing; sloshing liquids can be a more critical concern with liquid products to be freeze-dried
or for containers that are filled to the brim
• Shape of the robotic arms should be selected to reduce turbulence
• Speed and smoothness of reaction of the robot to reduce airflow turbulence should be considered in
the programming (e.g., rapid upward movements are to be avoided or minimized, slowest motions
should be used near open containers)
• Placement of the robotic arms near the critical surfaces or in areas that risk reflux from “dirtier”
zones should be forbidden (e.g., not above open containers or components, not near air-return
openings in an open RABS (oRABS))
• Location of servos and cams should be outside the aseptic barrier or below the working height and
must be sealed
• Wear parts and friction points (e.g., gaskets and seals) should be evaluated for particle generation in
order to minimize total particle contamination within the aseptic operations (localized exhaust or air
returns should be placed according to high-risk particle-generating operations)
• Lubricants must be sealed against the Grade A environment, ideally with dual lip seals that prevent
leakage of lubricant out and protect the seal from intrusion of cleaning agents and disinfectants
• Cleaning and biodecontamination of the robotics should be considered in the design of the robot to
ensure that there are no locations that might hold product or be difficult to decontaminate
• Coatings on the robot materials of construction (if any) should be robust to the intended cleaning
and biodecontamination agents
• Frequency of referencing (e.g., returning to home position) and calibration should be sufficient to
correct for minor positioning errors to reduce the risk of misalignment
Examples where a robot can support the aseptic operation include, but are not limited to:
• Opening of RTP doors (when the preferred solution of automated opening option is not feasible)
• Installation of a filling path (manual setup with gloves requires roughly forty glove-touches around
the filling needle)
• Handling of viable and total particle-monitoring (regular glove intervention brings risk, and
improper handling can generate false positives)
• Installation of indirect product-contact parts
• Handling of packaging materials (e.g., removal of SteriBags, introduction of nests, delidding)
• Handling of containers in a variety of modalities including single container and nested containers,
as well as handling containers in both modes (e.g., denesting containers to enable a 100% IPC or
denesting of RTU containers for capping application)
• Specific container(s) removal (e.g., sampling, weight check, reject removal with verification)
• Bulk handling of containers or trays of containers (e.g., lyophilizer loading, beginning/end-of-line
tray loading, palletizing)
• Individualized container transport for filling and stoppering (which may have a benefit in reducing
or eliminating change parts, but may result in a decrease in line speed)
Advancements in aseptic-filling technology have resulted in the development of filling systems with a
reduced need for manual interventions with gloves. Gloveless (or near gloveless) lines require advanced
automation such as robotics for all activities that would be performed by an operator on a conventional
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 99

--- PDF Page 114 (doc p100) ---
filling line. Progressive implementation of robotics on conventional lines can greatly reduce risk for routine
activities, even when all activities are not yet designed to be robotic. In these cases, the use of gloves should
be designated within SOPs for intervention procedures. Those interventions should be qualified and
included in the APS design.
When robotics are part of the desired design for the filling line, they commonly bring a focus on how to
improve the design of the underlying equipment and design of required process interventions. The aim is to
process product in a simplified manner with less risk of contamination or errors in handling, which is
beneficial to process robustness in more than just the direct application of the robotics solution.
100 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.