
--- PDF Page 101 ---
Different products will have different filling curves depending on the characteristics of the products (e.g.,
viscosity, flowability, foaming, dripping). During development, an iterative approach is used to optimize the
filling curve of each specific product. The filling curve consists of the synchronized control of fluid velocity
and needle movement throughout four stages: start of filling, ramping up to filling speed, filling at speed,
and ramping down until the end of fill where filling is stopped. The needle movement is an integral part of
each of these filling stages, where the needle cycles through a synchronized sequence of needle dive in
movement, needle movement above filling level until the fill is ended, and retraction of the filling needle
from the neck of the container once filling is complete.
For a RPP, the filling curve is fulfilled by the speed at which the piston pushes the product out of the cavity.
The rotation of the piston into the position where it will pull product out of the suction side can be
programmed to be as fast as possible. Diaphragm pumps can adjust the stroke of the foot against the
diaphragm, thereby adjusting the speed of fill. The filling curve of a PP is executed by the speed of rotation
of the rollers (the “shoe”), while a TP filling curve is executed by speed and distance of opening the pinch
valve, duration of remaining in the open position, and closing of the valve; the pressure remains constant
during the filling cycle. Of the four technologies discussed in Section 2.0 of this document, the TP filler has
the fewest options to dramatically vary the fill curve. This means that the PP, RPP, and DP are better at
modifying the fill curve when required to adapt to product attributes.
4.4 Functionality Affecting Foam
The tendency to foam is a product attribute and, therefore, may be somewhat unavoidable; however, there
are handling considerations for products with a propensity to foam that can help to control foam formation.
In particular, foam prevention is important at all steps of the process where the drug product is moved from
one location to another, especially at product transfer and filling.
Products with a tendency to foam should never be allowed to drop a long distance in a transfer, for example,
into a vessel from a top outlet, since the impact of the product on the bottom of the vessel or on the surface
of the existing liquid within the vessel will cause agitation of the air–product interface and can cause
foaming. A dip tube (sometimes called a J-tube) should be used to move the product inlet into the vessel to
the lowest possible location, or the product can be filled from the bottom tangent of the vessel or from
below. Every subsequent refill step must be a sub-surface addition, requiring that the vessel level is
known/monitored. In addition, placing the vessel higher than the filling pumps will help to prevent entrained
air, especially at the end of the aseptic fill unit operation. If agitation is required for the product, the agitation
speed should be targeted just above the minimum validated agitation condition to avoid the entrainment of
air.
Having the right size and correct geometry of the fluid pathway and filling needle is also important to avoid
or minimize foaming (due to overpressure) and splashing. Careful priming of the filling or transfer tubing
must be made to ensure that no air is left in the lines, since bubbles in the filling lines can cause foaming and
affect dosing accuracy. A 100% IPC weight check would be beneficial to detect air bubbles in the system
and to initiate countermeasures such as priming.
Foaming is also directly related to the filling curve, with an emphasis on the start and end of container
phases as the points at the highest risk. Slowing the fill rate at these stages reduces agitation of the solution.
Diving needles are a common adaptation for fillers to reduce splashing and foaming. The diving needle
plunges to the bottom of the container just before the filling is started and is withdrawn in coordination with
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 87

--- PDF Page 102 ---
the rise of the fluid level within the container. This needle movement reduces the distance from the outlet of
the needle to the bottom of the container or to the surface of the liquid within the container, thereby reducing
foaming.
4.5 Functionality Affecting Drip Control
Product characteristics (e.g., rheology, elasticity, surface tension, viscosity) may result in a tendency for the
product to drip during filling. For example, when surface tension is too low, there is little to inhibit a droplet
from breaking free at the end of the needle. For highly viscous products, a “string” or “thread” may occur
after completion of the filling cycle when there is incomplete separation of the filled quantity from the
quantity remaining in the filling needle.
There are several design attributes that can exacerbate or prevent dripping, including but not exhaustively:
• Needle geometry (ID, length)
• Needle-diving movement and/or dynamic filling (e.g., fill curve parameters for retraction speed,
retraction amount, adjustments to pump deceleration, distance between meniscus and needle tip at
the end of filling)
• Hose design (diameter, material, hardness, length)
• Hose position
• Fluid pathway sizing
• Long interruptions in the filling process
Larger filling needles may reduce the surface tension at the opening, resulting in a drip. Adapting the needle
ID and length to better match the viscosity, surface tension, and gravitational forces on the product can
prevent dripping.
Needle-diving movement in the container (see Section 4.4) as well as needle-follow-along movement (also
known as dynamic filling) can result in dripping from the motion of the needle during the filling cycle. In
dynamic filling applications, the needle will dive down into the container, begin filling, and rise back up
after filling while moving along with the container as the containers are transported through the machine.
For these walking-beam transport machines, oscillation from the lateral follow-along needle-holder
movement may result in dripping if the tubing is not of sufficient stiffness. Dripping can happen during
dive-out or as the filling needles move back to fill the next containers in line.
Hose design can result in dripping due to various factors such as reduction in surface tension (diameter),
poor fit and compression against the filling pump (material, hardness), excessively long arching of the
tubing which can result in gravitational drips (length), and/or loss of liquid-retraction (i.e., suck-back)
control. Liquid retraction is the process whereby the product is minutely withdrawn back into the filling
needle (usually by a small stroke in the opposite direction of fill) to create a concave, rather than convex,
surface in the fluid at the end of the needle, thereby assisting surface tension to retain the final drop of fluid
at the end of the needle. Active liquid-retraction control by reverse stroke is not possible with TP filling;
however, rapid closure of the pinch valve can disrupt the flow sufficiently to create an analogous effect at
the point of fill.
As a consequence, TP systems may not be the most suitable for products that have dripping characteristics,
because retracting product at the point of filling is not easy to achieve. For such systems, the needles may be
a closeable type, meaning they are mechanically closed after filling has been executed (see Section 3.0 for a
88 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 103 ---
description and diagram), though such needles may be challenging to implement in an aseptic operation due
to their mechanical complexity and the ability to demonstrate cleanliness and sterility.
RPPs, on the other hand, can be programmed to have the servo drive retract the piston upwards or push it
downwards (depending on whether the filling stroke is executed from the bottom up or top down) slightly
after filling. DPs can be operated similarly to coordinate the stroke of the bottom foot (piston) and the
timing of the pinch valves. That will result in slightly pulling product up the needle and thus avoid dripping.
PPs can also be programmed to turn slightly in the opposite direction (opposite to the filling direction) after
filling, which will result in pulling product up the needle (liquid retraction) and thereby avoid dripping
outside of the filling needle. Most of the PP systems available on the market today are servo-driven, so it is
relatively straightforward to handle the challenge of dripping.
When the hose is positioned below the intermediate vessel relative to the point of fill, dripping can result
due to additional head pressure on the point of fill. This could lead to “bleeding” at the opening of the pump.
PPs will also “leak” at some point if the pre-pump pressure breaks the threshold point. Having the hose
positioned above the point of fill provides some benefit in reducing the opportunity for entraining air and
causing foaming; therefore, the tendency to foam and the tendency to drip must be balanced relative to their
competing needs for placement of the bulk vessel and hose.
All components along the fluid pathway must be appropriately sized to work together properly to prevent
dripping. For example, when the pumps are too large, there are limitations on how small the tubing and
filling needles can be. The selection of an oversized pump may result in residual volume that is not
dispensed and may drip.
Long downtimes of the filling machine can also result in dripping as gravitational forces continue to be
applied and pressure may build up in lines.
In summary, dripping can often result when companies try to economize by trying to combine different
products and dosing volumes with “one-size fits all” setups for filling. It is important to ensure that the
characteristics of each product and its intended filling-system design are evaluated for suitability.
4.6 Functionality for Maintaining Homogeneity
Maintaining homogeneity in products that tend to sediment (e.g., emulsions, suspensions, ATMPs, cell
therapy products) may be achieved by keeping the product in constant movement. Typical technologies to
achieve this include stirring and/or recirculation loops (see Figures 4.6.1-1-4.6.1-5). To prevent the
possibility of sedimentation or inhomogeneity, these mechanical systems must be integrated with the filling
mechanism to either ensure constant circulation or to circulate when stopping time approaches the validated
hold time of the product.
Stops of the filling system may arise due to, but not limited to, the following reasons:
• Inherent machine stops (e.g., settle-plate handling after four hours)
• Corrective machine stoppage (e.g., broken glass, stuck stopper)
• Interruption in the infeed of components (e.g., nests, stoppers, caps, containers coming out of a
depyrogenation tunnel)
• Environmental monitoring (EM)-related stops (e.g., rise in particulate count)
• Employee-related stops (e.g., breaks, shift change, gaps in shift coverage)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 89

--- PDF Page 104 ---
Keeping the product in motion can be performed by implementing mixers in the product vessels or by
designing recirculation loops to bring the product back into the bulk product-vessel or back into the
intermediate buffer-vessel or a combination of both. Recirculation may be superior to mixing when it is
necessary to control sedimentation in the connections (e.g., hosing, pipes) between the vessels and the rest
of the dosing path. If these connections are long, sedimentation may occur with mixing alone. Recirculation
will keep the product in motion in both the bulk vessel and the intermediate vessel, as well as in each
portion of the fluid pathway. The major factors to be considered in design are the size of the product vessel
and the length of the connections between the product vessel and the equipment at the filler. For some
applications, due to the size of the vessels or the nature of the product, it may be necessary to include a
mixer in the bulk product-vessel and/or intermediate product-vessel in addition to recirculating.
When considering approaches for preventing sedimentation, a number of design factors should be
considered. These factors include product attributes, equipment selection, instrumentation selection, and
equipment design and operation approach, as well as Quality Assurance controls such as:
• Product/process quality considerations:
̶ Product sedimentation time and risk factors for the product
̶ Shear-force sensitivity of the product, which may limit some recirculation options, or limit
the desirable duration of recirculation
• Major equipment decisions:
̶ Is the system a strictly mixer-based system or a strictly recirculation-based system or a
hybrid?
̶ When recirculating, will an inner loop, outer loop, or a double loop be executed?
̶ Is it sufficient to use one pump in combination with a three-way valve that will either
recirculate or feed the product, or should a second pump be implemented for recirculation
and run constantly, irrelevant of whether or not the product infeed is active?
• Instrumentation to be considered to confirm parameters:
̶ Homogeneity
̶ Flow rates
• System design factors and operational parameters as to whether the design is sufficient to
avoid sedimentation:
̶ Cross section of pipes, hoses, and manifolds to ensure turbulence of flow is guaranteed
̶ Position of the product vessel in relation to the filling machine does not promote
sedimentation (longer fluid paths means a greater volume encountering potential
sedimentation)
̶ Approach should be determined to either employ constant recirculation (even during
filling) or recirculation only after a predefined stop time
̶ Lowest volume that can be mixed or recirculated effectively should be established, based
on the configuration of the vessels and length of the fluid pathway, and it should be
confirmed that the volume is an acceptable loss volume.
Note: Systems that combine agitation and recirculation may be able to ensure homogeneity
below the minimum agitable volume. Studies should be performed to validate the
effectiveness of any approach identified for agitation, recirculation, or a combination of the
two.
90 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 105 ---
• Quality assurance considerations to ensure homogeneity:
̶ Is instrumentation available (e.g., PAT) to confirm homogeneity of suspensions, and is it
appropriately sensitive to determine diversion of flow to waste when inhomogeneity is
detected?
̶ What action is needed after the filler restarts (e.g., discard of predefined volume or number
of containers, predefined period of recirculation before resumption of fill, or proceeding to
fill without any action)?
̶ How will it be ensured that the filling is stopped when the batch reaches the minimum
effective volume for either mixing or recirculation?
4.6.1 Design Options for Maintaining Homogeneity
Figures 4.6.1-1–4.6.1-5 represent just a few examples of common recirculation strategies, although the
possibilities for system design are nearly limitless.
Figure 4.6.1-1 depicts the use of mixing without recirculation. In these cases, there is a mixer present in
each vessel and no recirculation loops. This would be an effective approach for true solutions and for any
product that is unlikely to settle with brief periods of low or no flow. The distance between the product
vessel and the intermediate product-vessel should be considered to ensure that potential sedimentation is
avoided, or that it is accounted for once the filler proceeds to pull product out of the intermediate product-
vessel. The flow rate should always be defined specific to each product to ensure good functionality. When
using mixers, studies should be carried out to determine the speed of the mixer relative to the volume within
the container and to define at what level the mixer is no longer ensuring there is no sedimentation. If the
level of product in the vessel is below the mixer, mixing may become ineffective, and often the remaining
product must be discarded.
Figure 4.6.1-1 Mixing Without Recirculation
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 91

--- PDF Page 106 ---
Figure 4.6.1-2 depicts an example similar to Figure 4.6.1-1, except that instead mixing in the intermediate
product-vessel, a constant recirculation approach has been selected. In this example, the product infeed
pump is constantly running irrelevant of whether or not the filling pumps are dosing due to a machine
stoppage. The recirculation pump in the “inner loop” is also constantly running. The revolutions per minute
(rpm) of the recirculation pump is defined by the amount of product it needs to keep in motion. That amount
is either the product being supplied by the product infeed pump, in case the machine has stopped, or the
product being fed in, less the product being dosed if the machine is running. Here, additional elements, such
as a flowmeter that ensures the flow rate is being maintained to avoid sedimentation and a PAT system for
homogeneity, could also be integrated in the system. In this scenario, when the level in the product vessel
falls below the agitator, this might not lead to complete disposal, if the residual product can be
accommodated in the intermediate vessel and if the recirculation loop can be demonstrated to maintain
homogeneity of the final product volume.
Figure 4.6.1-2 Mixing with Constant Recirculation at the Filling Manifold
Figure 4.6.1-3 depicts a recirculation-only system without mixing. This may be a good solution for systems
where the product vessel is moderately sized and where the vessel is relatively close to the filler. The
product-infeed pump and pipes/tubes are designed to allow for larger volumes than would be needed for a
system that was only feeding the filler. The product-infeed pump should be large enough to support two
functions:
1. replenish the intermediate product-vessel which, in turn, feeds the dosing pumps
2. provide excess flow to keep the product moving through the intermediate buffer-vessel, through the
manifold, and back to the product vessel via the product recirculation pump
92 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 107 ---
Both pumps are constantly running, regardless of whether or not the filler is running); therefore, the amount
of product and the flow rate should be selected to ensure no sedimentation takes place. The rpm of the
recirculation pump increases and decreases depending on whether the product is being displaced for dosing.
A flowmeter can be used to ensure that critical recirculation parameters are continuously met to ensure
homogeneity.
Figure 4.6.1-3 External Loop Recirculation Without Mixing
Figure 4.6.1-4 depicts a scenario where an end user has decided to move away from implementing mixers.
In this example, two recirculation loops are designed, each with their own recirculation pumps. In order to
keep the product in the entire system in motion, the product-infeed pump should be able to do the following:
• Replenish the intermediate product-vessel
• Provide an excess to be recirculated by the recirculation pump in the “external loop” of the product
vessel
• Provide product via the intermediate product-vessel to be dosed by the filling pumps
• Provide an excess of product to be recirculated by the product-recirculation pump in the “inner
loop” of the intermediate product-vessel
Details regarding where to place mass flowmeters or PATs may differ according to end-user decisions and
what they define as critical. For example, while some users may place a PAT sensor immediately after the
intermediate product-vessels, others may conclude that the positioning of a PAT downstream from the
manifold may be more beneficial to ensure there is no sedimentation in the manifold.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 93

--- PDF Page 108 ---
Figure 4.6.1-4 Double-Loop Recirculation Without Mixing
Figure 4.6.1-5 depicts a system where there are no mixers that also utilizes a double-loop design. In this
scenario, there are two major differences compared to the example depicted in Figure 4.6.1-4:
• A decision has been made to use the product-infeed pump to feed product from the product vessel
to the dosing system, but also to recirculate back to the vessel in case of a machine stop. This is
executed by implementing a three-way valve that either feeds the product to the intermediate vessel
or switches to feeding back to the product-vessel in an external loop should the filler stop for any
reason (e.g., exceeding a predefined time).
• The recirculation of the inner loop takes place after the dosing pumps by using another three-way
valve design. When there is no stoppage of the line, the product will flow directly through the filling
needles into the containers. In case of a machine stop, the dosing pumps will continue to run, but the
product will be directed via the three-way valve back to the intermediate product-vessel using the
product recirculation pump in the inner loop. This is typically executed for high-cost products
where avoiding product rejection, as much as possible, is required.
94 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 109 ---
Figure 4.6.1-5 Use of Three-Way Valves in Recirculation Loop and at Filling Needles
4.7 Functionality for Controlling Temperature
Products that require temperature control during filling commonly have a restrictive “temperature budget,”
that is, a specific limited duration that the product is permitted to be outside of active temperature control
during manufacturing, filling, and packaging. This ensures that the entire time out of temperature through all
transport, handling, and patient administration steps (or through end of shelf life) does not adversely affect
product quality. For products with a temperature-control requirement, the temperature budget (both time and
temperature range) will drive the technical requirements for the filling operation.
Product that is affected by temperature can be cooled, in most cases, by cooling the product-vessels. For an
intermediate product-bag, a cooling plate can be applied to maintain the temperature, and stainless steel
intermediate product-vessels can be cooled by a vessel jacket (a double-walled vessel where cooling liquid
is pumped around the outside of the “inner vessel”), or cooling coil.
As a consequence of the cold temperatures within a warmer external environment, condensation may form
on the outside of the vessels, hoses, manifolds or, even more critically, on the filling needle, which could
result in droplets that dilute the product and compromise sterility. To combat condensation, relative
humidity of the environment should be closely controlled (without inducing an electrostatic charge to
components due to low %RH which could have negative effects such as impact to gravimetric weighing
results, dripping, component handling difficulties, etc.). Condensation is a particularly high risk for the
portions of the vessel or piping that is within the Grade A environment. In an isolator, there may be the
opportunity to more tightly control the relative humidity of the environment to reduce the risk of
condensation. Isolators, however, will encounter a different challenge in getting cooling liquid for double-
walled vessels inside and back outside of the containment.
If using a PP filling system, in addition to cooling the intermediate vessel, it could also be considered to cool
the pumps (and therefore the fluid pathway) within a refrigerated enclosure.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 95

--- PDF Page 110 ---
Temperature may influence the flow of the product due to temperature-induced changes in viscosity. This
may be particularly critical for TP filling systems. For these products, the temperature must be carefully
managed to optimize the balance between temperature and flowability. The effects of the product
temperature on filling accuracy and on weight checks should be understood and addressed within the design
and controls.
4.7.1 Filling Speed, Filling Time, and Temperature
Filling speed should be designed to ensure that filled containers can be returned to refrigerated conditions
within a controlled duration of time. Accumulation points that serve to buffer capacity on the line (e.g.,
accumulator tables before lyophilizer loaders or before cappers) should be minimized to ensure that the
exposure of every unit does not exceed the maximum allowed time (keeping in mind that accumulation
points are using randomized handling where individual containers are not traceable). For lyophilizer loading
consider whether the filler can continuously run while the lyophilizer loader is changing shelves. Cold
loading of lyophilizers may need to be accommodated with additional controls, such as low %RH, special
closing doors on the lyophilizer, or nitrogen blanket, to prevent the possibility of condensation on the
outside of the containers from affecting the loading.
For all temperature-restricted products, the validation must include demonstration that the time-out-of-
temperature period is well controlled and acceptable to the product quality for all containers along the line.
4.8 Design and Functionality for Large Batch Sizes
The fluid pathway for large batches commonly will include an intermediate holding-vessel that is a fraction
of the size of the bulk vessel. This is especially true for designs where the bulk vessel is some distance away
from the filler. The intermediate vessel is able to moderate the head pressure between the vessel and the
pumps or pinch valves. The positioning of vessels above the filling needles is critical due to the head
pressure that this provides. The deeper the vessel, the greater the head pressure. If the vessel is placed too
high, relative to the fill pumps, this can induce leaks.
The intermediate vessel is typically located after the sterilizing filter. The bulk vessel, upstream of the
intermediate vessel, will have a sterilizing-vent filter to assist in the compensation of the pressure as the
vessel empties. If the headspace pressure in the intermediate vessel is too variable, dosing control can suffer.
To manage that level in the intermediate vessel, a product transfer pump is sometimes employed to feed the
bulk from the manufacturing vessel to the intermediate vessel. Other transfer controls are also possible, such
as overpressure with pinch valves. The size of the intermediate vessel may be a consideration when
determining the frequency of replenishment and to better enable a constant flow.
Large batches lend themselves to fixed piping systems with CIP/SIP rather than SU. The ability to switch to
a new filter pathway during the batch, should the first filter become blocked with product, may be a
consideration with large batches. There is no practical difference in the design of the fluid pathway(s) based
on the type of filler.
4.9 Functionality to Control Oxygen Exposure
Additional controls are required for the filling step for oxygen-sensitive products. Products that are sensitive
to oxygen are typically stored in vessels in an overpressure condition with an inert gas, such as nitrogen,
prior to filling, as well as during formulation/compounding. Any intermediate vessel in the filling process is
96 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 111 ---
also blanketed with nitrogen. When biodecontamination of the environment is performed prior to filling,
extreme care should be taken to control residual levels of the biodecontamination agent (e.g., vaporized
hydrogen peroxide) in the environment and absorbed in the materials to be used during the filling operation
(e.g., tubing). The former is reduced through effective aeration cycles and the latter through protective
packaging, through flushing or performing CIP and/or SIP after biodecontamination. The initial flush of
product through the fluid pathway is commonly discarded as the air is displaced from the lines by the liquid
and steps may be taken to eliminate residual oxygen in the container after closing, as described below.
Since liquid will displace air, the benefits of pre-gassing of containers, as well as gassing during filling
(common historically), are typically not as effective as gassing after filling during closing to reduce the
residual oxygen in the headspace of the container. Studies have demonstrated that gassing during closing is
the most efficient and effective way of reducing oxygen in the headspace. Thus, newer equipment designs
have an inert gas overlay only at the closing position; however, older product registrations may have
additional details that make it necessary to include gassing at other positions, and it is possible to source
filling systems with any of the desired positions for gassing.
For hypersensitive products, it is also possible to apply vacuum to the container to augment the gassing
steps through a vacuum bell at the required positions along the line. For example, a vacuum can be applied
prior to filling to ensure a complete fill on containers such as cartridges and syringes to ensure complete
filling at the tip. This evacuation has an added benefit of reducing atmospheric air from the tip that might
remain in the product for oxygen-sensitive products. Vacuum can be applied during the fill as well,
especially for viscous products, where the evacuation helps to ensure that no air is trapped within the
product. Vacuum can also be applied after filling before introduction of inert gas to the headspace. The
evacuation sequence depends on the product sensitivity, the oxygen-reduction target, and the viscosity of the
product. Sequence of operation may include evacuation, inerting, evacuation, and then closing to completely
remove the oxygen from the headspace (see Section 7.3.2 for use of a vacuum bell during closing process).
Low-viscosity products may boil under vacuum; therefore, vacuum sequences may be limited for these
applications.
To enable the supply of inerting gas to the container, the gas may be supplied through a separate gassing
needle or a jacketed needle (needle within a needle) (see Section 3.0). SU needles are not currently available
with a jacketed design. Cleaning validation is complicated for jacketed needles. For post-filling gassing
(performed between filling and stoppering), it is possible to include an inert gas tunnel above the containers.
The tunnel will also provide additional protection in the headspace in case of brief-duration line stoppages.
However, when considering the design of the tunnel, the potential for the tunnel to disrupt First Air must be
evaluated and the approach justified.
For a lyophilized product, the lyophilizer chamber is typically filled with nitrogen after vacuum steps are
completed to ensure low residual oxygen in the container prior to stoppering or closing.
Once the container is sealed (with plunger, stopper and cap, or disc seal) for headspace-controlled products,
the sealed-container residual oxygen must be verified. This may be accomplished through a suitable
validation and quality control sampling, or through validated instruments that provide 100% on-line or off-
line verification. The approach taken must be appropriate to the critical quality attributes (CQAs) of the
product and justified within the product’s overall control strategy.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 97

--- PDF Page 112 ---
4.10 Enhancing Functionality with Robotics
People are the greatest source of contamination associated with aseptic filling. Therefore, robotics offers an
enormous opportunity to improve SA when designed and implemented properly. Recent advances in
robotics and isolator designs have enabled the implementation of gloveless isolators which are a significant
enhancement in SA for aseptic filling. This section does not provide comprehensive design or
implementation guidance for robotics (nor for gloveless isolators) but rather lists some of the points to
consider for this type of installation.
Robots are machines capable of automatically performing complex tasks that would otherwise be performed
by humans. Typical robotics designs are four- or six-axis armatures. The definition of robots may
conventionally be extended to programmable rakes, X-Y tables, and other machine movement such as
magnetic levitating conveyance, all of which can offer benefits to SA as they improve handling and limit the
risk of contamination, disruption of unidirectional airflow, or the needed interventions of personnel.
However, this section focuses on the more complex robotics associated with numerous degrees of motion.
When using robotics in the aseptic environment for aseptic filling, the design and operating principles must
be carefully evaluated for suitability to operate within a cleanroom environment. Robotic systems,
regardless of type, bring a certain risk to the unidirectional airflow due to a tendency to generate turbulence.
Therefore, robots should not be used for the sake of using robotics but rather should bring a benefit for the
aseptic-filling process. CFD and air flow visualization (i.e. smoke studies) should verify the impact of the
robot on the unidirectional airflow and the robot’s potential to create excessive turbulence or to introduce
contamination.
Implementation of robotics adds complexity to filling system automation and motion control unless careful
integration with the filling machine is executed as part of the filling-machine design. In some cases, robotics
may present a limitation on the speed and accessibility (e.g., for interventions, for cleaning and disinfection)
of the line, which may be an unacceptable tradeoff in the design of the aseptic operation. However, robotics
may provide enhancements in reliability and reproducibility for complex tasks that provide a significant
aseptic advantage. Therefore, companies should carefully and thoughtfully assess whether robotics are the
right solution for process automation.
Contamination control strategies would require that manual aseptic assembly is to be avoided. Therefore,
robotics is commonly sought as a solution; however, robotic assembly of filler components can be very
difficult. For example, the geometry and design of the RPP or TP fillers make robotic setup difficult. In
contrast, PPs can be set up with robots, as the tubing installation is in a fixed position with a relatively
simple geometry. It is commonly not required for SA purposes, however, as it is possible to have the PPs
outside of the isolator or RABS. In all cases, robotics may be useful for the installation of tubing and
needles downstream of the fill pumps within the sterile boundary. This is especially appropriate when the
tubing and needles are extended through a transfer port system into an isolator. The robotics can remove the
needle assembly from the port and install them in the needle receptable.
Companies should also be aware that additional skill sets may be required for operations and maintenance
personnel that are not needed for conventional filling and conveyance.
98 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 113 ---
Design considerations include:
• Selection for service should be for operations where human intervention presents a greater SA risk
than to the robot
• Robotic handling of filled containers should be designed to be smooth (i.e., minimize rapid change
in acceleration, braking, and turning) and to minimize the risk of stopper displacement, sloshing,
and splashing; sloshing liquids can be a more critical concern with liquid products to be freeze-dried
or for containers that are filled to the brim
• Shape of the robotic arms should be selected to reduce turbulence
• Speed and smoothness of reaction of the robot to reduce airflow turbulence should be considered in
the programming (e.g., rapid upward movements are to be avoided or minimized, slowest motions
should be used near open containers)
• Placement of the robotic arms near the critical surfaces or in areas that risk reflux from “dirtier”
zones should be forbidden (e.g., not above open containers or components, not near air-return
openings in an open RABS (oRABS))
• Location of servos and cams should be outside the aseptic barrier or below the working height and
must be sealed
• Wear parts and friction points (e.g., gaskets and seals) should be evaluated for particle generation in
order to minimize total particle contamination within the aseptic operations (localized exhaust or air
returns should be placed according to high-risk particle-generating operations)
• Lubricants must be sealed against the Grade A environment, ideally with dual lip seals that prevent
leakage of lubricant out and protect the seal from intrusion of cleaning agents and disinfectants
• Cleaning and biodecontamination of the robotics should be considered in the design of the robot to
ensure that there are no locations that might hold product or be difficult to decontaminate
• Coatings on the robot materials of construction (if any) should be robust to the intended cleaning
and biodecontamination agents
• Frequency of referencing (e.g., returning to home position) and calibration should be sufficient to
correct for minor positioning errors to reduce the risk of misalignment
Examples where a robot can support the aseptic operation include, but are not limited to:
• Opening of RTP doors (when the preferred solution of automated opening option is not feasible)
• Installation of a filling path (manual setup with gloves requires roughly forty glove-touches around
the filling needle)
• Handling of viable and total particle-monitoring (regular glove intervention brings risk, and
improper handling can generate false positives)
• Installation of indirect product-contact parts
• Handling of packaging materials (e.g., removal of SteriBags, introduction of nests, delidding)
• Handling of containers in a variety of modalities including single container and nested containers,
as well as handling containers in both modes (e.g., denesting containers to enable a 100% IPC or
denesting of RTU containers for capping application)
• Specific container(s) removal (e.g., sampling, weight check, reject removal with verification)
• Bulk handling of containers or trays of containers (e.g., lyophilizer loading, beginning/end-of-line
tray loading, palletizing)
• Individualized container transport for filling and stoppering (which may have a benefit in reducing
or eliminating change parts, but may result in a decrease in line speed)
Advancements in aseptic-filling technology have resulted in the development of filling systems with a
reduced need for manual interventions with gloves. Gloveless (or near gloveless) lines require advanced
automation such as robotics for all activities that would be performed by an operator on a conventional
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 99

--- PDF Page 114 ---
filling line. Progressive implementation of robotics on conventional lines can greatly reduce risk for routine
activities, even when all activities are not yet designed to be robotic. In these cases, the use of gloves should
be designated within SOPs for intervention procedures. Those interventions should be qualified and
included in the APS design.
When robotics are part of the desired design for the filling line, they commonly bring a focus on how to
improve the design of the underlying equipment and design of required process interventions. The aim is to
process product in a simplified manner with less risk of contamination or errors in handling, which is
beneficial to process robustness in more than just the direct application of the robotics solution.
100 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.