
--- PDF Page 85 ---
Table 4.0-1 Functionality Requirements and Their Influence on Liquid Filling System Selection
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Continuous Durability of setup Good, provided that Good for Very good for May not be very
Filling/ (ability to process in a tubing is shifted or continuous/ continuous/ well suited if the
Campaign stable manner for a replaced prior to campaign filling. campaign filling. length of the
long time as would reaching pre- continuous/
Filling
If pump is to be Location of fill pump
be required for determined tubing campaign filling
Operations vs. changed with outside of the barrier
continuous/ failure point. necessitates having
Batch Filling another size can be a benefit to
campaign filling). to replace the
Minimal aseptic CIP/SIP, typically campaigns.
diaphragm mid-
SU Sterile connections required between
Capable of CIP/SIP, process/mid-
Components in Fluid required. PPs can be batches, the rest of
which may require campaign after its
Path or Ability to located outside of the setup may still
aseptic connections wear-and-tear time
Perform CIP/SIP. containment to be able to be
to be made and (number of cycles)
support the retained and used.
Minimization of broken, but generally has elapsed.
necessary handling.
number of aseptic CIP/SIP may require fewer connections
In this case, only
connections required numerous aseptic than with RPPs.
needles have to be
for setup. connections be
introduced to the
broken and
Format parts, such as aseptic
reestablished.
hoses and needles, environment.
need to be
considered to
accommodate the
different filling
volumes of the
individual batches
within the campaign.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 71

--- PDF Page 86 ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Speed of Number and type of Speedy and easy Slower setup at Fast setup, but Excellent speed of
Setup/ format parts required line setup for SU. beginning of batch, CIP/SIP is line setup for SU.
Changeover (fewer parts or more efforts to recommended,
For non-SU, fast For non-SU, fast
greater range of clean and sterilize, which is time-
setup is also setup is also
capability, or each although different consuming.
common as only the common as entire
part is faster). materials of
intermediate vessel, fluid path may be
construction may be
SU fluid path is faster manifold, and preassembled and
faster for CIP/SIP
than CIP/SIP. needles have to be sterilized offline.
(e.g., ceramic
cleaned and Only aseptic
pumps).
sterilized. connection to
product vessel and
mounting to
machine are
necessary.
72 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 87 ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Speed of Filling Number of cycles per Capable of Dedicated size Modifying pressure Dedicated size
vs. Control minute defines modifying fill-curve pumps for the during the filling pumps for different
Aspects speed, including within a single different fill volumes cycle (i.e., fill curve) is fill volumes to
conveyance (e.g., container through to achieve optimal not performed; achieve optimal
walking rake servo pump rate speed with the only modest speed with the
motion), number of modification. required accuracy. modifications to the required accuracy.
pump cycles required fill curve are available
May require a
to hit volume, and through the timing
different fill-pump
weight check. As and distance of
head size and/or
long as fill-time is less opening of the pinch
formats for different
than cycle-time, the valve. Therefore,
fill volumes to
speed is maximized. product
achieve the
characteristics may
Acceleration and necessary speeds.
limit rate.
deceleration may
influence maximum
speed permissible.
Balance between
required fill accuracy
and speed. Product
characteristics (e.g.,
foam, dripping) may
drive maximum
speed limits, while
fill-curve profile may
also influence speed
(i.e., slower at the
end of the cycle).
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 73

--- PDF Page 88 ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Foam Foam may be Axial flow is good Placement of vessel TP will be less Placement of
Prevention dependent on the for foam prevention. must be balanced sensitive to the intermediate vessel
product and, with head pressure positioning of the should be very
Larger-diameter
therefore, is to avoid pump vessel than other close to the point
tubing may reduce
unavoidable. leakage (without systems, but the end of fill in order to
foam.
placing it so low that of the aseptic fill-unit minimize tubing
Placing vessel a little
Dual-tube PPs end of the aseptic operation may be lengths, while still
higher than filling
minimize pulsation, fill-unit operation critical for foam if gas allowing gravity
pumps (ideally with
which can reduce results in drawing in is entrained in the feed.
bottom outlet).
foaming (although air that may product.
Filling formats (e.g.,
Optimal sizing of fill- dual-tube systems enhance foaming
Fluid pathway valves tube and needle
path components to often employ characteristics).
(e.g., pinch valve or diameter and/or tip
reduce overpressure. smaller tubing,
Filling formats (e.g., weir) geometry and geometry) and
which may be
Adjustment of filling tube and needle opening speed can filling-curve
counterproductive
curve (rate of fill diameter) and filling- be modified to parameters
to foam control).
start, midpoint, end curve parameters provide a curvilinear adjustable.
of each container) Filling formats (e.g., adjustable. opening and to open
Diving-needle
will minimize foam. tube and needle at an optimal rate to
Larger tube-sizing designs available.
diameter) and filling- reduce back pressure
Minimizing distance curve parameters and harder materials and potential for
from the outlet of adjustable. of construction for foam.
filling needle to the tubing may improve
liquid height. Diving-needle foaming but may be Filling formats (e.g.,
designs available. detrimental to drip tube and needle
control and diameter) and filling
accuracy. curve parameters
adjustable.
Diving-needle
designs available. Diving-needle
designs available.
74 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 89 ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Drip Control Matching fluid Liquid retraction Liquid retraction by No active liquid Liquid retraction by
characteristics to the (i.e., suck back) by design: small stroke retraction possible design: small stroke
appropriate technical design: small in the opposite with a reverse in the opposite
characteristics. rotation in the direction of stroke; however, direction of
opposite direction dispensing achieves some drip control dispensing
Needle design is one
of dispensing the required liquid can be managed with achieves the
of the most
achieves the retraction to avoid speed of pinch-valve required liquid
important features.
required liquid dripping; however, closure. retraction to avoid
Length and hardness
retraction to avoid the filling formats dripping; however,
of tubing is very
dripping; however, (needle and tubing the filling formats
critical.
the filling formats selection) play a (needle and tubing
(needle and tubing role. selection) play a
selection) play a role.
role.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 75

--- PDF Page 90 ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Need to Introduce a For SU, it is not Ceramic pumps may The pressure No additional risks
Maintain recirculation and/or common to find be better than requirement is to be if critical attributes/
Homogeneity mixing capability for systems with inner stainless steel for kept constant in the enablers have been
the vessels and fluid recirculation loops suspensions. intermediate vessel considered.
in Filling Loop
pathway (see Figures (e.g., valves). for dosing accuracy,
and Filling Close tolerance of
4.6.1-1–4.6.1-5); which might
Vessel the piston pumps
ensure that the compete with the
may not be
product can recirculation forces
appropriate for all
withstand applied to keep the
particle sizes; pump
continuous product in
clearance should be
recirculation (e.g., not suspension. To
assured to not
shear sensitive) to prevent this, a
damage any
determine whether manifold
particulate in the
recirculation is downstream of the
product.
continuous or only intermediate vessel
when the filler stops. Small dead-volume can be installed to
at the base of the ensure constant
The design of the
piston pump may pressure on the
buffer vessel is
mean the settling valves.
customized; the
occurs within the
decision whether to No additional risks if
pump (depending
recirculate at the critical
on settling time);
manifold or even attributes/enablers
trials will need to be
right before the have been
conducted to test
filling needles should considered.
the dynamics with
be studied.
the individual
Consider the trade- suspension.
offs between line
Poor choice for
length and
products with
complexity of
viscosity over 100
piping/recirculation
mPa-s.
pathways.
Limit interruptions in
the filling process,
76 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 91 ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
especially
interruptions in
recirculation or flow.
Have a defined
process for recovery
after stoppages (e.g.,
line clearance,
duration of resumed
recirculation before
restart of fill).
Defined quantity
should be scrapped
at the end of aseptic
unit operation when
recirculation / mixing
becomes ineffective.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 77

--- PDF Page 92 ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Need to Generally, No influence on No influence on TP filling requires Highly insensitive
Control temperature is product product temperature control to product
Product controlled at the bulk temperature directly temperature directly for accurate dosing. temperature;
holding vessels (e.g., caused by the caused by the however, changes
Temperature
With extremes in
jacketed vessel, pumps. pumps; if the to temperature
during Filling temperature, more
cooling coil, cold product during filling may
For extremes in detail in the design of
room). temperature have a marginal
temperature, the system is needed
negatively affects negative effect on
Impact on viscosity consideration due to the nature of
the stainless-steel dosing accuracy.
and flow should be should be given to some products that
pump (e.g.,
understood through changes in tubing expand or contract
tolerance on pump),
the dynamic stiffness. with Δ T, eventually
an alternative could
temperature range causing Δ P.
be ceramic or glass.
encountered during
Temperature
the cooling and
compensation for
filling.
pressure can occur
Consideration should through PLC control,
be given to the if required to ensure
environment to filling accuracy.
prevent
condensation on
vessels and fluid
pathway.
Effect of
temperature on
filling accuracy and
weight checks should
be understood.
78 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 93 ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
For Large Transfer vessels are If the hydrostatic If the hydrostatic If there are large If the hydrostatic
Batches, common, which will pressure or head- pressure or head- volume changes in pressure or head-
Mechanisms to require venting and space pressure is space pressure is the intermediate space pressure is
possibly pressure too high, it can too high, this can vessel, control of too high, it can
Supply the
control. induce leaks in the induce leaks in the hydrostatic pressure induce leaks in the
Product to the
connections and in pump. and head-space barbed tubing
Filler, including CIP/SIP capability for
between the rollers. pressure may need connections to the
All Necessary vessels and fluid Sensitive to vessel
to be taken into pump.
Intermediate path. Sensitive to vessel position (too high
account.
Steps and position (too high above the pumps
above the pump will will induce leaks).
Controls
induce leaks in the
connections and
potentially in
between the rollers).
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 79

--- PDF Page 94 ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Head Space Inert gas overlay in No additional risks if No additional risks if Use an inert gas for No additional risks
Management/ bulk, transfer, and critical critical the pressurizing of if critical
Head Space intermediate vessels. attributes/enablers attributes/enablers the TP vessel. attribute/enablers
have been have been have been
Replacement
Inert gas to be used
considered. considered. considered.
for any bulk transfer
that relies on
pressure rather than
a transfer pump.
Discard initial flush of
product as it
displaces air in lines
for oxygen-sensitive
products. Vacuum
can be applied to
enhance air removal
(except for low-
viscosity products).
Inert gas can be
applied through
jacketed needle,
separate needle,
and/or inert gas
tunnels.
Locations of gassing
vary, with gassing at
the closing station
being most effective.
80 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 95 ---
Consideration Critical Attributes/ Peristaltic Pump Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm
Enablers (PP) Pump (RPP) Pump (DP)
Robotics Clear design Easier to set up with Robotic fluid path Robotic fluid path Robotic fluid path
objectives for the aid of robotics, setup with setup with setup with
robotics functions as the PP is a closed conventional RPP is conventional TP is conventional DP is
with demonstrable system. Also, as the difficult. difficult. difficult.
advantage of pumps can be
Commonly, fluid Commonly, fluid Commonly, fluid
replacing human located outside the
path setup is not a path setup is not a path setup is not a
intervention. containment, a
requirement for requirement for requirement for
robot would be
Computational Fluid systems that are systems that are systems that are
easily able to install
Dynamics (CFD) for CIP/SIP-enabled CIP/SIP-enabled CIP/SIP-enabled
the preassembled
modeling airflow (unless a pump (unless a change is (unless a pump
filling needles within
around robotics change is required required as part of a change is required
the Grade A.
movements during as part of a campaign). as part of a
design phase. campaign). campaign).
Design of robotic
movements so that
they minimize
turbulence and avoid
the introduction of
contamination.
Technical expertise
in robotics control
and calibration.
Change parts or
consumables that are
not too heavy or
awkward.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 81

--- PDF Page 96 ---
4.1 Continuous Filling/Campaign Filling Versus Batch Filling
In manufacturing, a batch is defined as the complete production procedure from compounding, product
filtration, filling-line preparation, filling, and closing all the way up to final packaging (end-to-end). The
batch size can typically be defined by the volume of product that is manufactured or by the number of units
that are processed.
Some users will perform continuous filling operations where the definition of batch is volume or time-based
(e.g., every ## of liters filled, one batch per ## operating shifts or ## days). As an example, continuous bulk
drug substance to bulk drug product formulation systems will also make use of continuous aseptic filling.
However, continuous formulation is not the only time that continuous filling may be employed. In these
cases, large volumes of bulk product are filled into identical container–closure systems. The designation of a
batch (or filling order or section) is primarily to facilitate quality control approval and release of the product,
as well as to enable a clear initiation and conclusion of monitoring and sampling that are assigned to each
batch
In contrast, some users who happen to have a single bulk formulation that is filled with different fill
volumes may choose to run the product in campaigns. Therefore, in a campaigned process, the same product
is filled in two or more container–closure formats, where each format represents an individual batch, and the
sum of batches would be considered the campaign. For example, a user may formulate a product batch of
1,000 liters, fill half of the bulk solution (500 liters) in 6R vials and, when that fill is complete, switch to fill
the last 500 liters of the same product, with a different filling volume in 10R vials. Other campaign designs
are also possible (e.g., production of two or more bulk solutions requiring a fluid pathway change,
campaigns that require modest format part changes, etc.).
In the case of both continuous filling and campaign filling, the most common use case is that the user is
filling the same active substance, as a different active substance would pose a risk of cross contamination. If
different active substances are to be used, appropriate contamination control strategies should be employed
to minimize the risk.
4.1.1 Environment for Filling
Isolators are the most common environment for manufacturers who intend to operate in a continuous filling
or campaign mode for the production of a sterile product. The use of isolators for prolonged processing is
the strongest option for SA, as the initial surface biodecontamination provides an extremely high-quality
environment, and the ability to operate for long periods without opening the doors is assured by the design.
4.1.2 Sterility Assurance
When running a continuous or campaigned process, the major objective SA is to minimize the disruptions
within the barrier between batches. Therefore, when designing filling systems for continuous/campaign
production, it is crucial to plan them in a manner that allows batch completion and modest changeover
(when required) to be made with closed doors. This requires that the introduction of tools, format parts,
wipes, environmental monitoring supplies, and the like, are properly planned during the design phase (e.g.,
implementing RTPs and material transfer chambers to avoid the need to open the barrier). Careful thought
82 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 97 ---
should be given to whether a filter change will be needed during the prolonged production period2. Design
of the sterile fluid pathway will determine whether a presterilized SUS can be introduced easily or whether
the sterile fluid pathway will require recleaning and resterilization, as this will influence equipment layout,
design, controls, and environment. Risk analysis is recommended to determine the associated risks. In some
cases, parallel filtration pathways are established at the outset so that the change-over activities (which may
include PUPSIT of filters) are minimized at the time the new pathway is to be connected.
The length or duration of the production period should be established based on production needs and the
process designed to meet those needs. The process should then be qualified based on equipment/process
capability and limitations. Once established, that period and duration, as well as duration-related
interventions and conditions, including those associated with equipment change-over, should be taken into
consideration in the design of the APS. However, the APS should not be used as the primary means to
establish or validate the duration of the aseptic process (3). Continuous manufacturing/campaigns may be
able to last multiple weeks within an isolated environment if the process is properly designed and validated.
4.1.3 Benefits and Risks
The most significant benefit of continuous or campaign production modes is the total production-time to
turnaround-time ratio. For example, every time a line is turned around, time is needed to clean, set up,
perform integrity tests on filters, perform (isolator) leak tests and glove integrity tests and, of course, to
decontaminate the isolator itself (e.g., using hydrogen peroxide). Continuous and campaigning filling
processes save by reducing the number of times that these activities need to be performed. Other benefits
might also be realized, such as a reduction in product losses, as a proportion of the total volume filled.
Despite the benefits, the feasibility of running in a continuous or campaigned mode is not always
straightforward as the limitations of the filling technology and changeover requirements must be weighed in
the decision-making. For continuous-filling operations, there may be little to no mechanical changeover
required between batches as the containers and closures will typically remain identical from batch to batch.
For campaigns, the primary limitation is the size difference of the formats that need to be processed. As an
example, if a manufacturer intends to run the first batch with a 2R vial with a 13 mm stopper, and then run a
second batch in the campaign, filling the same product in a 10R vial with a 20 mm stopper, the transport
parts, star wheels, sorting systems, product fluid-path components, and everything needed for further
batches must either be placed in the barrier before beginning the campaign, or should be aseptically
introduced via RTP or material transfer chambers after finishing the first batch. Due to the size and handling
of some of these components (e.g., sorting systems), it may not be feasible to carry out the campaign under
these constraints. Batch-wise filling would be a better option to reduce risk rather than attempting a
campaign.
4.1.4 Equipment Design Options
Some OEMs have technologies where format parts are reduced or even eliminated. For example, some
manufacturers have constructed universal feeding bowls that will feed stoppers of relevant sizes to the
sorting tracks where the orientation takes place. In these cases, the large bowls need not be exchanged,
thereby reducing changeover and disruption of the campaign.
2 Annex 1 indicates that a liquid sterilizing filter should not be used for longer than one working day unless such
process has been validated. See filter use considerations under Annex 1, Section 8.95.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 83

--- PDF Page 98 ---
For varied container sizes, OEMs have introduced technologies, such as universal or adjustable rake,
walking-beam systems, or transport with prismatic (i.e., triangular) carrier pockets with an adjustable rail,
that enable the transport of containers of different dimensions (e.g., diameter, height, neck) without having
to replace or change the transport system. An adjustment is commonly required during changeover to the
next size, but this adjustment is automated as part of the recipe to enable touchless adjustments. Vendors
may also implement adjustable or universal star wheels, which contain pockets for each of the pertinent
diameters in adjacent positions. The automation then ensures that the containers are held within the
appropriate-sized pocket. The ultimate goal of the universal star wheel is to eliminate or reduce the needed
interventions for changeover. While these universal technologies are designed to accommodate a wide
variety of sizes, there are practical limitations to the number of sizes that the various transport mechanisms
can accommodate. Therefore, when planning for campaign production, it is important to ensure that the
required sizes are known in advance and included in the system design.
With regard to dosing systems, the same constraints on the feasibility of changeover would apply. For
example, if RPPs are used and the intention of the campaign is to fill containers with two different fill
volumes of 2 mL and 14 mL, this change in volume would typically necessitate exchanging the RPPs. This
campaign would not be considered feasible if the barrier has to be opened in order to exchange the pumps.
Breaching sterility by opening the barrier to accommodate the larger-format RPP would jeopardize the
campaign. As a consequence, if the design requirement included the ability to campaign these two disparate
fill volumes, a different filling technology might need to be selected to enable the intended range of fill.
Where a RPP’s limitation is the filling range, other technologies have different limitations. For example, a
PP can only run for so many revolutions until the hoses begin shedding particles. Therefore, if the duration
of the continuous process or campaign is longer than the permissible use-time of the hoses, the hoses must
either be repositioned or exchanged. This procedure has to be validated and qualified.
For continuous manufacturing or campaigns, manual interventions associated with batch changeover
represent possible contamination-control risks that should be assessed and evaluated as part of the intended
control strategy for the line.
4.2 Changeover Functionality
For any production line, the uptime-to-downtime ratio (e.g., overall equipment effectiveness) is a critical
factor in the return on investment and profitability of the line. For facilities with the ability to fill in a
continuous batch or campaign mode, the speed of setup/changeover may be less of an issue as there is a
significant boost in uptime with the ability to make multiple batches in a row without (or with reduced)
changeover. However, for companies that produce single batches, the speed of setup/changeover can have a
significant influence on efficiency and, ultimately, cost per unit. The impact of setup/changeover time is
especially severe for companies that may be capacity-limited.
The advent of SU technology in the industry has resulted in significant gains in efficiency in all phases of
the manufacturing process, including the filling operation. SU technology can reduce or eliminate the need
for offline or in-place cleaning and sterilization of many critical components. However, while this approach
may be useful for filling systems that make use of PP fillers, for example, the same level of benefit will not
be achieved for RPPs where pump cleaning and assembly will still be required even with SU tubing sets.
Lines that are designed to make use of fewer format parts, or that make use of format parts with a greater
range of capability, have reduced time devoted to setup/changeover. The ergonomics of the line can also
84 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 99 ---
facilitate or hinder rapid setup/changeover. When all parts to be changed or adjusted are within easy reach
from a limited number of positions on the line, setup/changeover can be performed with less time-
investment. Similarly, lines that make use of features, such as “tool-less” adjustments for guides and
conveyance parts, can simplify and speed setup/changeover.
4.3 Functionality Affecting Line Speed
When user requirements specifications designate the speed of filling, it is usually based on calculations that
either directly or indirectly relate to production (throughput) requirements. Some examples of factors that
determine (or limit) the speed of filling include:
• Cycle-time limits (after priming)
̶ Filling volume (e.g., number of pump cycles)
̶ Number of cycles per minute of the conveyance system (e.g., walking rake servo motion,
weight-check cycle-time/frequency of weigh checks)
̶ Fill curve (e.g., end-to-end cycle-time for single-filling cycle)
• Deceleration and acceleration limits
̶ Product characteristics may affect fill curve (e.g., foaming, viscosity, flowability, dripping,
temperature exposure)
̶ Required dosing accuracy may affect fill curve (e.g., could be influenced by factors such as
container type (e.g., vial vs. prefilled syringe), contents (i.e., single-dose vs. multi-dose),
overage limits (cost of product. i.e., high-volume production vs. niche high-cost products)
• Other factors that affect the overall duration of fill/readiness to fill
̶ Priming time (e.g., filling any oversized sections of fluid path, eliminating air bubbles,
standardizing fill)
̶ Batch size
̶ Shift length (the time allocated to filling a batch)
̶ Turnaround time (the time needed to prepare the line for the next batch)
The first two categories will have an influence on the selected filling technology. The final category affects
the acceptability of the speed of filling but has no significant influence on the selection of the filling
technology.
4.3.1 Dosing Accuracy, Weight Verification, and Speed
With some high-volume applications, where dosing accuracy is only of moderate importance (e.g.,
conventional vaccines or heparins), the batches are typically large and the containers are usually slightly
overfilled, as the product is not very expensive. In such applications, a 100% IPC, where the empty
containers are weighed prior to filling and then check-weighed after filling to determine the filling volume
in 100% of the containers, may not be opted for if the user decides that a statistical check is sufficient. The
higher the output requirements of such lines, the bigger the possible influence the weight check would have
on cycle-time. If statistical weight checking enables faster production with continuous transport machines, it
would be the desired option for high-speed fills where slight over-filling is acceptable. 100% IPC weight
checks, on the other hand, would typically require intermittent transport and, hence, lower filling-line
speeds. In contrast, small batches of expensive products will commonly target 100% IPC (or net-weight
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 85

--- PDF Page 100 ---
filling) for accuracy and reduction in product losses through tighter fill-volume targets. For additional
information, refer to dose control in Sections 5.1-5.1.4.
The nature of the containers/container packaging (e.g., nesting) could also determine whether a 100% IPC is
feasible. For example, filling machines that fill presterilized containers in a nest will typically run a 0.2-10%
statistical check. In this case, 100% IPC will only make sense (from a line-speed and waste perspective) if
the containers are removed from the nest before filling and are filled in single file on an intermittent
transport machine.
4.3.2 Product-Conserving Features Which Can Affect Speed
Additional controls for high-cost, small-batch products that will conserve product include, but are not
limited to:
• Net-weight filling or filling on weighing scales at the beginning of the batch to ensure no product is
discarded due to air bubbles during priming and batch initiation that might result in underfills.
• Automatic correction of underfilled containers in order to avoid having to discard them due to not
reaching the target fill.
• Systematic emptying of the product vessel at end of the aseptic fill-unit operation by filling on load
cells to ensure that the containers discarded due to underfills are kept to the minimum.
• Automatic checks for stopper presence and raised stopper detection (see Section 7.0).
• Automated re-stoppering capability in order to ensure that correctly filled containers are not
discarded due to missing or raised stoppers while they are still under Grade A controls.
• Force and rotation control during capping-and-crimp operations and quality inspection (e.g., vision
system inspections for stopper height and correct crimp seal) to ensure the container is closed
correctly before leaving the line.
• Recapping in order to ensure that correctly filled and stoppered containers are not discarded due to
missing or bad crimp seals.
• Component checks, such as glass breakage, empty container inspection, and cap quality, in order to
ensure rejection of bad components so as, for example, not to fill good product in faulty or missing
containers.
See Section 12.0 for additional causes of routine and nonroutine product rejection such as priming and end
of the aseptic filling-unit operation (along with strategies for conservation of product.)
Many of the features listed here can take additional time for the verification and correction steps, which will
increase the overall duration of the filling and closing operation and, therefore, will reduce the comparative
“speed” of the fill. However, they each help to ensure product quality and reduce waste, which can be an
important trade-off for speed.
4.3.3 Filling Curve and Speed
The filling time of a single container is governed by the filling curve specific to the product being filled and
the required volume to be filled in each container. The filling curves are independent of the speed of the
filling machines. It could be quite possible to have a high-speed line with multiple filling needles but with a
relatively slow filling curve. A typical example of this would be sensor-filling of bulk cartridges, where the
filling curve is programmed to fill up to the brim of the container, which will require slowing the rate of fill
as the top of the container is reached. Another example would be the filling of products that tend to foam.
The filling curve is slowed intentionally to reduce the possibility of foam generation, which can arise if the
containers are filled too quickly.
86 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.