
--- PDF Page 166 ---
Consideration In-Line and On-Site Ready to Use Ready to Use (RTU) with Ready to Use (RTU) with
Treatment (RTU) with No- External External
Touch Transfer Biodecontamination — Biodecontamination —
Hydrogen Peroxide E-Beam
Validation Qualification and Simpler validation In-line biodecontamination In-line biodecontamination
validation required for (e.g., no on-site requires qualification. requires qualification.
processing. qualification of
Easy to validate process, Easy to validate process, ability
washer and tunnel,
Well-understood ability to demonstrate a clear to demonstrate a clear 6-log
VPHP, or E-Beam).
processes. 6-log reduction in resistant reduction in resistant
microorganisms. microorganism
Easy to validate process,
ability to demonstrate a
clear 6-log reduction in
resistant microorganisms.
Particulate Risk Potential for glass-to- No glass-to-glass No glass-to-glass contact. No glass-to-glass contact.
glass contact depending contact.
upon conveyance
mechanism.
Residuals Risk None None Risk of oxidizing residuals (24). Risk of free radicals or ozone
residuals.
Cost of Lower cost of primary Primary packaging Less expensive primary Less expensive primary
Components packaging compared to more expensive, as packaging than NTT, as packaging than NTT as single-
RTU. vendor has single-bag RTU may be bag RTU may be sufficient but
additional processing sufficient but are more is more expensive than fully
steps. expensive than fully on-site on-site processed components.
processed components.
Initial capital costs may be high.
152 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 167 ---
Consideration In-Line and On-Site Ready to Use Ready to Use (RTU) with Ready to Use (RTU) with
Treatment (RTU) with No- External External
Touch Transfer Biodecontamination — Biodecontamination —
Hydrogen Peroxide E-Beam
Optimal Batch Large where economies- Both large and small Small batches where the Large batches favored to offset
Sizes of-scale can be applied to batches are optimal. economics favor the the additional facility and
costs of on-site increased cost of the equipment costs (both initial
Constraints may be
sterilization. components with the capital expenditure and
enforced by supplier.
elimination of supporting ongoing operating
Less economical for small
processes (e.g., washing, expenditures due to E-beam
batches of components.
depyrogenation). emitter maintenance).
Facility Design More unit operations, Simpler line with In-line biodecontamination In-line biodecontamination
additional equipment and fewer unit process increases line process increases line
utilities required. operations, less complexity. complexity and may impact
equipment, and building construction, thereby
Smaller overall footprint than
fewer additional increasing the cost of
on-site and E-Beam options.
utilities. component supply (favoring
In-line biodecontamination larger-scale batches).
Waste material
requires additional utilities.
management In-line biodecontamination
required for requires additional utilities.
protective packaging
removed at point of
component
introduction.
Possible greater cost
for additional
containment and
second debagger, if
needed, depending
on configuration.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 153

--- PDF Page 168 ---
Consideration In-Line and On-Site Ready to Use Ready to Use (RTU) with Ready to Use (RTU) with
Treatment (RTU) with No- External External
Touch Transfer Biodecontamination — Biodecontamination —
Hydrogen Peroxide E-Beam
Transfer Often directly connected Grade transfer C to B Grade transfer from C to A Grade transfer from C to A
Classifications to Grade A (or may and B to A for RABS, with surface with surface
transfer from B to A with or from B/C outside biodecontamination. biodecontamination.
SteriBags). isolator to A with
only removal of
layers of wrapping.
Nesting Generally not Yes Yes Yes
Capable?
Other None More complexity to None Radiation protection required
Considerations demonstrate there is to protect operators from X-
no adverse impact to rays along with Health and
Grade A at Safety officers for the process.
mouseholes within
the qualification of
the NTT.
154 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 169 ---
9.1.1.8 Considerations for Closures
Closures of all types must be of suitable cleanliness (e.g., low particulate levels) and sterile for use in the
Grade A environment. As with primary containers, the decision must be made either to provide RTU, RTS
components, or to clean and sterilize closures on-site.
There are several types of closure systems that are in use, the most common of which are:
• Vial stoppers – Designed to be placed within the neck of the vial, they can be of different sizes and
shapes that may be fully or partially inserted (e.g., liquid vs. lyophilized). From a functional
standpoint, the stopper needs to ensure a tight fit with respect to permeation and entrainment (e.g.,
product loss, gas exchange, microbiological contamination) at all temperatures the vial and stopper
will encounter throughout shelf life and use periods (e.g., freeze-drying, freezing, refrigeration,
room temperature). For multi-dose containers, the stoppers need to be self-sealing to withstand
multiple punctures.
• Snap closures – May be an integrated part of the container that are, for example, intended for
special low-temperature applications. They are designed for tight sealing even under conditions of
ultra-low-temperature freezing and through multiple freeze–thaw cycles.
• Cartridge disc seals – Include both a rubber disc (potentially composed of two different
elastomers) and a crimp seal. For proper function, they need to ensure a tight fit when pressurized
from inside while maintaining self-sealing properties when cartridges comprise a multi-dose
container. With cartridge disc seals, the potential for particulate release is higher compared to other
elastomers due to the integrated crimp seal that is applied near the filler.
• Cartridge and syringe plungers – Incorporate an elastomer on the end of a rigid plunger rod. The
elastomeric end should ensure both a tight fit against the walls of the cartridge or syringe barrel, as
well as low shear to ensure geometrical displacement with the application of low force during dose
delivery.
• Syringe-needle elastomer – In addition to ensuring a microbiological barrier, this elastomer must
be permeable to gases, such as EtO, used for sterilizing the syringe barrel.
In-house sterilization can be performed with automatic stopper-processing systems that clean, siliconize
(when required), dry, and sterilize or through semiautomatic systems that use a wash/siliconize/dry process
followed by separate processing in an autoclave. These processes require the firm to possess good
knowledge of siliconization, as well as particulate, sterility, and endotoxin control (19-22, 25).
Integrated container–closure systems, such as snap closures on polymer containers, are a more recent
innovation for aseptically-filled products. Like elastomeric closures, the essential quality attributes of
cleanliness (including particulate level) and sterility apply. Due to the polymeric materials of construction,
these are typically supplied RTU after being gamma-irradiated.
9.1.2 Condition of Closures Upon Presentation to the Line
Whether performed in-house or at a vendor site, multiple factors must be considered with regard to the
condition of the elastomers and closures when they emerge from pretreatment steps (e.g., washing,
sterilization). In all cases, the pretreatment processes and post-treatment handling (e.g., packaging
operations, quantity per package, weight per package) must be designed to:
• Reduce the incidence of one closure being stuck to or entwined with another
• Prevent deformation (e.g., prevention of deformation of the aluminum portion of combination seals,
prevention of deformation of the plunger through twisting or bending, or deformation of the ribs
that would affect plunger alignment during insertion or during deployment at dosing)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 155

--- PDF Page 170 ---
• Prevent dissociation of combination seals (e.g., dissociation of disc seals, where a crimp seal is
found without an elastomer, an elastomer is found without the crimp seal, or where their positions
are inverted)
• Prevent damage to integrated caps to minimize the risk of breakage at the attachment point (e.g.,
snap closures)
• Ensure dryness (e.g., for moisture-sensitive products, for lyophile elastomers)
Automatic stoppering systems often provide discharge and connection through a RTP to the Grade A
environment. In the case of treatment with an autoclave step, this can be accomplished with a RTP or
through a bag-transfer system under Grade A air supply when supplying a RABS that is not equipped with
RTP technology. Lift technology may need to be considered in the footprint of the filling line to elevate the
elastomers to the hoppers that will feed the components to the closure station.
When procuring RTU or RTS components, strong collaboration between the supplier and the end user is
required to guarantee the necessary quality. The advantages and disadvantages of on-site treatment versus
RTS or RTU elastomers are highlighted in Table 9.1.2-1.
156 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 171 ---
Table 9.1.2-1 Considerations for On-Site Treatment Versus Ready-to-Sterilize or Ready to Use Elastomers
Considerations for Potential Advantages Considerations for Potential Disadvantages
On-Site Treatment • Slightly lower cost of elastomers compared to • Requires knowledge of elastomer particle control,
RTU siliconization sterilization, and endotoxin control
• Requires more unit operations than RTU, resulting in
greater equipment expense and larger layout within
the facility
• Requires greater utility consumption
• Requires secondary packaging in SteriBags or RTP
pressure-containers for transfer to filling line (or a
direct connection to Grade A at point of supply)
• Often requires heavy-duty lifting systems requiring
significant footprint
• Requires qualification and process validation
• Less economical approach for small batches of
components
Ready-to-Sterilize (RTS) • Fewer unit operations as no stopper-washer • More expensive, as elastomer supplier has additional
Utilizing a Rapid Transfer required processing steps and provides beta port for mating
Port (RTP) with RABS or • Simpler validation (no qualification or process with site alpha port
validation of a stopper-washer) • Elastomer supplier must maintain close
Isolator
• Reduced contamination risk communication for bag specifications and controls to
• Fewer required utilities support sterilization process control
• Easier process for autoclaving cycle due to • Risk of particulate contamination can still be present if
larger breathing surface transfer to a SteriBag or a component processing
system is required at the receiving site
Ready-to-Sterilize (RTS) • Fewer unit operations as no stopper-washer is • Elastomer supplier must maintain close
Utilizing SteriBags with required communication for bag specifications and controls to
RABS • Simpler validation (no qualification or process support sterilization process control
validation of a stopper–washer) • Complex process with multiple points of risk for
• Fewer utilities required opening SteriBags (e.g., transport, peeling, spraying,
• Simpler process for autoclaving cycle due to opening, feeding)
larger breathing surface • Potential risk of contamination transfer during
opening of the SteriBag
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 157

--- PDF Page 172 ---
Considerations for Potential Advantages Considerations for Potential Disadvantages
Ready to Use (RTU) with • Fewer unit operations as no stopper-washer • More expensive as elastomer supplier has additional
RABS or Isolator or autoclave required for elastomers processing steps and provides beta port for mating
• Simpler validation (no qualification or process with site alpha port or multiple layers of SteriBags
validation of a stopper-washer or an autoclave • Complex process with multiple points of risk for
cycle) opening SteriBags (e.g., transport, peeling, spraying,
• Reduced contamination risk when using RTP opening, feeding)
transfer • Potential risk of contamination transfer during
• Fewer utilities required opening of the SteriBags
• May have prolonged development times (e.g., for
sterilization cycles) for specialty components that are
not always available in RTU format
• Limited components per bag
158 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 173 ---
9.1.3 Sorting/Supply at Filler and Closing (or Partial-Closing) Stations
Bulk components like plastic containers (such as droptainers for ophthalmics) and elastomers are supplied to
the filling line in large volume to reduce the frequency of replenishment. Regardless of the type of
container–closure and the number of stations required for their insertion, the use of bulk-supplied
components commonly requires a sorting device(s) that orients the component in the correct position for
filling or insertion. In addition, a bulk hopper may periodically feed components to the sorting station to
avoid frequent human intervention. Consideration should be given to the needed size of the bulk hoppers to
plan for the overall size of the batch and the number of packages of components that will be required. The
hopper may be sized to limit the number of times the replenishment operation will be required.
Although feeding by gravity is preferable, gravity-feeding is commonly augmented with vibratory functions
to ensure that the components flow easily from the hopper to the sorting station. The sorting station may
also make use of vibratory feeding to assist with separation and orientation functions. Vibration, gravity,
and/or vacuum may also be used at the point of insertion. Care should be taken to measure and control the
particulate at these important equipment locations as the vibration and friction of moving components can
generate or loosen particulate. In addition, care should be taken to ensure that the supply, sorting,
orientation, and insertion mechanisms do not damage components in any way. Handling and point-of-
insertion delivery (as well as all intended pretreatment steps) should be demonstrated during validation, as
closure damage may result in the loss of performance of sealing surfaces or loss of performance of
components, such as plungers.
Specialty preparations, such as some suspensions, may require glass or stainless-steel beads to be inserted
within the primary container. While the beads are not closures, the operations required for the insertion of
these components are similar in that they typically include vibratory feed, gravity, and vacuum. Therefore,
the same considerations as those described for supply and feeding of closures would apply.
Airflow studies within the Grade A environment should demonstrate controlled unidirectional airflow
during the intermittent (or continuous) vibratory episodes at the equipment locations. This requirement
would also apply to other locations that are subject to accumulation (e.g., turntables, bi-flow tables, loader
unloaders) that might result in intermittent container-on-container contact and generate particulate.
9.1.4 Crimp Seals and Caps
Sterilized crimp seals and caps are required in isolators where the capper is within the Grade A environment
of the isolator. Sterilized crimp seals and caps are not mandatory for most conventional operations (e.g.,
RABS), but can be prepared as either sterile or nonsterile, according to the site CCS. When upgraded to a
sterile state, the intent is to provide additional protection of the closure and capping environment.
For applications that make use of RTPs (e.g., isolators, some RABS), caps can be fed into a polymer or
stainless-steel transport container (with or without sterility). Special care must be taken to prevent damage
or deformation of the seals/caps when handling them in bulk; therefore, a RTP with a soft-sided transfer bag
is not typically recommended.
9.1.5 Considerations for Filters
For certain operations (e.g., nitrogen-gassing, vacuum-filling, product sterile-filtration), filter cartridges
might need to be transferred into the barrier (see Section 11.0). There are different ways to introduce filters:
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 159

--- PDF Page 174 ---
• Transfer via RTP container as a preassembled autoclaved configuration
• Transfer via RTP container/bag for aseptic installation within the barrier
• Transfer via RTP as a preassembled, presterilized, gamma-irradiated system
• Transfer of the autoclaved filter enclosed within a SteriBag as an autoclaved, preassembled
configuration
• Transfer of the autoclaved filter enclosed within a SteriBag for aseptic installation within the barrier
Filters can also be installed as nonsterile components during line setup but then would need to undergo a
CIP/SIP cycle and external biodecontamination after installation before use.
160 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 175 ---
10.0 Material Transfer System Design
Section 9.0 addressed the various methods of preparing and handling materials and components that are
needed to supply the aseptic filling line. Section 10.0 addresses the mechanistic aspects of material transfer.
When considering the mechanisms to introduce sterile or depyrogenated components to a filling system,
they can be divided into two categories of transfer: conveyance or docking. This section addresses both
categories as well as the considerations for decontamination based on the method of introduction.
10.1 Conveyance for Material Transfer
Conveyors are the traditional mechanism of movement through a filling system. Conveyors permit the direct
connection from one piece of equipment to another. An example of this is a tunnel conveyor exit across a
dead plate to the filling-system accumulator-table or filling conveyor. The NTT systems described in
Section 9.0, is an automatic or semiautomatic system for outer-bag and inner-bag removal that introduces a
presterilized tub or tray within the barrier, that would generally fall within the conveyor category since, after
the robotic entry, the tub or tray may be subjected to conventional conveyance or to complete robotic
movement. Conveyance systems are typically used for components.
10.2 Docking for Material Transfer
Docking is the process of connecting a bag, cannister, or other transport element (e.g., transport isolator) to a
RABS or isolator wall. The direct connection of equipment discharge-doors, such as autoclaves, ovens, or
lyophilizers (i.e., equipment with fixed-load positions) through the walls of a RABS or isolator also fall into
this category. Both the direct-equipment connection and the canister-connection commonly require an
isolator or RABS glove with a tool or a robotic system to perform an unloading or discharge intervention,
even if the door opening is automated.
Reducing the number of manual interventions is an important step in reducing the contamination risk for all
these points of entry. Therefore, when designing these docking interfaces, consideration should be given to
the end-to-end mechanisms of transfer for each component or equipment element, especially for critical
material transfers. In particular, as these docking systems often deliver critical-product-contact or indirect-
product-contact materials, consideration should be given to ensuring all materials and equipment in the
vicinity of, and to be removed from, the docking port are protected from contamination. For example, when
using a RTP to deliver stoppers or caps to feed bowls located in front of and below the port, avoiding
disruption of unidirectional airflow can be extremely difficult.
The diversity of transferred components and equipment may drive whether automating all docking and
unloading functions is possible. When it is not possible, glove ports are typically employed to perform the
material transfers. When operations are performed manually using isolator or RABS gloves, it is necessary
to ensure that the glove location and length is suitable for the operations to be carried out. In the case of
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 161