
--- PDF Page 22 ---
Part 1: Technology Selection and
Design
8 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 23 ---
1.0 Aseptic Filling System Design Elements
When designing an aseptic filling process, there are many considerations. First, we must recognize that the
product is intended to be a sterile product and that our target is an optimally designed aseptic filling system
(see the red bullseye in Figure 1.0-1) that supports the goal of producing a sterile product. Therefore, the
filling system must be easy to clean, biodecontaminate, and/or sterilize, minimize the need for interventions,
maintain air quality within the environment during operation, and the like. Ensuring sterility assurance (SA)
will govern all our decision-making as the primary consideration.
Next, the attributes of the product that will impact the design are evaluated. These include, but are not
limited to, the product critical to quality attributes (CQAs). Only after these product attributes are fulfilled
by the design, can the desired flexibility and business targets be considered. Figure 1.0-1 illustrates some of
these various considerations and shows the complexity of how they might interplay to identify the optimal
aseptic filling system design.
Figure 1.0-1 Example Considerations for Optimal Filling System Design
When considering all the factors depicted in Figure 1.0-1 collectively, compromises may be required. For
example, some of the desired business or flexibility attributes may be waived in order to ensure that the
product CQAs, including sterility, are fulfilled. The points to consider for several of the elements to be
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 9

--- PDF Page 24 ---
evaluated in a mature design are provided in this topic and throughout this document. Section 21.0 contains
case studies that make use of the principles described in Section 1.0 to demonstrate how design decisions
and trade-offs are made.
It is important to note that the physical equipment selection is not the only necessary element for success in
aseptic filling. The ways in which personnel interact with the filling system represent risks to microbial
control and opportunities to improve sterility assurance. Therefore Part 3: Operational Considerations
Including Interventions, Component Handling, Filtration, Fluid Pathway, and Discards should not be
overlooked when identifying an appropriate design. Only as an integrated whole (engineering solutions
coupled with the required operational behaviors) can an appropriate aseptic design be accomplished.
1.1 Product Considerations for Aseptic Filling System Selection and
Design
The physicochemical attributes, sensitivities, and tendencies of each product may dictate special filling
conditions for that material. Further, the product’s attributes, or the intended administration of the product,
may also designate specific final containers. In general, if there are specific physicochemical attributes
associated with the product that dictate special handling, these considerations will often outweigh the
desired requirements for flexibility or fulfillment of business desires. Sections 1.1.1–1.1.3 discuss product
attributes that may need to be taken into consideration.
1.1.1 Pharmaceutical Activity
Products that are hazardous (e.g., highly potent, toxic, specific designations for occupational exposure band
(OEB), or occupational exposure level (OEL)) should be filled using a closed Restricted Access Barrier
System (cRABS) or isolator technology with containment features (e.g., airflow, appropriate pressure
cascades) designed to protect the environment, personnel, and product. The enclosures also commonly
include special capabilities to clean residual product, handle soiled parts, and deal with spillage or breakage.
In such cases, safety of all personnel must be considered in addition to the routine considerations for product
quality and safety.
1.1.2 Product Sensitivities
Biological or physicochemical requirements for ensuring the quality and safety of the product must be
assured. Sections 1.1.2.1–1.1.2.6 provide examples of product sensitivities that need to be taken into
consideration.
1.1.2.1 Temperature Sensitivity
Temperature-sensitive products may require temperature-controlled conditions during filling, (e.g.,
temperature control may be required on the bulk vessel, product-feed pathway, intermediate vessel and/or
filling system). Alternatively, or in addition, there could be a time limitation for filling to prevent excessive
“time out of temperature” for any individual dose. In some cases, recirculation is possible as a means to
maintain the product in contact with temperature-control media (e.g., vessel jacket, temperature coils within
the vessel) (see Section 4.0 and Section 4.7 for additional design options ).
10 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 25 ---
1.1.2.2 Oxygen Sensitivity
Oxygen-sensitive products can experience oxidation-degradation with a loss of effectiveness of the product
in the presence of oxygen over time. Steps must be taken during holding and processing to reduce the risk of
such degradation. Inert gases are therefore used in the headspace of holding vessels (e.g., nitrogen overlay)
during the filling and closing of the filled containers to minimize oxygen exposure. Overlay in the container
may be accomplished with pre-gassing, gassing during filling with a special double-walled filling needle,
post-gassing, and/or gassing during closing. Gassing during closing is the most important and effective
method for overlay (see Section 4.0 and Section 4.9).
1.1.2.3 Light Sensitivity
Light-sensitive products must be protected from light exposure during the filling and storage process to
prevent degradation. These products can be filled in a light-absorbent container, such as amber glass, or the
entirety of the filling system, including the filler, capper, and any transfer systems or loading/unloading
systems, can be designed with attributes such as light-protective windows, light-emitting diode lighting,
wavelength diffusers, or lighting of a specific wavelength. Different products may have sensitivity to
different wavelengths (e.g., visible blue light and invisible ultraviolet light are more energetic than red
light). Higher energy wavelengths from 300 nm to 500 nm are most often responsible for photodegradation.
Therefore, performing characterization studies to determine the light-mediated degradation pathway is
recommended in order to ensure that the most appropriate solution, without compromising product quality,
is implemented. For example, the use of light-absorbent containers may make visual inspection more
difficult and may be contraindicated in some cases.
1.1.2.4 Metal Sensitivity
Metal-sensitive products must be protected from contact with certain metals, which may limit the alloys that
can be used in the design of the product-contact surfaces. Single-use (SU) disposable elastomers for the
fluid pathway are often employed, and materials of construction such as ceramics are selected for the filling
equipment rather than low-iron material parts such as chrome-plated stainless steel.
1.1.2.5 Silicone Sensitivity
Silicone-sensitive products must be protected from contact with silicone oils or emulsions that are
commonly applied to glass containers and elastomers. To protect from silicone exposure, polymer
container–closure systems (e.g., cyclic olefin copolymer (COC)) may be used as the designated silicone-free
container. Alternatively, there are glass containers available with lubricant that have been polymerized onto
the glass either by heat or by high voltage. Elastomeric closures may be completely coated with an
alternative polymeric coating, or only the product contact surface of the elastomer may have a specific
coating that is silicone-free. When handling silicone-free elastomers, especially for syringes, the filling line
may need to be designed with vacuum stoppering as the silicone-free or coated stoppers may not withstand
the mechanical friction and compression of a vent-tube closure system (see Section 7.3). When employing
vacuum stoppering, vacuum filling might also be required, especially for higher viscosities, to extract the air
bubble from the syringe’s luer channel while filling. This vacuum filling approach will also reduce the
potential of splashing due to rapid air withdrawal from the luer channel during vacuum stoppering.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 11

--- PDF Page 26 ---
1.1.2.6 Shear Force Sensitivity
Shear force-sensitive products include long-chain molecules such as proteins. These products generally do
not tolerate dosing systems with high shear or long dwell-times within the pump. Therefore, time pressure
(TP), rolling diaphragm pumps (DP), or peristaltic pumps (PP) are often used as low-shear options.
1.1.3 Physicochemical Properties
Properties such as viscosity, surface tension, or foaming tendencies for liquids, or products that are
suspensions, quick-drying, flammable, or explosive may require specialized filling technologies, special
filling needles, or specific filling-process conditions for optimal, safe filling. Compatibility of the materials
in contact with product should also be evaluated to ensure maintenance of the physicochemical properties of
the product.
Powder characteristics that will influence powder filling-system selection and process control are
flowability, particle size, particle morphology, bulk and tapped density, angle of repose, and surface area,
among others (see Section 17.0).
The following are examples of physicochemical properties that may need to be taken into consideration:
• High viscosity products, which must be filled air-bubble-free, often need to be filled under vacuum.
Depending on the surface tension and break-away behavior (e.g., likelihood to drip) during filling, a
fluted filling needle (or, in some cases, a closing needle) may be considered (see Section 3.0 for
additional detail on needle types).
• Products with a surface tension that is less than water must be filled with a smaller internal
diameter cylindrical needle, or a needle with a crimped outlet or basketed outlet to prevent dripping
(see Section 3.0 for more details on needle types).
• Products with a tendency to foam during handling often create a foam or froth when agitation
occurs at the air-liquid interface. The fluid pathway and vessels must be carefully designed to
minimize the opportunities for foaming, which may include but are not limited to controlling the
methods of introduction to the bulk or intermediate vessel (e.g., through a J-tube or tube that
extends to the bottom of the vessel), limiting the pressure applied to the product, controlling the fill-
curve for the liquid dispensing (i.e., controlled velocity, acceleration, deceleration), use of diving
needles (i.e., synchronized movement of the filling needle correlated to the liquid dispensing), or
several of these techniques together (see Section 4.0 for more details).
• Suspension products are a heterogeneous mixture of a liquid and finely distributed solids
(particles). To ensure that there is no settling of the particles and to ensure uniform filling, the solids
must be continuously suspended in the liquid. This can be accomplished by agitating the suspension
using agitators and/or recirculation. In addition, it will be very important to control filling-stoppage
times (see Section 4.6 for diagrams of possible designs for both agitation and recirculation). Care
must be taken to ensure that the selected suspension mechanism does not impact the biological or
physicochemical characteristics of the product. Another consideration for suspensions is that the
solids content in the suspension can have an abrasive effect, which may influence the selection of
the materials of construction of the filling equipment (e.g., using ceramic instead of chrome-plated
stainless steel).
• Quick-drying products or those that have a tendency to crystallize can accumulate at the points
where they are exposed to air such as at the tips of filling needles. The exact characteristics of the
formulation will determine the appropriate engineering solution. Therefore, it is important to
evaluate the composition of the product to determine which ingredient(s) is(are) responsible for any
visible residue and, when possible, formulate to limit their impact (some excipients have a tendency
12 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 27 ---
to form very visible residues even when the solid quantities are negligible). Data should be
available on the impact of dried residue ending up within a dosage unit in order to determine risk to
patients (e.g., what are the quality implications for potency? stability? particulate?). When
reformulation is not possible, the filling needle design must be selected to prevent dripping or
accumulation; basket needle designs may be helpful. The implementation of jacketed needles (i.e.,
gassing needles) may help with some products (see Section 3.0 for additional details on needle
selection). Suck back may also be helpful to avoid accumulation of product at the tip of the needle.
The fill curve is the primary method to control splashing and accumulation of product on the
outside of the needle. The fill curve should avoid any sudden acceleration or excessive velocity, the
filling should be conducted from bottom up, and the needle motion should avoid touching the
surface of the liquid at any point during the fill curve. Smooth flow throughout the filling cycle
should be the goal. With regard to the dosing system, the product-lubricated rotary piston pump
(RPP) may experience drying at the interface where the piston enters. Therefore, a better choice in
filling system might incorporate closed system technology such as PP, TP, or DP. Environmental
conditions such as low humidity may also exacerbate rapid drying. During prolonged operation or
prolonged periods of line stoppage, drying may become inevitable and may require interventions
such as flushing needles and discarding units upon restart, or disabling or replacing filling stations
in the worst cases. From a quality control perspective if the residue affects dosing accuracy 100%
IPC may be required (see Section 5.0 for additional details on IPC for dose control).
• Flammable or explosive products will require that influencing factors be evaluated prior to
determining the appropriate filling technology, such as:
̶ Material properties (e.g., flash point, ignition temperature, maximum content of the
flammable constituent in the formulation)
̶ Maximum volume to be filled in each container and headspace for volatile constituents
̶ Zone classification, temperature class, and explosion group
̶ Identification of external influences and ambient temperature
̶ Safety data sheet
1.2 Materials and Container–Closure Considerations for Aseptic Filling
System Selection and Design
Materials of construction and container-closure selection also influence filling-line selection and design.
Whether it is selecting materials that will be in product contact, or preventing unwanted material
interactions, care must be taken with the final design. Containers and closures, likewise, have different
needs to ensure container integrity and smooth operation and handling.
1.2.1 Material Compatibility
Compatibility of the product with product-contact materials and compatibility with the primary drug-
product storage container will be critical. For liquids, the wetted fluid pathway may include product vessels
of stainless-steel, high-density polyethylene or other polymers, multiple hydrophilic filters, polymeric
tubing, intrinsic sterile-connection devices, and single- or multi-use needles, in addition to any product-
contact surfaces within the filling pump (if any).
All product-contact materials require evaluation as they may contribute metal ions that may be harmful to
the product, or unwanted trace leachable or extractable contaminants from polymers that could impact
product characteristics over the shelf life. Similarly, the compatibility of the final primary-packaging
components used for product storage also requires leachable and extractable evaluation. The potential for
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 13

--- PDF Page 28 ---
product degradation caused by free-radicals and ozone (e.g., resulting from ionizing radiation sterilization or
biodecontamination) or oxidation (e.g., resulting from biodecontamination with hydrogen peroxide) should
also be considered.
1.2.2 Container–Closure Characteristics
The interface between sterilized primary components (i.e., the container and the closure) is of critical
importance in ensuring that the integrity of a filled drug product unit can be expected to be maintained over
the shelf life of the product, keeping the drug product both sterile and stable. This generally involves the
validation of the process controls for the interface between a flexible elastomer closure (e.g., stopper or
plunger) and a rigid glass or polymeric container (e.g., vial, syringe, cartridge) being held together under a
constant compression force (e.g., residual seal force (RSF) for vials), consistent insertion force (e.g., syringe
plunger), or consistent knife height (e.g., cartridge seal).* See Section 6.0 for advanced design container–
closure systems and Section 7.0 for discussion of closures and closing systems. Section 7.7 includes some
of the primary considerations for CCI and CCI validation.
*Note: Other single containers closed by fusion, for example ampoules or blow-fill-seal, require validation
but will additionally be subject to 100% integrity-testing.
The selection of the specific container and its presentation to the line (e.g., singly or in nests) will influence
the selection of the handling mechanisms for introduction to the line, the conveyance, and the design of the
barrier system (see Section 9.0 and Section 10.0). In turn, the conveyance mechanisms will influence the
design of the filling system. The selection of the specific closure(s) to be applied will dictate the attributes of
the closing system (see Section 7.0). For lines that are intended to handle more than one container or more
than one closure system, there may be additional complexity in the mechanical systems, requiring either
complete swap-out of mechanical systems or additional change parts to compensate for the differences in
the containers and/or closures.
1.3 Aseptic Filling System Process Requirements Driving Selection and
Design
Every aseptic filling system will have specialized process considerations that will need to be evaluated when
designing a filling process. Some such considerations include, but are not limited to, those discussed in
Sections 1.3.1–1.3.4.
1.3.1 Specialized Applications
There may be specific filling requirements that are driven by product characteristics or specialized
application issues associated with the selected container–closure system or patient delivery system.
Headspace requirements, for example, can be driven by product characteristics or may be due to the design
of intended end-product usage, for example:
• Products with characteristics such as oxygen-sensitivity or high viscosity may require filling
processes that reduce the likelihood of trapping or entrainment of air-bubbles or may require
specific headspace controls in the filling process (as discussed above in Section 1.1.2.2 and Section
1.1.3).
• End-product usage requirements could call for an air-bubble-free headspace if using an autoinjector,
for example, or for reduction of stopper movement during transport, when highly accurate stopper
placement is required.
14 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 29 ---
In these cases, sensor filling (see Section 2.0 and Section 5.2.2) or vacuum-vent tube-stoppering may be
required for precision control of headspace and stopper positioning (see Section 7.0 on stopper-setting
mechanisms) to minimize air bubbles. To exert complete control over air bubbles and headspace for viscous
products, product degassing before filling may be required. This will include the application of vacuum to
the bulk solution and control over product-transfer mechanisms to prevent the reintroduction of dissolved
gases within the liquid, thereby also excluding the possibility of using TP filling, which uses overpressure
with gas to control fill level.
1.3.2 Multi-container Considerations
A key consideration for any filling line is the mechanism of container introduction. Line design is
contingent upon whether the containers will be introduced as bulk (e.g., needing to be washed, siliconized,
and depyrogenated on site) or introduced to the line bagged in tubs/nests or trays, pre-siliconized (if
needed), presterilized, and ready to use (RTU) (see Section 9.0 and Section 10.0 for the introduction of
components and the various options for component supply). If multiple types of containers are required to
be filled on a single filling line, the complexity will be increased if both bulk and RTU containers are
required to be handled as there may be additional processing steps for the bulk components and the
handling/transfer mechanisms of the component supply for bulk and RTU will be different.
Although the filling process itself is generally indifferent to the incoming container handling, the infeed of
the line must be configured to match the incoming containers. Upstream of the filler, a bulk-only line will
use an interfaced washer and depyrogenation tunnel. An RTU-only line will employ debagging equipment,
decontamination, and a delidding machine. A filling line that will handle both bulk and RTU processes must
have both capabilities with appropriate bypasses. This added complexity, as well as the equipment cost and
footprint, must be taken into consideration for new filling-line projects and facility-lifecycle costs. In
addition, a filling line that can handle bulk as well as RTU will inherently run slower than a high-speed line
that only processes nested RTU syringes or only bulk cartridges. Depending on the desired line throughput,
it could take several flexible filling-lines (those handling both bulk and RTU) to equal the output of one
high-speed filling-line that handles one or the other, but not both.
1.3.3 Multiple-Filling Technology Considerations
In the past, few lines existed that could utilize multiple-filling technologies. With recent technological
advances, however, many suppliers have filling lines available with multiple installed (or interchangeable)
filling technologies. For example, a cartridge that must be filled with minimal headspace can be filled on a
line with TP sensor filling, and that same line can be changed over between batches or campaigns to fill
syringes with PPs. Likewise, a line that can fill suspensions in a vial with rolling DPs can be changed over
to fill highly viscous product with RPP. This added complexity will impact cost, footprint, and throughput
of the line due to change over time, and an analysis of throughput vs. cost vs. number of lines required
should be executed for each multi-capability filling line. It may be more economical to install two dedicated
lines instead of one flexible line.
If it is known that multi-filling technology capability is desired for the future, but not required for initial
operations, it is essential that the capability be thoroughly evaluated during the initial design and
procurement stage to ensure that the required flexibility and changeover requirements are fully evaluated for
feasibility before committing to a filling-line design.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 15

--- PDF Page 30 ---
1.3.4 Considerations for Wide Range of Filling Volume
Most commercially available filling technologies can fill a wide range of drug product volumes with either:
• Pump changes (increasing pump diameter for RPPs and rolling DPs) or
• Product path changes (increasing tubing size and/or occlusion bed for PP, and tubing size and
orifice for TP filling).
See Section 2.0 for additional details on filling-pump and filling-path designs.
Due to this scalability of filling technology, filling volume is usually not a true constraint on the filling
system design. Typical filling-line fill-volume limitations are based on the size of the container and,
therefore, the machine pitch (i.e., conveyance spacing including all scrolls, grips, star wheels, side-rails,
grippers).
For example, the diameters of a 2R vial and a 100R1 vial are 16 mm and 47 mm respectively, a difference of
31 mm. A bulk filling line capable of filling these extremes would need to have machine pitch capable of
handling both sizes, check-weigh scales (assuming gravimetric filling) that can handle low and high loads
with acceptable accuracy, and a depyrogenation tunnel that is sized to run the worst-case load at line speed,
among other considerations. If expanding to large-volume parenterals (LVPs), the issues are exacerbated
with the significant increases in container size.
For an RTU line, the size of the containers is somewhat limited by what is commercially available in nested
or trayed formats; therefore, wide volume ranges are not typically required of RTU lines. For example, at
the time this guide was drafted, there were only a few specialized options for 50R or larger vials in an RTU
format, so the problems of pitch in the above examples would not arise.
1.4 Aseptic Filling Line Business Requirements Driving Selection and
Design
The intended operational parameters that govern the business, the operational objectives, and the
profitability of the production line will drive another subset of considerations for the economic feasibility of
the intended filling-line design. These considerations may need to be modified if the product characteristics
cannot be supported with the intended operating paradigm, as product quality must always be preserved. At
the planning stage for a new filling line, however, the business considerations offer an effective feasibility
screen for the intended design.
First and foremost, the yearly throughput of a fill-finish line is the basis on which all considerations must be
made. Given a known batch size (or range of batch sizes), the speed of the filling line must be selected with
a careful analysis of many factors to ensure that the desired throughput, at the desired price-point per unit,
can be achieved.
The following are business considerations that should be evaluated:
• Staffing Level – Will the facility be operated 16/5, 24/5, or 24/7 hours per day/days per week?
1 ISO 8632 defines the different container and closure types for injections. ##R represents the nominal fill volume in
mL (##), and tubular glass (R). Therefore, 2R is a 2mL nominal fill volume injection vial manufactured with a
tubular glass process and 100R is a 100mL nominal fill volume tubular glass injection vial.
16 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.