
--- PDF Page 234 ---
headspace controls during the filling operation (e.g., when the filler is shut down) will result in rejections
during the processing.
If there is powder at the neck of the container during filling (e.g., due to inaccurate fill-targeting into the
container opening or uncontrolled electrostatic charge), the powder may cause a poor seal around the
elastomer, which can result in an ingress of oxygen during the shelf life of the product. Powder at the necks
of containers may be difficult to observe during initial visual inspection due to the crimp seal. Therefore,
additional controls should be put in place for targeting delivery of the powder to the container-opening
during setup, and electrostatic control should be part of the standard environmental controls. The filling
process should be verified intermittently to ensure continued dust control at the neck. Headspace analysis
may be used for nitrogen-flooded containers to ensure that the closure is integral, thereby demonstrating an
effective seal between elastomer and neck without interference due to the presence of powder.
19.3 Discard Strategies at Dose Control
For net-weight fillers, rejection should be automatic and demonstrated during the qualification of the
equipment to determine that the correct containers have been rejected. As with liquid filling, if the weight-
check function is statistical (intermittent), the segregation and rejection will need to occur beginning at the
last confirmed correct-weight check (see Section 5.0).
One of the key reasons that dosing becomes inaccurate for VPPF is blinding of the screen, which affects
both powder compression and powder expulsion. Another, less-frequent reason could be screen breakage.
(Screens should be changed as part of routine preventive maintenance and inspected regularly after cleaning
to verify screen integrity.) Either condition can result in rejections during the run due to inaccurate dosing.
AF primarily encounters dosing inaccuracies when the conditions of the powder change during the run. Both
the VPPF and AF are available with net-weight models that enable automatic adjustments to keep the
weights within preset weight limits throughout the run. For some AF fillers, the weight adjustment may be
capable of occurring dynamically for each dose, whereas the VPPF will react to a trend in weights over
several cycles.
19.4 Discard Strategies at Conclusion of Fill
At the end of the filling process, as powder levels start to drop in the hopper, dosing may become
inconsistent. Proper hopper design is essential to minimize residual powder waste and to maintain filling
accuracy for as long as possible. It is important during development of the filling process parameters that the
level at which this occurs is noted and defined (measurable). Shutting down when this level is reached must
become a normal part of the operation and must be defined in the site SOPs or batch record. For net-weight
fillers, there may be an option to continue to fill until the rejection level becomes too high to be practicable
and compliant. The company must establish procedures to handle the end of fill consistently to ensure that
only good-quality containers are produced (see Section 13.0).
Table 19.4-1 summarizes common discard events and the specific risks represented by primary powder-
filling technologies.
220 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 235 ---
Table 19.4-1 Common Discard Events and Their Impact Based on Powder-Filling Technology
Considerations Vacuum-Pressure Powder Auger Powder Filler (AF)
Filler (VPPF)
Priming, loss of dose Dependent on powder attributes Dependent on powder attributes
control and airflow management and flow characteristics
(including filter selection)
End-of-process dose Dependent on hopper and Dependent on hopper and
accuracy when powder agitator design; some risk for end agitator design; some risk for end
levels are low of aseptic-fill-unit operation when of aseptic-fill-unit operation when
powder levels are low unless powder levels are low and back-
controlled by net-weight pressure on the auger is reduced
surveillance unless controlled by net-weight
surveillance
Powder discard at end Dependent on hopper and Dependent on hopper and
of process agitator design; very efficient (i.e., agitator design; the requirement
little waste) for low-weight fills or for back-pressure on the auger
low fill speeds may result in more losses
Risk to dose control Broad range of fill-weight Broad range of fill-weight
based on dose size capability; highly effective for low capability
fill weights
Filler interventions Broken or blocked screens can No special concerns for
present a risk, although proper interventions
selection to pair the filter with the
powder attributes will mitigate
risk
19.5 Other Rejection Considerations
Rejections along the filling line may occur for other reasons that may not be directly related to the operation
of the filler, for example:
• Raised stopper or plunger placement detection
• Missing stopper or plunger
• Fallen components
• Bad crimp seals or closures (at capper)
These sensors and rejection stations should be integrated into the filling conveyance system and tested
during qualification to ensure that detection and rejection timing is appropriately integrated.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 221