
--- PDF Page 181 ---
The filterability of the product, including such attributes as viscosity and likelihood of product blocking or
blinding the filter, will drive the need to consider whether parallel filter trains or in-line prefilters are needed
to provide redundancy and prevent blockage during the filling operation.
The hazardous nature of the product is another consideration for filtration, whether it is highly potent,
sensitizing, or toxic. Containment and decontamination considerations should be included in the design of
filtration manifolds so that waste associated with PUPSIT or filter-flush at the beginning of processing is
handled in a way that does not risk the employees, the environment, or the outside of any filled containers.
11.3 Product Transfer Modalities and Influence on System Design
The two primary methods to get product from a vessel through the filter-manifold, either to another vessel
or directly to the filler, are overpressure and pumping. Overpressure is provided by the application of a
sterile gas (either clean, compressed air or an inert gas such as nitrogen) in the headspace of the pressure
vessel. The increase in pressure in the headspace forces the product through the bottom outlet of the vessel
and through the transfer lines. The pressure can be controlled to either continuously or intermittently feed
the product. Pumping is the application of a mechanical transfer of the fluid in the transfer line. The pump
can be product-contacting (e.g., rotary lobe, centrifugal) or non-product-contacting (e.g., peristaltic). Care
must be taken to ensure that, with either transfer mechanism, the pressure and any pulsation of the liquids
does not harm the filter membrane or create shear stress on the product that can result in the formation of
particulate or harm-filterable suspensions for example.
Configurations for transfer can include presterilized intermediate vessels (also known as surge vessels) in
conjunction with a manifold, or the transfer can be made directly to the filler manifold without an
intermediate vessel. The filler manifold assists in securing a stable flow of product to the filling pumps and
needles by providing a small upstream reservoir or widening of the fluid pathway. Table 11.3-1 lists some
of the considerations for these different configurations.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 167

--- PDF Page 182 ---
Table 11.3-1 Transfer System Design Influences on Filtration Risks
Method of Filter Sterile Filler Filler Considerations
Transfer from Intermediate Manifold
Formulation Vessel
Vessel
Overpressure Yes No Yes Consider pressure drop across the filter membrane, as filling system
controls the rate of transfer for time-pressure filling systems. Under
certain conditions, if stable pressure on the dosing system cannot be
maintained, the dosing accuracy could be affected.
Overpressure Yes Yes Yes Rate of transfer controlled by filtration operation alone; limited risk for
pressure drop.
Pump Yes No Yes Start/stop of the pump should be considered relative to the risk to the
filter membrane, as the pump will need to be interlocked with the
filler. Under certain conditions, if stable pressure on the dosing system
cannot be maintained, the dosing accuracy could be affected.
Pump Yes Yes Yes Rate of transfer controlled by the filtration operation alone to the
intermediate vessel; offers less risk of start/stop to the filter
membrane.
11.4 Filter Selection and Influences on System Design
The two primary filter types are cartridge filters and capsule filters. Cartridge filters are filter membranes installed within a filter housing that is part of
the equipment. O-rings at the bottom of the filter create the seal with the equipment housing. Cartridge filters can be either sterilized out of place in an
autoclave or SIP on a rigid piping system, and then integrity-tested in place (see Section 11.9).
Capsule filters are supplied with a molded-polymer housing that is an integral part of the supplied filter. The housing, which is pressure-rated, is
equipped with connectors and test connections that can be clamped directly to existing stainless-steel transfer lines, creating a continuous pathway that
can be CIP, SIP, or assembled and autoclaved. The capsule filter is then integrity-tested according to the PUPSIT justification (see Section 11.9). The
selection of the type of filter to be used is driven in part by the complexity of connections and complexity of the equipment for the filtration-unit
operation. Capsule filters are more highly integrated with the fluid pathway and are considered the filter of choice for SUS.
168 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 183 ---
The materials of construction of the transfer lines, filter, and filter-housing should be evaluated for
compatibility with the product to prevent the risk, for example, API or preservative adsorption, oxidation, or
exposure to free radicals. When any of these conditions are unavoidable, consideration should be given to
the flush quantities required to standardize the product homogeneity (e.g., through binding to available
sites). This flush quantity must be proven through validation, and the line length and filter surface area must
be tightly controlled and standardized by procedure.
11.5 Filter Configuration Alternatives
A wide variety of filter configurations are possible. The product attributes will drive the selection of the
filter configuration, as will considerations for risk mitigation associated with SA. The examples of filter
configuration for the fluid pathways depicted in Figure 11.9.2-1 through Figure 11.9.2-3, below are just
examples; each manufacturer must determine the best approach to filtration by balancing the product
requirements and risks.
One common approach is the installation of a bioburden-reduction filter placed upstream of the sterilizing
filter. In some cases, two sterilizing filters can be placed in a series; this ensures that, if the downstream
filter fails an integrity test, the upstream filter may be tested for integrity. If the upstream filter passes, then
the batch disposition is not compromised.
Another common configuration is the installation of two parallel fluid pathways, each with a sterilizing filter
in place. In this redundant parallel configuration, the process would proceed through the first pathway, with
pressure being monitored throughout, until a pressure rise is observed across the membrane. When that
pressure rise is observed, the fluid pathway is switched to the secondary pathway. This approach is often
used when working with products that are likely to block the filter due to particulate or product deposition
that blocks the filter’s pores (e.g., large molecules, proteinaceous, long filtration times due to large batches
or prolonged filling operations). Legacy configurations that employ the removal of a prefilter during
processing, rather than employing a redundant filtration manifold, should be assessed for compliance;
breaking into a transfer line and filtration manifold after integrity-testing presents a significant risk (see
Section 11.9).
11.6 Duration of Fill and Impact on Filtration System Layout
When considering the configuration for the fluid path and whether to make use of a sterile holding vessel,
the duration of the filling process and the likely duration of the filtration process should be taken into
account. The duration of the filtration is an important parameter in the initial qualification of the filter
membrane and one that will require requalification should the filtration time be changed over the life of the
product (26).
Two failure modes are possible if the filling process is prolonged. First, as the bulk product is held during
presterilization, the bioburden may replicate in the nonsterile bulk intermediate vessel and, as a result,
present a challenge to the sterilizing filter. Second, there is a risk of “grow through” for the filter, where
microorganisms on the upstream side of the filter can divide and multiply, grow through the membrane, and
breach the intended sterile barrier of the filter membrane. Consequently, if the filling process is prolonged,
thereby prolonging the filtration process, consideration should be given to using a sterile transfer vessel so
the filtration can be accomplished more quickly. This approach will require additional space for the
placement of the sterile vessel. The presterilized intermediate vessel must be held under positive pressure
after sterilization and throughout the filling operation. In addition, the sterile intermediate vessel will require
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 169

--- PDF Page 184 ---
a sterilizing vent-filter during the transfer process, which will also require an integrity test at the conclusion
of the filling process. Possible configurations for the fluid pathway are illustrated in Figure 11.9.2-1, Figure
11.9.2-2, and Figure 11.9.2-3. The sterile hold-time for the bulk must be validated as part of the
manufacturing process. Other possible consequences of prolonged filling operations include blocking of the
sterilizing filter, as discussed in Section 11.5.
For direct filtration without a bulk intermediate vessel, slow and fast fill-speeds must be validated to ensure
that the filtration parameters (e.g., maximum and minimum flow rate, differential pressure) can be
maintained while supplying the filler with consistent product flow.
Aseptic filling operations are expected to have point-of-use filtration, regardless of the filling system design,
when permitted by the product and filler attributes (see Section 11.11).
11.7 Sterilization of the Filter and Filter Train
When selecting a sterilizing filter, there are multiple options for ensuring the sterility of the filter and its
associated transfer lines. Filters can be gamma-irradiated SU, or they can be sterilized on site, either through
an autoclave load or SIP cycles.
For optimal SA, all connections required for the filter should be made prior to the sterilization step,
especially on the downstream side; as an alternative, intrinsic sterile connection-devices should be
considered to reduce the risk of sterility breaches during assembly. These approaches would require
coordination with the filter supplier to ensure that the needed connections can be supplied if the filter will
arrive RTU. For on-site filter assembly, there may be more flexibility in the connectors used, as bioburden-
controlled assembly can be implemented prior to the sterilization step.
The mechanism of transfer to the line should be considered, as it will determine whether the filtration
apparatus requires special packaging, such as double- or triple-bagging for introduction to the filling area, or
whether a RTP system or other advanced protective measures will be used (see Section 9.0 and Section
10.0 for the transfer of materials and components).
The method of sterilization should also be evaluated for impact on the product. For example, when using
gamma-irradiation, the formation of free radicals may result in the need to reject the first quantity of filtered
product as a precautionary measure (see Section 12.0 for information on discard considerations).
11.8 Overview of Factors Influencing Filtration-Pathway Layout
When considering the overall fluid pathway for the product to reach the filler, the location of the filter is an
important design aspect. For SA, the ideal position is to place the filter as close as possible to the filling
system to minimize the sterile fluid pathway. However, there are many interactions with the filter train that
should be considered to ensure that there are adequate provisions for access and interface without risk of
contamination to the filling system, such as:
• Setup connections
• PUPSIT
• Initial venting of the filter
• Drying the filter, when required, prior to or after integrity-testing
• Start-up rejection volumes
• Need to change over to a parallel filter installation during the process, when used
170 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 185 ---
The shortest fluid pathway is often placement of the filter within the aseptic boundary, such as inside an
isolator, as seen in Figure 11.9.2-1. However, this positioning will require a mechanism, such as a transfer
port, to introduce the filter to the aseptic environment and additional interventions within the aseptic
boundary for setup, testing (e.g., PUPSIT), and changeover. Placement of the filter within the aseptic
boundary can also result in other challenges to maintaining the aseptic environment (e.g., airflow impacts,
additional mechanical components within the aseptic boundary that require maintenance or calibration,
cleaning and disinfection due to additional complexity). As a result, many configurations now call for
placement of the filter outside the sterile boundary with a sterile connector to the fluid pathway (see Figure
11.9.2-2 and Figure 11.9.2-3).
With bulk solutions that require mixing or recirculation during filling, such as filterable suspensions, the
placement of the filter requires a number of considerations (see Section 4.6):
• Filtration on demand for products that require recirculation may result in the need to clear the filter
after any period of flow hold; filtration to a sterile intermediate vessel with recirculation capability
can reduce the risk of settling during filtration.
• Use of sterile intermediate vessels and recirculation loops increase the distance between the
sterilizing filter and the point of fill, which will require risk assessment.
11.9 Integrity Testing and PUPSIT Implementation
The EU Annex 1 expectation for integrity-testing is that it will occur in place, that is, in the filter housing
(3). The expectation for any filter installed in a removable housing is that they will be tested together in their
installed position, not off-line with the housing removed. All required connections and valving should be
included in the filling system and fluid-pathway design to prevent unnecessary connections during setup and
testing (27, 28).
11.9.1 PUPSIT Implementation Considerations
The EU Annex 1 requires that filters be integrity-tested both before and after use (3). If pre-use testing
represents a risk to the product or process, a suitable justification must be available in the quality-system
documentation to demonstrate why the pretest will not be performed.
One important PUPSIT criteria is whether the filter will be integrity-wetted and -tested with product or with
water for injection (WFI) at the pre- and post-use test points. When using WFI as a pretest material, the
filter must be installed in a manner that the filter and the fluid pathway are easily drainable. The filter is
typically dried with sterile compressed-air or nitrogen or is flushed with sufficient product after testing to
ensure that there is no risk of compromise or dilution of the product. (The introduction of valving and
utility-piping for the drying medium should be part of the overall piping configuration when used.) When
using WFI as a post-test material, the product must be thoroughly rinsed from the membrane with sufficient
WFI to ensure a valid measurement. When using product to test the filter before and after use, a small
amount of product may be lost; however, the preflush requirements for leachables and extractables may
include the amount consumed during a pretest.
In all cases, the WFI or product used for the filter integrity-testing must have a mechanism for disposal that
does not contaminate the filling line. For hazardous products, care must be taken to ensure appropriate
containment. This may require a biocontainment bag or waste system to be employed with appropriate
valving and connectors to protect both operators and the environment.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 171

--- PDF Page 186 ---
The design of the assembly should ensure appropriate valves are in place for management of the fluid
pathway. In some cases, the valves may be automated with confirmation of positioning. In other cases, the
valves may be entirely manual; in that case, detailed procedures must be available to ensure the correct
sequential operation of the valves.
To ensure consistent configuration of the tubing sets, a shadow board displaying the appropriate outlines
and providing the needed hooks that represent the desired configuration could be used by the operator to lay
out the tubing and connectors during assembly prior to sterilization.
11.9.2 Layout Alternatives for the Filter and Sterile Fluid-Pathway
Multiple fluid-path configurations are possible that consider the various requirements related to product,
assembly, integrity, position of the sterilizing filter, and associated header- and hold-vessels or bags. Figure
11.9.2-1, Figure 11.9.2-2, and Figure 11.9.2-3 depict diverse arrangements that represent just a few of the
many possible configurations for the sterile fluid pathway. The advantages and disadvantages of each
illustrated configuration have been provided to help illustrate possible considerations for the numerous of
other possible layouts. In all cases, the risk-benefit analysis should be part of an appropriate risk assessment
that can be used to support the site’s aseptic-process control strategy and the overall CCS.
Figure 11.9.2-1 depicts a configuration where the filter(s) is located inside the barrier. A single aseptic
connection is made in the surrounding environment through the isolator or barrier wall to the upstream side
of the filter, which permits connection to the sterile fluid path. The sterile intermediate bag downstream of
the filter that helps maintain fill accuracy is also present inside of the barrier (see Section 9.0 and Section
10.0). The advantage of this configuration is that the filter is maintained within the aseptic environment,
providing the highest level of SA, while all connections are made on the nonsterile side of the filter. The
primary disadvantage of this arrangement is that the complexity of the interventions for setup and integrity-
testing add increased risk that can compromise the aseptic environment. While it is possible to bring
presterilized and preassembled components in through a RTP, there may be size restrictions. Alternatively,
the individual components may be brought in, subjected to biodecontamination within the environment
(e.g., in hydrogen peroxide-impermeable packaging), and then assembled with dedicated and specific
connections (as recommended by EU Annex I). However, without the benefit of a shadow board to aid in
assembly, the risk of operator error increases.
While the sterile holding-vessel in Figure 11.9.2-1 is located within the barrier in a protected position (an
advantage), adequate space must be made within the barrier for the placement of this bag (a possible
disadvantage). This may also limit the practical size of the sterile holding-vessel.
In Figure 11.9.2-1, Figure 11.9.2-2, and Figure 11.9.2-3, the filter is depicted as a single unit for the
simplicity of drawing. However, it is possible to have more than one filter in a series or more than one
filtration setup in parallel; all connection points would then be multiplied accordingly. In addition, the
complexity of the PUPSIT-valve assembly is depicted as a single icon when, in reality, it is much more
complex, with test, flush, and drying connections. Pressure monitoring is typically located upstream of the
filter, however configurations can vary with between one and three monitoring points possible, depending
upon the process risk assessment, the exact configuration of the piping and the number of filters. Therefore,
pressure monitoring has also not been depicted, but is an essential part of the design (i.e., to monitor the
differential pressure across the filter membrane). In addition, if the vessels are stainless steel, each vessel
will require a vent filter (not shown); SU bags do not typically require a vent connection for filtration and
transfer.
172 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 187 ---
Figure 11.9.2-1 Filter Position within the Aseptic Barrier
Figure 11.9.2-2 depicts a configuration where the filter(s) is located outside the barrier. An intrinsic sterile
connection device is used to make a connection to the fluid pathway. The connection is made downstream
of the sterilizing filter, outside the Grade-A zone. The sterile intermediate vessel in Figure 11.9.2-2
downstream of the filter is also present outside the barrier. (It is possible to also move this sterile
connection, and even the intermediate vessel, to the inside of the aseptic barrier.) The primary advantage of
the configuration shown in Figure 11.9.2-2 is the access to and simplicity of making the connections
required for integrity-testing, which may include the use of a shadow board. The primary disadvantage of
this configuration is the integrity risk, as there is a significant portion of the sterile fluid pathway positioned
in the environment outside the aseptic barrier. As such, the integrity from the filter to the point of use must
be assured. Testing of the fluid pathway, not just integrity-testing of the filter assembly, will be required to
ensure that sterility is maintained.
Figure 11.9.2-2 Filter Position Outside of the Aseptic Barrier
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 173

--- PDF Page 188 ---
Figure 11.9.2-3 is a slight variation on Figure 11.9.2-2, one that uses a header bag near the point of fill. All
of the other advantages and disadvantages from Figure 11.9.2-2 also apply to Figure 11.9.2-3. The header
bag represents an additional point of connection and an extension of the sterile fluid pathway that must be
maintained as integral. The header bag can improve the filling precision; however, it may require an
additional supply pump, usually positioned outside the barrier, to transfer the product to the header bag. The
configuration introduces additional complexity to the sterile fluid pathway, posing an added risk to the
integrity of the overall system. The benefit in filling accuracy must outweigh this risk, and whether there are
other approaches to improve the filling accuracy (e.g., change in filling technology, position of intermediate
vessel, optimization of filling setup such as hose diameter and filling-needle geometry, optimization of
filling curve) should be explored. Overpressure, as a means of product transfer, would not be recommended
on the sterile product vessel upstream of the header bag as it could become an impediment to the sterile
filtration.
Figure 11.9.2-3 Filter Position Outside the Aseptic Barrier with Header Bag
When the bulk is required to be held in a cold room due to temperature restrictions on the product, the
activities depicted outside of the barrier would commonly be held in the cold room, with or without a sterile
product vessel (see Section 4.7 for additional details on needed controls for handling temperature-sensitive
products, as other process requirements could also apply).
Regardless of filter positioning, some general design considerations apply to all configurations. The fluid
transfer-line diameter should be as small as possible and the length as short as possible while still providing
the necessary flow rates to the process. Doing so will reduce the amount of scrapped product due to line
loss. Other product risk factors, such as shear force, should also be considered when determining line
dimensions in order to reduce friction during transfer under pressure. The best balance of the two conditions,
that is, line loss and shear force, should be sought.
11.10 Aseptic Filling Technology Influence on Filter and Fluid Pathway
Configuration
Table 11.10-1 summarizes equipment-specific designs that might affect the selection of the fluid pathway
beyond the selection of the process filter that should be considered, such as:
174 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 189 ---
• For rolling DPs, the pump itself may cause some pulsation (depending on design and size), which
presents a higher risk to the filter membrane. Increasing the distance between the filter and the
pump may dampen this effect.
• For RPPs, there is a risk of back-flow through the filter if the volume (e.g., manifold or reservoir)
between the pump and the filter is inadequate.
• Having a manifold (header) upstream of the filling heads (e.g., filling pumps for RPP or DP, pinch
valves in TP filling systems, rotors in PP filling systems) is a common design feature. When the
filter is positioned to provide point-of-use filtration, a small dead-leg can be formed between the
filter and the end of the manifold. This dead-leg can create a risk when performing such activities as
filter-flushing at the beginning of the filling operation. The dead-leg provides some uncertainty
about whether the full volume of the waste solution has been expelled from the system.
• For RPP and TP filling systems, including a mechanism that vents air from the filling system should
be considered. For example, air removal is beneficial at startup, as the manifold first fills, or when
there are interventions that introduce air to the system. If the manifold can be positioned below the
filling pumps, this positioning may reduce or eliminate the need for a separate venting mechanism,
if air can escape through the filling heads.
• Design of the manifold should be carefully considered to ensure that it can be appropriately
sterilized and assembled in the fluid pathway in an aseptic manner, especially when introducing the
manifold through a RTP for assembly. If it is subject to SIP, the manifold represents a widening of
the line and a transition to multiple filling systems, so it is imperative to ensure that an adequate
mechanism for complete air removal during sterilization is present.
Table 11.10-1 Fluid Pathway Design Risk by Liquid Filler Type
Considerations Rotary Diaphragm Pump Time Pressure Peristaltic
Piston (DP) (TP)
Pump
(RPP)
Filtration Point of Use
Requirement
Operation Risks Back-flow Consider pulsation Pressure-drop None
caused by risk on filter through the filter
idle stroke membrane due to when not using a
pump operation sterile receiver
Design Risk for Avoid dead-leg at the end of the manifold
Manifold
Ensure manifold is designed for either aseptic assembly or SIP with appropriate
maintenance of sterile pathway
Design Risk for Consider design to vent air out of the filling system
Venting
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 175

--- PDF Page 190 ---
In addition to these considerations for in-line filtration to liquid filling systems, other filters may be in place
along the fluid pathway, including:
• Vessel vent filters (not required for SU bags)
• Inert-gas point-of-use filters
• Manifold/filling-head venting system filters (as applicable)
Integrity-testing will be required for each of these additional process filters. That integrity-testing will
commonly be performed off-line as these are hydrophobic filters that would commonly be tested with
alcohol.
11.11 Considerations Regarding Products that are Not Filterable
Some products cannot be sterile-filtered, for example, some suspension products and cell therapy products
where the particle size of the suspension or cells exceeds the porosity rating of the filter. Terminal
sterilization should always be the first choice for the preparation of sterile products. However, where neither
terminal sterilization nor sterile filtration are possible due to the composition and attributes of the product, a
control strategy must be in place. The product and process control strategy must address the steps taken to
ensure the sterility of each ingredient/component of the product, including the potential for filtration of each
prior to introduction to the unfilterable component, and to ensure that the procedures used to bring the
various ingredients/components together provide the highest possible SA. Minimizing the length of the fluid
pathway and ensuring its integrity after sterilization are essential elements to success for these products. A
risk assessment is recommended to support the robustness of the overall control strategy for SA. In these
cases, the process is the product; that is, the combination of all the sterile inputs provides the assurance of
sterility for the final product. Hence, each must be separately assured.
11.12 Filtration Associated with Powder Filling
Although there is no filtration associated with a product in powder-filling, filtration is associated with:
• Powder delivery and handling
• Inerting
• Drying after cleaning
• Exhaust and dust collection
For vacuum pressure powder fillers (VPPF), point-of-use filtration is used for the clean compressed air and
the vacuum. The filters are installed between the utility source (e.g., vacuum, dosing air, purge air) and the
mechanical backplate or the pneumatic rotary joint. (For fillers designed for dosing needles, there is one
filter per air or vacuum pathway.) The filter assembly is installed as part of the aseptic setup of the filling
system.
For both VPPF and auger fillers (AF), an inert gas or clean compressed air may also be introduced to assist
with powder flow within the hopper. For both VPPF and AF, if the product requires protection from oxygen,
a filtered inerting-gas is also used during the filling operation.
For AF, no clean compressed air or vacuum is associated with the filling operation; however, filtered clean
compressed air is associated with drying the powder pathway after cleaning. If CIP is associated with the
bulk-hopper component of the VPPF filler, the bulk hopper would also be subject to drying with filtered
clean compressed air. (VPPF dosing-system elements, other than the bulk hopper, are not capable of CIP
and, therefore, will not have clean compressed air for system drying.)
176 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 191 ---
All filter usage for VPPF and AF described here make use of a sterilizing-grade hydrophobic filter with a
nominal pore size of 0.22 µm. These filters are typically procured as sterile, gamma-irradiated capsule
filters, although autoclavable options may also be used. All piping downstream of the filter should be
capable of sterilization. All filters should be subject to integrity-testing, and the integrity-test results should
be considered in the batch disposition process.
Either filler type may make use of dust collection, which would use HEPA-filtered exhaust at the point of
collection. These filters are generally located within a gray space to facilitate change-out of the filter and
emptying of the reservoir outside the cleanroom environment; however, cleanroom models do exist. Dust-
collection systems may also employ a bag-in–bag-out configuration for potent compounds that require
containment. These HEPA filters are intended for containment rather than microbiological control;
therefore, the frequency of integrity-testing is at the discretion of the manufacturer based on application,
system design (e.g., location of the filter), and risk.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 177

--- PDF Page 192 ---
12.0 Discard Strategies for Aseptic Filling of Liquids
The selection of a filling technology and its specific system design can influence the discard strategies that
are employed for such line events as startup, priming, line stoppage, interventions, and end of the aseptic
fill-unit operation. Products that are very expensive or limited in availability will be impacted
disproportionately by systems that have high discard requirements. Therefore, careful consideration of the
system design and the integration of the filling technology with the filling enclosure/isolator is warranted.
12.1 Discard Strategies at Startup
Product rejection at the start of the filling operation, immediately after setup, is not uncommon and may
occur for several reasons. It may be associated with the product formulation, the product’s physicochemical
characteristics, the upstream process, or the filling equipment or it could be due to standardizing the dose of
the product.
Several common causes of container or product rejection include:
• Interaction with the product (e.g., adsorption of API, excipients, preservatives) for tubing or other
polymers (e.g., filters) or elastomers (e.g., diaphragms, gaskets)
• Degradation of the product due to first exposure to surfaces (e.g., free-radical exposure associated
with gamma-irradiated components, oxidation of product within tubing/manifolds) (24)
• Leachables entering the product from first product exposure to surfaces (e.g., filters, transfer lines,
SU intermediate bags)
• Dilution of the product arising from filter integrity-testing (e.g., PUPSIT) or initial filter-flushing if
these tasks are not performed with product
Priming of the filling stations may be required to ensure:
• Elimination of air
• Elimination of foam
• Homogenization (e.g., suspension products)
• Dose standardization (e.g., fill-weight/volume)
• Seating (e.g., relaxation) of tubing within peristaltic pumps
The quantity of product/number of units to be rejected due to these influences should be established prior to
process validation through careful evaluation of content uniformity and fill accuracy. Then, the discard
quantities should be standardized for use in the process validation and in subsequent routine filling. Any
changes to the upstream process involving polymers/elastomers in use, or changes to filling conditions,
could require reevaluation of rejection quantities.
178 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 193 ---
12.2 Discard Strategies at Priming
Some fillers are equipped with a priming feature that is linked to a discard mode for the units processed
while in this mode. Other systems are designed to permit rejection directly to a discard vessel. Fillers may
establish the quantity to be discarded based on the dose volume/weight, the number of priming cycles, or
both.
For high-value products, it may be possible to start the filler in phases to ensure the number of completely
filled containers is maximized. For example, filling can take place directly on the weigh-cells to avoid the
occurrence of partially filled containers during the priming procedure. This approach eliminates the need to
discard containers used during priming, as they are assured to be filled appropriately (see Section 5.0). This
approach requires that other possible priming quality concerns (e.g., adsorption, oxidation, leachables) have
been addressed.
Some filling systems are equipped with a dedicated refilling pump as well as a dedicated weighing system
that permits accurate refilling of any under-filled units associated with the priming stage. The equipment
needs to be designed to properly handle this separate filling path during production.
In all cases, the performance of this priming mode must be challenged during operational qualification to
ensure that the filler is rejecting any units that are improperly filled, in accordance with the intended system
design. Product-development data may be leveraged to ensure that all product attributes have been
accounted for when determining the discard quantities.
12.3 Discard Strategies During Filling and Interventions
During the filling operation, interruptions that stop the line (e.g., gaps in component supply, interventions,
operator breaks) or are caused by unexpected events (e.g., particle excursion, loss of temperature in the
tunnel, breakage, fallen units, collisions on the lyophilizer loader) may require rejections. While many
filling-equipment designs have accumulation capability that creates a buffer to prevent stoppages or
minimize their impact, stoppages may still occur. Depending on their duration, these stoppages may result
in:
• Loss in homogeneity (e.g., suspensions)
• Changes in binding to elastomers or polymers (e.g., loss of API, preservative, excipients)
• Loss of headspace or oxidation for oxygen-sensitive products
• Drying at the tip of a needle that causes plugging
• Dripping and loss of weight control (if not 100% IPC)
• Loss of temperature control for products that are cold-filled (e.g., 2–8 °C)
• Risk of compromising containers due to exposure to intervention activities
These, and other similar filling interruptions, may result in the need to reject units. In the case of oxygen-
sensitive products, for instance, any open containers may need to be rejected, in addition to the possible
need to reprime the filler and reject bulk solution associated with the repriming. The number of
units/volume or weight rejected after a line stoppage of a specified time period should be established prior to
process validation through equipment validation and product testing. The requirements for stoppages should
then be included in the site SOP.
Line interventions associated with the filling system itself also may require the discard of product or product
containers. In an optimal line-design, the mechanical components of the system are installed outside the
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 179

--- PDF Page 194 ---
filling enclosure (e.g., isolator, RABS), so adjustments can be made in an area that is not proximate to the
open containers and would minimize the risk of introducing contamination to either empty or filled
containers. Some filling designs have clear advantages in enabling the mechanical equipment to be installed
outside of the enclosure, minimizing interventions within the enclosure. The PP tubing, for example, is a
closed system; therefore, PPs can easily be installed remotely from the filling needles. The minor downside
of any technology installed outside the barrier is that the tubing leading to each filling needle represents a
separate penetration to the enclosure. If a leak occurs or an adjustment is needed, an intervention within the
enclosure may still be required. Such an approach, however, is significantly less of a sterility-assurance risk
compared to a system where the majority of the mechanical components are inside the enclosure.
Advancements continue to be made in system design as the industry recognizes the SA advantage in
providing remote mechanical components (see Section 2.0).
Interventions that occur within the filling enclosure may require significant line clearance for components
and for filled, unsealed containers present in the zone where the intervention is to occur. With some systems,
an automated clearance mode is available that will stop the infeed to the filler and reject all containers
within the conveyor system in front of the filler. With legacy systems, where the rejection is entirely manual
care must be taken to perform the intervention using appropriate aseptic techniques, so as to not cause any
product spills and discarding each rejected container with a sterile tool. If there are filled, fully sealed
containers within the line-clearance zone, the decision to reject or retain those containers must be based on
appropriate risk assessment and documented following intervention SOPs at the site.
For oxygen-sensitive products, inert gas overlay (e.g., nitrogen) may need to be established to purge the air
from the headspace of the container. Units with excess oxygen in the headspace may need to be rejected at
the point of headspace-analysis of the containers or at the conclusion of filling. Any failure in the inert-gas
headspace controls during the filling operation (e.g., when the filler is shut down) will result in the rejection
of impacted units during the processing.
12.4 Discard Strategies Associated with Dose Control
The loss of dose control is another reason units may be rejected. In this case, the mechanism for weight
verification will influence the number of needed rejections. If 100% weight verification is employed, only
the affected containers will be discarded (see Section 2.0 and Section 5.0). If statistical weight control is
employed, units back to the last known correct weight check will need to be rejected. Filling technology
does not typically affect the discard strategy, although the type and degree of intervention required to correct
and recover the dose control will vary. Any intervention that results in the loss of prime will require not only
the affected containers during the intervention to be discarded, but also any containers associated with the
new priming activity.
With containers of narrow-diameter openings, targeting the delivery of the dose to make sure product is not
sprayed on the neck opening or down the barrel of a syringe or cartridge is important to ensure that
elastomers form effective seals with the container. Any evidence of improper dose-targeting during the
filling operation could also result in rejection.
180 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 195 ---
12.5 Discard Strategies Associated with Conclusion of Fill
At the end of the aseptic fill-unit operation, as bulk product volume decreases, fillers can encounter a loss of
fill accuracy. This may be due to:
• Low levels in the filling manifold/intermediate vessel
• Foam or air introduced while the final volume of product is pumped or pressurized through the filter
or transferred from the bulk vessel
• Loss of homogeneity due to loss of recirculation or mixing capability from low volumes, especially
for suspension products
Fillers may receive automated signals from the manifold or intermediate vessel to start and stop transfer
from the bulk vessel. When the alarm is triggered due to the lack of available bulk (e.g., low or low-low-
level alarm), the filler is directed to begin shut down or initiate line clearance or empty mode. For high-
value products, the shutdown may occur in stages. For example, individual filling paths will be shut down to
reduce the number of filling paths that remain active to complete the fill. Eventually arriving at the point
where all filling paths are shut down, and all partially filled containers are discarded.
The same technology used to permit refilling, to ensure every container is filled properly during priming,
can also be employed to ensure all aseptic end-of-fill unit-operation containers are appropriately filled (see
Section 2.0). The company must establish procedures to handle the end of fill consistently to ensure that
only good-quality containers are produced. These end-of-fill procedures must be included in the validation
of the process (see Section 13.0 for more information on the end of fill).
12.6 Discard Strategies Associated with Nested Components
Filling syringes that are nested in tubs can pose discard challenges when the dose-control performance fails
on an individual filling-needle position. Discarding the affected doses is the minimum action required. This
can be accomplished through one of two approaches: Discard individual syringes from a failing
pump/needle or discard the full tub. The discard of individual syringes can be significantly more
complicated as it will require some form of verification, either robotically (e.g., through reject
marking/tracking or through physical segregation) or by employing the four-eyes principle (i.e., independent
verification step) to ensure that all the affected syringes are discarded. (It should also be noted that some
filling technologies do not easily permit the deactivation of a single filling station; this is especially true in
nested configurations. Reset of the entire line may be more appropriate should a fault occur in a single
filling station for these systems.) Discard of the entire tub is a more conservative, and perhaps simpler,
approach from the standpoint of the quality system and the documentation that will be required.
Filling lines that permit the return of units for re-dosing or which employ re-stoppering, technology can be
employed to reduce the number of discards (see Section 5.0 and Section 7.3).
Table 12.6-1 provides some generalizations about the relative risk of different discard events based on the
type of filling technology employed.
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 181