
--- PDF Page 239 (doc p225) ---
21.1 Case 1: Small Volume Parenteral—Liquid in a Syringe
Specifications for Case 1 are detailed below:
• Product: monoclonal antibody
• Filling Volume: 0.5 mL
• Container / Closure System: prefilled syringe (PFS); 1 mL long
• Dosing System: to be determined
21.1.1 Case 1: Product Characteristics
Table 21.1.1-1 provides details on product characteristic considerations. Refer to Section 1.0 and Section 4.0 for additional information.
Table 21.1.1-1 Case 1: Product Characteristics
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Pharmaceutical Characteristics
Highly Potent No None; although containment for toxicity is not required, a decision has been
made to fill within an isolator to provide enhanced sterility assurance (SA)
Toxic No
Occupational Exposure Level (OEL) / No classification
Occupational Exposure Band (OEB)
level
Product Biological or Physicochemical Requirements
Temperature-sensitive No Filled under ambient conditions
Oxygen-sensitive Yes Inert gas introduction must be considered; bubble/air-gap size between
plunger and liquid is not critical, therefore vacuum stoppering is not necessary
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 225

--- PDF Page 240 (doc p226) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Light-sensitive Yes Isolator lighting has to have compatible spectrum
Metal-sensitive No None; no restrictions on product-contact materials of construction
Silicone-sensitive No None; no restrictions on polymers and tubing
Chemical-physical Properties
Viscosity Water-like, None; no restriction on filling technology based on viscosity
1-2 mPa-s
Liquid Product with Surface Tension No None; no significant concern for dripping, therefore no accommodation
Less than Water anticipated with the filling needle or filling technology selection; Cylindrical
needles acceptable
Solution or Suspension Solution No active agitation or recirculation required for filling machine or intermediate
vessel
Flammable or Explosive No None; NEMA/ATEX cabinetry not required for flammable; explosion-proof
operation
Shear-sensitive Yes To be verified for future products, different dosing systems could be utilized if
future products are not shear-sensitive
Foaming Tendency Yes Filling curve (e.g., start, stop, acceleration) to be carefully designed; level of
filling start, filling end, and careful needle movement must be incorporated to
prevent foam generation
226 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 241 (doc p227) ---
21.1.2 Case 1: Container–Closure Characteristics
Table 21.1.2-1 provides details on container-closure characteristic considerations. Refer to Section 1.0, Section 6.0 and Section 7.0 for additional
information.
Table 21.1.2-1 Case 1: Container–Closure Characteristics
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Pharmaceutical Primary–Packaging Characteristics
Syringe (syringe type, drawing, Syringe 1 mL long RNS, small round Details inform equipment designers of the needed filling
dimensions) flange, Supplier Name, Drawing #123 height and filling controls for the specific syringe design
Stopper (stopper type, drawing, Plunger 1 mL long, standard silicone, Details inform equipment designers of the requirement
dimension, and weight) Supplier Name, Drawing #456 for the sorting-system bowl and tracks
Tub (tub type, drawing, dimension) Tub Height 97 mm, Supplier Name, Details inform equipment designers of the details of the
Drawing #789 conveyance system
Nest (nest type, drawing, 160, 1 mL long, lengthwise, Supplier Details inform equipment designers of the number of fill
dimension) Name, Drawing #101 lanes, any X/Y movement needed for the fill heads and
the nest-handling
Tub Wrapping Details (bag, lid, and Polypropylene Bag, Tyvek Lid, Tyvek Details of the number of bags, bag folding, material types,
liner) Liner Supplier Name, Spec. Sheet: 567 and method of affixing lid (e.g., heat, glue) dictate details
of removal and disposal including, for example, needed
robotics, conveyance, and location of removal for outer
and inner bags and lids
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 227

--- PDF Page 242 (doc p228) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Assembly Drawing Supplier Name Drawing #112 Details inform equipment supplier of assembled
dimensional requirements and specific elements such as
whether position of the plunger is critical, whether an air
bubble is permissible
Components (stacked dimensional Supplier Name Drawing #134 Details inform equipment supplier of assembled
tolerances) dimensional requirements and the needed tolerance
flexibility for the handling of components and parts
Inherent-Component Container– To be confirmed by pharmaceutical firm None; ensures a container system can provide the
Closure Integrity (CCI) Development Report 12345 appropriate level of tightness for the intended application,
for instance, maintaining a modified headspace or
vacuum throughout the shelf life
Intended Capping Force or Residual N/A for syringe None
Seal Force
Multi-puncture Closure N/A for syringe None
Considerations
(also N/A for single-dose product)
(to limit risk of microbial ingress or
product leakage between doses)
Plunger Insertion Depth and Critical Bubble/air-gap size between plunger Shipping studies must support sterility at maximum
Bubble-size to Support and liquid level is not critical bubble/air-gap size
Maintenance of Sterility during
Shipment and Transportation
Headspace Maintenance for Inert- Yes Need to consider if 100% of containers must be analyzed
gas Overlay Product on-line for headspace
228 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 243 (doc p229) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Cold-storage Performance and Yes, product will be stored cold; product Ambient filling is acceptable
Maintenance of Integrity on Cold- is not temperature-sensitive during
Integrity of primary packaging under storage conditions
storage Conditions below the filling, but for shelf life, it is refrigerated
required at desired storage and shipping temperatures by
Material Properties (i.e., glass
the pharmaceutical manufacturer
transition temperature) for
Elastomers
21.1.3 Case 1: Specific Filling Requirements (e.g., headspace, deaeration)
Table 21.1.3-1 provides guidance on specific filling requirement considerations. Refer to Section 2.0 and Section 7.0 for additional information.
Table 21.1.3-1 Case 1: Specific Filling Requirements (e.g., headspace, deaeration)
Consideration Determination Design Implication
What inert gas will be used? Nitrogen Utility to be available; location to be determined based on subsequent answers
When will gas be applied?
Pre-gassing No Inert gas to be located at plunger-insertion station
Gassing during filling No
Post-fill gassing No
Gassing during closing Yes
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 229

--- PDF Page 244 (doc p230) ---
Consideration Determination Design Implication
Will vacuum be applied?
For removal of bubble at tip at the No Size of bubble at tip not critical for this application
initiation of filling
For deaeration purposes during No None; Although product has a foaming tendency, this can be adequately controlled
filling through fill curve (e.g., start, stop, acceleration) adjustments
For removal of air in headspace Yes Assists in air removal at the point of adding the inert gas
before inert-gas purge
How will Stopper-Setting be performed?
If gassing is performed, can vent Yes Gas bubble/air-gap size not critical, and plunger material is robust (i.e., no tendency to
tube be used for stopper- setting? wrinkle)
If no gassing is performed, can vent N/A Not applicable as gassing is required for this product
tube be used for stopper- setting?
Will vacuum stopper-setting be No No wrinkling tendency, therefore, vacuum short-vent tube is not required (Note that
performed with short vent tube? future use of plastic syringes with a silicone-free stopper may make this important to
consider)
Will a vacuum stopper-setting be No Stopper position is not so deep; further, there is not a large volume of gas to be
performed with a long vent tube? removed during stopper-setting (Note that future use of plastic syringes with a silicone-
free stopper may make this important to consider)
Will a vacuum bell be used? No Product is low viscosity, so a vacuum bell is not called for
230 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 245 (doc p231) ---
21.1.4 Case 1: Requirements for Multi-container/Multi-volume/Multi-product Filling
Table 21.1.4-1 provides guidance regarding multi-container/multi-volume/multi-product filling requirements. Refer to Section 1.0, Section 2.0 and
Section 5.0 for additional information.
Table 21.1.4-1 Case 1: Requirements for Multi-container/Multi-volume/Multi-product Filling
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Additional Containers, Closures, and Sizes to be Filled on the Same Line
1 – 3 mL Syringe, 3 mL Luer Lock, Tub and nest configuration should also be known to fully understand change-part needs (e.g.,
syringe round flange, Supplier Name, conveyance, tub height, which might affect lid and lid-liner removal, number of filling lanes
Drawing #123 needed).
1 mL-long Plunger, 1 mL-long, coated, No impact to current design if coating is compatible with closure sorting-system and insertion
plunger Supplier Name, Drawing #456 station (e.g., siliconized vs. non-siliconized) and if the number of ribs and dimensions on the
stopper are consistent with the current plunger (or have been subject to testing).
1 – 3 mL Plunger, 1–3 mL, coated, Evaluation of dimensional differences in parts on sorting-system change parts and insertion
plunger Supplier Name, Drawing # 789 station required.
Additional Fill Volume / Product Requirements Anticipated for the Containers and Closures
1 mL-long 0.2 mL fill monoclonal Fill volumes to be considered for selected filling technology, including whether change parts will
syringe antibody be required for the various volumetric differences. Product attributes should be assessed to
determine if any additional controls are required (e.g., viscosity, foam, shear-force-sensitivity,
oxygen-sensitivity, light-sensitivity, metal-sensitivity).
1 mL-long 1 mL fill peptide
syringe
1 – 3 mL 1 mL fill product uncertain
1 – 3 mL 3 mL fill NaCl
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 231

--- PDF Page 246 (doc p232) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Required Level of Flexibility for Future Products (Base Case: 1 mL-Long Nested Glass Syringes)
Container Nested, precapped cartridges Understanding whether future product presentations will also be nested or will include bulk-
Flexibility possible in future container-handling is important to the line footprint and design. When using only nested,
glassware washer and depyrogenation tunnels are not needed. Sensor filling may be required
for cartridges, which depending on the filler may require denesting (see Section 5.0). When
considering a change, like adding cartridges, this could result in the need for sensor-filling or the
application of vacuum for the removal of air bubbles at the tip and for vacuum-stoppering (see
Section 7.0).
Container Plastic syringes possible in Filling line should be provided with deionization capabilities for reducing static charge.
Material future Differences in tub height might influence lid and lid-liner removal station. Vacuum might be
Flexibility needed for setting the plunger in the plastic syringes, which might influence current system to
be vacuum-assisted vent-tube rather than vent-tube alone or, alternatively, might permit the
full change out of the stopper-setting system for the plastic syringes.
Alternative 2.25 mL and 5 mL syringes in Ensure that the format parts consider the range of sizes (diameters, lengths, tub and nest
Sizes future dimensions) to be filled and whether the format parts will be sourced with the initial purchase,
or only when needed.
Filling Identify need based on With some systems, it may be possible to add a different filling technology on the same
Technology intended range of filling machine-base if required for different products and/or different packaging configurations (e.g.,
Flexibility activities and product types rotary piston pumps with peristaltic pumps as the alternate filler when needed). While design
with alternate filling technologies can be more complex than a single system, the knowledge
that this will be a future requirement is a critical element to the initial filling line and isolator or
restricted access barrier system (RABS) design.
232 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 247 (doc p233) ---
21.1.5 Anticipated Batch Sizes and Operating Practices
Table 21.1.5-1 outlines typical batch parameters to consider. Refer to Section 1.0 and Section 5.0 for additional information.
Table 21.1.5-1 Case 1: Anticipated Batch Sizes and Operating Practices
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Batch Sizes
100-liter Batch Size 500,000 syringes at 0.2 mL fill volume 50,000 syringes per lane maximum each batch if using a 10-lane
100,000 syringes at 1.0 mL fill volume filler (the number of cycles is needed to assess potential wear-
33,300 syringes at 3.0 mL fill volume part effects on the filling pathway).
500-liter Batch Size 2.5 MM syringes at 0.2 mL fill 250,000 syringes per lane maximum each batch if using a 10-lane
500,000 syringes at 1.0 mL fill volume filler (the number of cycles is needed to assess potential wear-
166,700 syringes at 3.0 mL fill volume part effects on the filling pathway) .
Filler will need to be capable of long, stable run times; if using PP,
DP; tubing/diaphragm longevity may be an issue.
Campaign Criteria (and their influence on batch throughput)
Campaign Strategy Yes, 5 batch maximum per campaign When considering the maximum number of batches possible per
week, consider system longevity and ensure that it is clear
(i.e., will multiple batches be
whether the same primary packaging will be used for all 5
campaigned to reduce batches. Using different packaging may result in changeover
changeover time?) delays.
Length of Campaign 10 days At line speed and batch size, this represents 5 batches with
flexibility for normal downtime and change of fluid path between
batches.
Filling-path Management Replace filling-path (i.e., direct Filling-path must be fully disposable or be clean-in-place (CIP)/
product-contact parts) with each sterilize-in-place (SIP)-capable.
batch
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 233

--- PDF Page 248 (doc p234) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Container–closure Required to sterilize indirect product- Product utilizes the same container–closure and can be filled in
Management contact parts before each campaign the same campaign; between batches, no changeover is required.
Environmental Monitoring To be performed on each batch Adequate EM materials must be located inside the filling line at
within the campaign the start of the campaign or be able to be transferred within the
line between batches (e.g., rapid transfer chamber or rapid
transfer port (RTP) canister).
Interventions Aseptic Process Simulation (APS) Filling machine must be designed to limit interventions and
must be designed to include a should limit any interventions that would require line clearance;
representative (and possibly any intervention must be designed to utilize good aseptic
bracketed) number and type of technique.
interventions during the campaign
Holding Times Length of campaign must Consideration should be given to bulk hold times to ensure that
accommodate standard disruptions they support the campaign strategy with batches available on
demand but withstand possible delays incurred on changeover
between batches or normal process upsets.
Batch Failure Mode Recovery time after loss of batch to The filling system (and product supply tubing/lines) should be
be kept to a minimum designed both to minimize loss upon line repreparation, as well as
provide redundancy for backup product supply.
APS Strategy for Campaigns Must comply with all guidelines (e.g., Machine build must comply with the desired campaign strategy.
EU GMP Annex 1, FDA Aseptic
Processing)
234 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 249 (doc p235) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
100% IPC for Dose Weight No In nested fillers, 100% IPC drastically reduces the fill rate (100s
per hour rather than 100s per minute for non-100% IPC fills).
Therefore, a suitable frequency must be determined for the
statistical IPC. However, for expensive products, 100% IPC may
be more valuable at conserving product than the gains achieved
by higher-speed filling. (Note: If higher speed and 100% IPC are
both requirements, then the syringes must be de-nested and
again re-nested after filling and weight check are complete. This is
not a nest filler.)
Operating Criteria (and their influence on batch throughput)
Staffing Level 24/7 Verify whether maximum processing time per batch will be
accommodated in a single day and number of batches per week
(i.e., will the facility be
possible with changeover.
operated 16/5, 24/5, or 24/7
hours per day/days per week?)
Shutdown Allowances Two planned two-week shutdowns: Verify whether the selected technology maintenance and
Winter and Summer recalibration can be accommodated in the planned shutdowns.
(i.e., how many days per year
Also, consider the likely duration for technology transfer for new
will the line be operated, products, execution of APS, etc., relative to the number of
accounting for such factors as batches required to be filled each year on top of these
shutdowns, APS, testing, interruptions.
technical studies,
recapitalization, and changes?)
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 235

--- PDF Page 250 (doc p236) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Changeover Time 32 hours between campaigns 4 hours Use these values to determine annualized throughput on the line.
between batches within a campaign
(i.e., what amount of time is With the time between batches for a campaign, ensure that this
required between campaigns time accounts for emptying the bulk, clearing the line, closing the
batch documentation, addressing any needed changeover,
and between batches within a
changeover of the fluid pathway, filter-path integrity-testing,
campaign, measured from the
closeout of EM samples. All tasks should be accounted for and
last good container to the first
considered in this time, as this will influence the possible number
good container?)
of batches within the campaign period that is planned.
% Yield Expected 98% Yield 2–4% scrap is typical experience, inclusive of all rejection causes
(e.g., filter flush, filler priming, end of aseptic-fill unit operation,
(i.e., amount of scrap produced 2% Scrap
intervention clearance).
on average)
% Line Efficiency 85% Desired 75% minimum target; More than 80% is possible, but each
additional percentage-point requires significant effort to achieve.
(i.e., during filling operations,
This parameter is often less about the equipment design and
what is the operational “up more on the expertise of the operators on setup, as well as
time” for the line?) appropriate sensors and detection to improve the operational
efficiency without down-time. Interruptions during small batches
will have an outsized influence on this parameter.
% Facility Efficiency 70 – 80% Amount includes: needed maintenance, recalibration, shutdowns
for facility maintenance, and APS.
(i.e., what are the % available
hours in a year, during what %
is it expected that the line
operates within that range to
achieve the intended
production targets)
236 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 251 (doc p237) ---
21.1.6 Comparison of Requirements to Filling System Capabilities
Now that some of the preliminary design requirements for the product and its intended packaging have been defined, the requirements can be
compared to the filling-system capabilities and attributes as described in Section 2.0. Comparison of the filling system-capabilities to the product
needs, for this example, leads to the following evaluative matrix in Table 21.1.6-1. Refer to Section 2.0 and Section 4.0 for additional information.
Table 21.1.6-1 Case 1: Comparison of Product Requirements to Filling System Capabilities
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump (DP)
Pump (RPP)
Filling Range
0.2 mL future fill-volume
at lower end of capability
Viscosity Range
(low viscosity for this
product)
Product Compatibility
(proteins and peptides
(future)) not ideal for shear-
sensitive products
Diving Needle Capable
to Reduce Foaming
Dynamic Fill Curve
(e.g., start/stop,
less flexibility for dynamic-
acceleration) to fill curve due to pressure
Reduce Roaming control at vessel
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 237

--- PDF Page 252 (doc p238) ---
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump (DP)
Pump (RPP)
Range of Fill Volumes
may require different requires different generally, requires different
pump heads for wide pump-sets for orifices and fluid pathway to
ranges of fill but not a different fill-volumes maintain accuracy across
problem for stated the range
range
Drip Control
true suck-back not available;
rapid pinch-valve closure
may be sufficient for some
fluids
Vacuum to Reduce
Bubble at Tip
vacuum with PP vacuum with TP technology
(future for cartridges)
technology is not typical is not typical
Dosing Accuracy
Dosing Accuracy
Stability Across Run
statistical IPC required statistical IPC statistical IPC required statistical IPC required
recommended;
dosing accuracy very
stable
238 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 253 (doc p239) ---
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump (DP)
Pump (RPP)
Single-Use (SU) Fluid
Pathway
rare (but possible) due possible but may be
to pump expense expensive
Clean-In-Place
(CIP)/Sterilize-In-Place
(SIP) Execution rare (but possible); often
SU instead
Stability Over Long
Batches/Number of
Cycles hose-wear a detriment hose-wear at pinch-point diaphragm wear can be a
can be a minor minor consideration but
consideration; processor usually only after
required for varying head excessive operation
pressure
Campaign
Compatibility
hose wear must be filling equipment can single-point hose-wear diaphragm-wear must be
considered be replaced must be considered considered
Execution Outside
Isolator or RABS
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 239

--- PDF Page 254 (doc p240) ---
Product Requirements Peristaltic Pump (PP) Rotary Piston Time Pressure (TP) Diaphragm Pump (DP)
Pump (RPP)
Speed of Setup
Changeover
requires aseptic setup requires aseptic setup or requires aseptic setup,
or CIP/SIP CIP/SIP, but fluid path is CIP/SIP, or single-use
reduced compared to RPP (which is the fastest
changeover)
Nested Syringes
Nested Precrimped
Cartridges (future)
Sensor-Filling
Compatible (future)
sensor-filling not sensor-filling not sensor-filling not generally sensor-filling not
generally compatible generally compatible compatible with nest fillers generally compatible with
with nest fillers with nest fillers nest fillers
= available or acceptable
= not available or not acceptable
Based on the above chart for the Comparison of Needs to Filling System Capabilities, the product characteristics make PP, TP, and DP the leading
candidates as shear-sensitivity of the product may preclude RPP.
240 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 255 (doc p241) ---
PP, TP, and DP are well-matched. Decision-making may come down to whether smaller volume fills will be
required in the future (ruling out DP, which is at the lower end of its capability at around 0.2 mL), or
whether single-use (SU) technology (favoring PP and DP) or CIP/SIP are preferred (favoring TP and DP). If
the foaming with the product is severe and SU technology is the desire, then PP will be the strongest
contender, as long as the number of cycles between tubing changeout is managed to be within the
capabilities of the selected tubing and that this works with the intended batch sizes.
21.1.7 Other Design Elements for Consideration
There are a number of other design decisions that will impact the layout and operation of the filling line,
such as:
• Operator Interface with the line (Section 8.0)
• Supply of Components (Section 9.0 and Section 10.0)
• Product Filtration, including location of filters, required number of filter elements, integrity testing
pre- and post-filling (Section 11.0)
• Filling Environment and Utilities (Section 14.0 and Section 15.0)
Generally, these decisions should be made as part of the filling-line specification process as they may affect
costs and can influence placement of equipment; however, these are generally less of a direct impact on the
selection of the filling technology itself.
21.2 Case 2: Large Volume Parenteral—Liquid in a Bottle
Specifications for Case 2 are detailed below:
• Product: blood-plasma protein product
• Filling Volume: 250 mL
• Container / Closure System: Bottle 250 IL
• Dosing System: to be determined
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 241

--- PDF Page 256 (doc p242) ---
21.2.1 Case 2: Product Characteristics
Table 21.2.1-1 provides details on product characteristic considerations. Refer to Section 1.0, Section 3.0 and Section 4.0 for additional information.
Table 21.2.1-1 Case 2: Product Characteristics
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Pharmaceutical Characteristics
Highly potent No None; no firm decision has been made to fill in an isolator (preferred) or on a
conventional RABS filling line; therefore, both possibilities will be explored.
Toxic No
OEL / OEB Level No classification
Product Biological or Physicochemical Requirements
Temperature-sensitive No Filled under ambient conditions
Oxygen-sensitive Yes Inert gas introduction must be considered at stoppering
Light-sensitive No None; no restrictions on lighting
Metal-sensitive No None; no restrictions on product-contact materials of construction
Silicone-sensitive No None; no restrictions on polymers and tubing
Chemical-physical Properties
Viscosity 25 mPa-s None; no restriction on filling technology based on viscosity; not high enough to create
an issue with selected technologies
242 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 257 (doc p243) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Liquid Product with Surface No None; no concern for dripping, therefore, no accommodation anticipated with the filling
Tension Less than Water needle or filling technology selection; Cylindrical needles acceptable
Solution or Suspension Solution No active agitation or recirculation required for filling machine or intermediate vessel
Flammable or Explosive No None; NEMA/ATEX cabinetry not required for flammable; explosion-proof operation
Shear-Sensitive Yes To be verified for future products, different dosing systems could be utilized if future
products are not shear sensitive.
Foaming Tendency Yes Filling curve (e.g., start, stop, acceleration) to be carefully designed; level of filling start,
filling end, and careful needle movement must be incorporated to prevent foam
generation.
21.2.2 Case 2: Container–Closure Characteristics
Table 21.2.2-1 provides details on container-closure characteristic considerations. Refer to Section 1.0, Section 6.0 and Section 7.0 for additional
information.
Table 21.2.2-1 Case 2: Container–Closure Characteristics
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Pharmaceutical Primary Packaging Characteristics
Container (vial type, 250 IL, ISO 8536-1, D=68 mm, Details inform equipment designers of the needed filling height and filling
dimensions, drawing) H=125 mm, weight 170 g, controls for the specific syringe design.
Supplier Name, Drawing #123
Stopper (stopper type, 32 mm infusion stopper, (liquid Details inform equipment designers of the requirement for the sorting-
drawing, dimension, and stopper), Supplier Name, Drawing system bowl and tracks.
weight) #456
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 243

--- PDF Page 258 (doc p244) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Tub (tub type, drawing, N/A Will use traditional bulk line that will receive glass that is washed and
dimension) depyrogenated in-line.
Nest (nest type, drawing, N/A Will use traditional bulk line that will receive glass that is washed and
dimension) depyrogenated in-line.
Tub Wrapping Details N/A Will use traditional bulk line that will receive glass that is washed and
(bag, lid, and liner) depyrogenated in-line.
Assembly Drawing Not Required Not required if individual component drawings are provided for this
container–closure system.
Components (stacked Supplier Name Details inform equipment supplier of assembled dimensional requirements
dimensional tolerances) and the needed tolerance flexibility for the handling of components and
Drawing #789
parts.
Will also identify tolerances associated with roundness control.
Inherent-Component To be confirmed by None; Ensures a container system can provide the appropriate level of
Container– Closure pharmaceutical firm tightness for the intended application, for instance, maintaining a modified
Integrity (CCI) Development Report 12345 headspace throughout the shelf life. Important elements are correct
stopper and cap fit, including that cap cannot be rotated after crimping,
ensuring crimping results in no damage to neck of container.
Crimp Seal Specifications 32 mm Flip Seal Length of For crimp seal, may also determine placement and variability permitted in
aluminum skirt = 13 mm crimp-seal ink or laser jet labeling to ensure fit and legibility.
Supplier Name
Drawing #101
Intended Capping Force To be confirmed by After parameter-setting, on-line evaluation will be through visual inspection
or Residual Seal Force pharmaceutical firm and manual control. CCI test will be confirmed for each batch.
Development Report 121212
244 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

--- PDF Page 259 (doc p245) ---
Attribute Determination Design Implication
Multi-puncture Closures N/A SU product None
Considerations (to limit
risk of microbial ingress or
product leakage between
doses)
Plunger Insertion Depth N/A for vials/bottles None
and Critical Bubble-size to
Support Maintenance of
Sterility during Shipment
and Transportation
Headspace Maintenance Yes Need to consider if 100% of containers must be analyzed on-line for
for Inert-gas Overlay headspace
Product
Cold-storage Performance No None
and Maintenance of
Integrity (e.g., glass
transition temperature) on
Cold-storage Conditions
Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 245

--- PDF Page 260 (doc p246) ---
21.2.3 Case 2: Specific Filling Requirements (e.g., headspace, deaeration)
Table 21.2.3-1 provides guidance on specific filling requirement considerations. See Section 2.0 and Section 7.0 for additional information.
Table 21.2.3-1 Case 2: Specific Filling Requirements (e.g., headspace, deaeration)
Consideration Determination Design Implication
What inert gas will be used? Nitrogen Utility to be available; location to be determined based on subsequent answers.
When will gas be applied?
Pre-gassing No Inert gas to be located at stopper-insertion station; specification <4% O2 in
headspace.
Gassing During Filling No
Post-fill Gassing No
Gassing During Closing Yes
Will vacuum be applied?
For removal of bubble at tip at the N/A for vials/ None
initiation of filling bottles
For deaeration purposes during filling No None; although product has a foaming tendency this can be adequately controlled
through fill curve (e.g., start, stop, acceleration) adjustments.
For removal of air in headspace Yes Assists in air removal at the point of adding the inert gas.
before inert-gas purge
Will vacuum insertion or mechanical Mechanical Mechanical stopper-insertion is sufficient for the designated stopper and container;
insertion be used for stopper- development reports from line trials must demonstrate that there is limited risk of
setting? pop-off of the stoppers after insertion.
246 Manufacturing Technology Guide No. 1 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.