Introduction 
This document provides key "Points to Consider" for navigating the complexities of raw materials in the 
manufacturing of advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMP), aiming to guide stakeholders in 
establishing robust strategies for raw material management, promoting best practices, and supporting the 
safe and effective development and manufacturing of ATMPs. The unique nature of ATMPs presents 
distinct challenges compared to traditional pharmaceuticals, demanding a focused approach to material 
selection, qualification, and supplier management. 
Specifically addressed in this document are the intricacies arising from the fact that ATMP raw materials 
are often animal- or human-derived, not monographed, not manufactured for good manufacturing practice 
(GMP) applications (e.g., research-only grade), single-sourced and/or required to be used for aseptic 
manufacturing. 
Very often, ATMP material suppliers and vendors are small, specialized companies with roots in 
academia that do not have a mature GMP quality system. 
These characteristics contribute to a complex regulatory landscape, as regulations for ATMP materials are 
not globally harmonized. Variations in regulations exist among the U.S. Food and Drug Association 
(FDA), European Medicines Agency (EMA), Japan Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices Agency 
(PMDA), and the Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S), as well as individual country-
specific laws to which companies must adhere.  
Scope 
This document applies to all process-stream-contacting raw materials, including starting and ancillary 
materials, excipients, consumables, and container–closure systems for ATMPs both in clinical stage and 
commercial manufacture. This includes but is not limited to cell-free mRNA therapeutics, viral vector-
based in-vivo gene therapies, human cells for autologous or allogeneic cell therapies, or tissue-engineered 
medicinal products.  
 
 
 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Points to Consider No. 13 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
2 
Glossary 
 
Definitions have been provided to help clarify 
the concepts discussed in this document. While 
some definitions used vary among companies, 
geographic location, etc., the definitions 
described below are consistently used within this 
Points to Consider document. Where a definition 
is based on another published source, the source 
is cited. 
 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease 
A rare, fatal brain disorder belonging to a group 
of diseases called prion diseases. It is caused by 
an abnormal infectious protein, a prion, that 
accumulates in the brain, leading to rapid mental 
decline and neurological symptoms. 
Primary Animal-Derived Materials 
Any material derived directly from animal 
sources. 
Primary Human-Derived Materials 
Any material derived directly from human 
sources. 
Secondary Animal-Derived Materials 
Any material manufactured using processes that 
include materials derived from animal sources.  
Secondary Human-Derived Materials 
Any material manufactured using processes that 
include materials derived from human sources.  
 
 
 
 
 
Tertiary Animal-Derived Materials 
Any material free of animal-derived components 
that has been manufactured using secondary 
animal-derived materials. 
Tertiary Human-Derived Materials 
Any material free of human-derived components 
that has been manufactured using secondary 
human-derived materials. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
3 
 
Abbreviations 
 
 
AAV 
 
Adeno-associated Virus 
ATMP  
Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products 
BLA 
 
Biologics License Application 
CAR 
 
Chimeric Antigen Receptor 
CFR 
 
Code of Federal Regulations 
CJD 
 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease 
CoA 
 
Certificate of Analysis 
CoO 
 
Certificate of Origin 
gRNA  
guide RNA (ribonucleic acid) 
hESC  
human Embryonic Stem Cell 
IND 
 
Investigational New Drug 
iPSC 
 
induced Pluripotent Stem Cells 
JSBRM 
Japanese Standards for Biological Raw 
Materials 
PBMC  
Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells 
RUO 
 
Research Use Only 
TIL 
 
Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocyte 
TSE 
 
Transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies 
BSE 
 
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Points to Consider No. 13 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
4 
