Topic 5. Lifecycle Management Considerations for Commercial 
Manufacturing 
Ideally, lifecycle management of raw materials starts early in the development of an ATMP product. It 
evolves as the product moves through the early clinical phases, through commercialization, and continues 
throughout the lifecycle of the product as more data and understanding are gained.  
When an ATMP product is commercialized, the raw materials should be reviewed from the perspective of 
lifecycle management and potential new industry guidance. New information may be available that will 
change the risk-rating for raw materials and, therefore, testing and/or mitigation requirements. Topics to 
consider include: 
• 
Raw material that was single-sourced may now have additional suppliers that can be considered 
as a secondary or tertiary source. 
• 
Suppliers may now offer a raw material as GMP grade that was previously labeled for RUO. 
• 
Historical data will now be available on raw materials that may allow for updates to the incoming 
testing requirements and reassessment of testing specifications, including the widening of 
specifications. 
• 
Historical data will now be available for reassessment of a supplier’s qualification that may allow 
for reduced testing on the receipt of raw materials. 
Product regulatory filings are important to consider with any raw material reassessment, as it may require 
updates in multiple markets. The timing of these regulatory submissions should also be considered from 
the perspective of how it will impact the manufacturing and planning schedule and, by extension, patient 
supply.  
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
27 
 
 
Q 5.1. How do you manage the situation when the supplier does not provide GMP 
service for the material, for example, if only Research Use Only grade is available? 
The sponsor (i.e., cell-therapy drug manufacturer) can identify the risks on-site and figure out the pathway 
for enabling the material to be fit for purpose. The following case study will provide an example of 
quality risk management. 
Case Study: Example of Implementation of GMP Principles for ATMP Raw Materials 
This fictional case study is about raw materials used in genome-editing for induced pluripotent stem cells 
(iPSCs), which is an upstream cell-engineering process followed by single-cell cloning and, finally, 
differentiation to a CAR-T cell drug product. Health authorities give allowance for manufacturing 
materials, such as genome-editing materials, generation of iPSCs, and the subsequent selection of process 
cells, under the principles of GMP operation rather than full GMP compliance (5, 6, 15). In Japan, PMDA 
does not specify GMP or non-GMP adherence during the clinical phase, and the clinical-study sponsor 
owns the responsibility to secure the product quality for patients.  
This case study is an example of the implementation of “Principles of GMP” for gRNA and nuclease used 
in the genome-editing of iPSCs. In this context, principles of GMP refer to the application of specific 
GMP elements, such as robust documentation practices and contamination-control measures, even when a 
fully GMP-compliant environment is not available. 
Statement: Certified GMP facility and its established GMP-compliant quality management system is not 
available for a kind of custom-made small-volume production at the supplier. The only existing 
development laboratories can be used for manufacturing a product of appropriate quality for fit-for-
purpose. 
Approach: Instead of performing a normal GMP audit, strict sponsor’s Quality team oversight is required 
on gap identification and definition of control measures. After those measures are completed, the 
sponsor’s Quality confirms readiness on site prior to initiation of the contract manufacturing work. 
Agreed measures are spelled out in a Scope of Work (or ideally, a Quality Agreement) with the signatures 
of both parties.  
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Points to Consider No. 13 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
28 
Q 5.2. How to implement principles of GMP and enable IND filing? 
• 
Identify gaps on site and address them by measures for upgrade to principles of GMP. See 
contamination control strategy below as an example. 
• 
Provide detailed and complete production records with sufficient information for enabling an 
IND/BLA filing, which is traceable for all aspects of the manufacturing process and any 
incidents. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
29 
Points to Consider No. 13 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.  
Q 5.3. How to mitigate risks for cross-contamination and microbial contamination? 
• 
As a minimum requirement, use a non-ISO-grade certified facility (i.e., controlled research and 
development (R&D) laboratory) but dedicate its use for one product at a time. Replace all tubing 
of instruments with brand new tubing dedicated for the contract work. 
• 
Make the bulk product in the controlled R&D lab and transfer it into a qualified isolator for sterile 
filtration and fill–finishing. The adequacy of the aseptic operation and environmental control is 
confirmed through aseptic process simulation before actual production. 
Note: The supplier will not commit to producing “sterile” product; however, the sponsor is confident 
with the patient safety-based assurance on the material control, downstream manufacturing control, and 
overall quality control strategy of the final drug product. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Points to Consider No. 13 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
30 
Q 5.4. How to assure the quality of the product (i.e., gRNA, nuclease)? 
• 
Define the material specifications and perform quality control release-testing at a GMP-compliant 
laboratory. 
• 
Store the product in a GMP-controlled warehouse once it is manufactured. 
• 
Conduct a stability study to ensure the quality of the raw material during storage when no 
stability data is available from the supplier. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
31 
 
References 
1. European Commission. Guidelines on Good Manufacturing Practice Specific to Advanced 
Therapy Medicinal Products, EudraLex  – Volume 4 – Good Manufacturing Practice for 
Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2017. 
2. International Council for Harmonisation. Quality Guideline Q7: Good Manufacturing Practice 
Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients; ICH: Geneva, 2000. 
3. Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 83: Virus Contamination in 
Biomanufacturing: Risk Mitigation, Preparedness, and Response; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2019. 
4. Council of Europe. Raw Materials for the Production of Cell-Based and Gene Therapy Medicinal 
Products, Chapter 5.2.12. In European Pharmacopoeia, 5th Edition, Council of Europe: 
Strasbourg, 2016; p 627. 
5. European Medicines Agency. Questions and answers on the principles of GMP for the 
manufacturing of starting materials of biological origin used to transfer genetic material for the 
manufacturing of ATMPs; EMA: London, 2021. 
6. Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/Cooperation Scheme (PIC/S). Annex 2A: Manufacture of 
Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products for Human Use, GMP Guide to Good Manufacturing 
Practice for Medicinal Products; PIC/S: Geneva, 2021. 
7. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR 1271 Subpart C - Donor Eligibility; Government 
Publishing Office: Washington, D.C., 2004. 
8. Council of Europe. Methods of Preparation of Sterile Products, Chapter 5.1.1. In European 
Pharmacopoeia (Ph. Eur.), Council of Europe: Strasbourg, 2008; p 575. 
9. European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, EudraLex  – 
Volume 4 – EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human 
and Veterinary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2022. 
10. European Medicines Agency. Guideline on the Sterilisation of the Medicinal Product, Active 
Substance, Excipient and Primary Container; EMA: Amsterdam, 2019. 
11. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR 210.2 § 210.2 Applicability of Current Good 
Manufacturing Practice Regulations. Code of Federal Regulations. 
https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-21/chapter-I/subchapter-C/part-210/section-210.2 (accessed 7 
May 2025). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Points to Consider No. 13 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
32 
12. U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter <1046> Cellular and Tissue-Based Products. In 
USP 43–NF 38, USP: Rockville, Md., 2020. 
13. U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter <1047> Gene Therapy Products. In USP 43–
NF 38, USP: Rockville, Md., 2020. 
14. U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter <1043> Ancillary Materials for Cell, Gene, 
and Tissue-Engineered Products. In USP 34–NF 29, USP: Rockville, Md., 2011. 
15. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. OTAT Town Hall: Gene Therapy – Chemistry, 
Manufacturing, and Controls, Presented at FDA CBER OTAT Town Hall: Gene Therapy 
Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls, Online, 29 Sept 2022; U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services: 2022. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
33 
 
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.) 
 
An Authorized User of this electronic publication in the purchase. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:  
• 
Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• 
Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• 
Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• 
Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the 
individual use of an Authorized User 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following: 
• 
Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication 
• 
Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to 
anyone other than an Authorized User 
• 
Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, 
either available on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a 
license from PDA, Inc. 
• 
Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA 
Electronic Publication 
• 
Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• 
Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of 
the PDA Electronic Publication 
• 
Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA 
Electronic Publication or its content 
• 
Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk 
reproduction or distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial 
purpose 
• 
Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• 
Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
including any texts or graphics 
• 
Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any 
copyright information or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication 
• 
Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material 
To License or purchase Reprints 
• 
Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for 
a fee. 
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact: 
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West 
Highway, Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814. 
• 
Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee. 
To order reprints, please contact: 
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West 
Highway, Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
34 
 
Points to Consider No. 13: Materials in ATMP Manufacturing 
About PDA Points to Consider 
PDA Points to Consider are consensus documents which reflect current industry best practices and 
thinking regarding a particular topic. These documents are prepared by member-driven Teams (listed on 
inside front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the 
pharmaceutical/biopharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. The viewpoints and 
strategies presented in this document are those of the authors as independent subject matter experts and do 
not necessarily represent the policies and practices of their respective companies.  
The final working draft is reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board(s) that sanctioned the project. PDA’s 
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products Advisory Board, 
Biopharmaceutical Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality Advisory Board. Following this 
stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and determines whether or not to 
publish the document as an official PDA Points to Consider.  
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Points to Consider is of the highest quality, all readers are 
encouraged to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or 
mistakes that might be found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org.
Sanctioning Advisory Board: ATMP 
 
Chair 
Friedrich  von Wintzingerode 
Roche-Genentech 
Vice-Chair 
Monica Commerford 
Autolus 
Michael Blackton 
Ocugen 
Rebecca Brewer 
Quality Executive Partners 
Jose Caraballo 
Kite Pharma, a Gilead Company 
Francesco Cicirello 
BioNtech 
Richard Denk 
SKAN 
Lori Dingledine 
Roche-Genentech 
Irving Ford 
Adaptimmune 
 
 
 
Stephan Krause 
BMS 
 
Claudia Lee 
Velvet Therapeutics  
Ryan Murray 
ValSource, Inc. 
Takehiro Okumura 
Alloy Therapeutics 
Darius Pillsbury 
ValSource, Inc. 
Qiang Qin 
Novartis 
Michael Skidmore 
Consultant 
Marsha Steed 
MicroBio LLC 
Jackie Veivia-Panter 
Pharmaceutical Quality Consultant 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
35 
Points to Consider No. 13 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.  
 
Points to Consider No. 13: Materials in ATMP Manufacturing
 
PDA Officers 
Chair 
Anil Sawant, PhD 
Global Quality Compliance 
Chair-Elect 
Melissa Seymour 
BMS 
Secretary 
Bettine Boltres, PhD 
West Pharmaceutical Services 
Treasurer 
Emma Ramnarine, PhD 
Boehringer Ingelheim 
Immediate Past-Chair 
Sue Schniepp 
RCA 
President 
Glenn E. Wright 
PDA 
PDA Publication 
Production and Editing 
Christine Alston-Roberts  
Project Manager, ATMP AB 
Josh Eaton 
Senior Director, Scientific 
& Regulatory Affairs 
Walter Morris 
Senior Director, Publishing 
and Press Relations 
Marilyn Foster 
Technical Editor/Writer 
 
PDA Directors 
 
Marcia Baroni 
Emergent BioSolutions, Inc. 
Lisa Bennett 
LB Consulting Australia Pty Ltd. 
Cristiana Campa, PhD 
GSK 
Andrew Chang, PhD 
Novo Nordisk, Inc. 
Cylia Chen Ooi 
Amgen 
Marc Glogovsky 
ValSource, Inc. 
Andrew Hopkins 
Lachman Consultants 
Ivy Louis 
VIENNI Training & Consulting LLP 
Amy McDaniel, PhD 
BMS 
Morten Munk 
FUJIFILM Diosynth Biotechnologies 
Brigitte Reuter-Haerle 
Vetter Pharma International GmbH 
Osamu Shirokizawa 
Life Scientia, Ltd.  
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
 
 
 
pda.org 
 
PDA Global Headquarters 
4350 East West Highway, Suite 600 
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA 
TEL +1 (301) 656-5900 
FAX +1 (301) 986-0296 
PDA Europe 
Am Borsigturm 60 
13507 Berlin, Germany 
PDA Asia Pacific 
20 Bendemeer Rd. #04-02  B S 
Bendemeer Centre, Singapore 
339914 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
