=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-May-2024
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-A4CAAA8B-6F02-4AB8-8628-09E102CBD703_8_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99925_08_01
DOI Ref:
n7zrj
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈797〉 PHARMACEUTICAL COMPOUNDING—STERILE PREP
ARATIONS
1. INTRODUCTION AND SCOPE
This chapter describes the minimum standards to be followed for the preparation of compounded sterile preparations (CSPs) for
human and animal drugs. Sterile compounding is de«ned as combining, admixing, diluting, pooling, reconstituting, repackaging, or
otherwise altering a drug product or bulk drug substance to create a sterile preparation.
The requirements in this chapter must be followed to minimize harm, including death, to human and animal patients that could result
from 1) microbial contamination [nonsterility], 2) excessive bacterial endotoxins, 3) variability from the intended strength of correct
ingredients, 4) physical and chemical incompatibilities, 5) chemical and physical contaminants, and/or 6) use of ingredients of
inappropriate quality.
Aseptic techniques, processes, and procedures must be followed for preparing any sterile medication. Processes and procedures must
be in place to minimize the potential for contact with nonsterile surfaces, introduction of par ticulate matter or biological ¬uids, and mix-
ups with other products or CSPs.
The use of technologies, techniques, materials, and procedures other than those described in this chapter is not prohibited as long as
they are noninferior to those described herein and validated for the intended purpose (e.g., Validation of Alternative Microbiological
Methods 〈1223〉 and Validation of Compendial Procedures 〈1225〉).
Unless otherwise speci«ed in each section, the requirements of this chapter apply to compounding all categories of CSPs.
1.1 Scope
1.1.1 CSPs affected:
 The requirements in this chapter must be met to ensure the sterility of any CSP
. Although the list below is not
exhaustive, the following must be sterile:
Injections, including infusions
Irrigations for internal body cavities (i.e., any space that does not normally communicate with the environment outside of the body,
such as the bladder cavity or peritoneal cavity). [Note—Irrigations for the mouth, rectal cavity, and sinus cavity are not required to be
sterile.]
Ophthalmic dosage forms
Aqueous preparations for pulmonary inhalation. [Note—Nasal dosage forms intended for local application are not required to be
sterile.]
Baths and soaks for live organs and tissues
Implants
1.1.2 Speci«c practices
Allergenic extracts:
Licensed allergenic extracts are mixed and diluted to prepare prescription sets for administration to patients. A
prescription set is a vial or set of vials of premixed licensed allergenic extracts for subcutaneous immunotherapy that have been diluted
with an appropriate diluent for an individual patient. Because of cer tain characteristics of allergenic extracts and allergy practice,
preparation of allergenic extract prescription sets is not subject to all of the requirements in this chapter that are applicable to other
sterile CSPs. The standards for compounding allergenic extracts, which are described in 21. Compounding Allergenic Extracts, are
applicable only when
1. The compounding process involves transfer via sterile needles and syringes of conventionally manufactured sterile allergen
products and appropriate conventionally manufactured sterile added substances; and
2. Manipulations are limited to penetrating stoppers on vials with sterile needles and syringes and transferring sterile liquids in
sterile syringes to sterile vials.
Blood-derived and other biological materials:
When compounding activities require the manipulation of a patient’s blood-derived or other
biological material (e.g., autologous serum), the manipulations must be clearly separated from other compounding activities and
equipment used in CSP preparation activities, and they must be controlled by speci«c standard operating procedures (SOPs) to avoid
any cross-contamination. Handling of blood components and other biological materials must additionally comply with laws and
regulations of the applicable regulatory jurisdiction.
Hazardous drugs:
Handling of sterile hazardous drugs (HDs) must additionally comply with Hazardous Drugs—Handling in Healthcare
Settings 〈800〉.
Repackaging:
Repackaging of a sterile product or preparation from its original container into another container must be performed in
accordance with the requirements in this chapter.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 2 ===
Sterile radiopharmaceuticals:
Compounding of radiopharmaceuticals is not required to meet the standards of this chapter as they are
subject to the requirements in Radiopharmaceuticals—Preparation, Compounding, Dispensing, and Repackaging 〈825〉.
1.1.3 Personnel and settings affected:
This chapter describes the minimum requirements that apply to all persons who prepare CSPs and
all places where CSPs are prepared. This includes but is not limited to pharmacists, technicians, nurses, physicians, veterinarians, dentists,
naturopaths, and chiropractors in all places including but not limited to hospitals and other healthcare institutions, medical and surgical
patient treatment sites, infusion facilities, pharmacies, and physician or veterinarian practice sites. Any person entering a sterile
compounding area, whether preparing a CSP or not, must meet the requirements in 3. Personal Hygiene and Garbing.
The compounding facility must designate one or more individuals (i.e., the designated person(s)) to be responsible and accountable
for the performance and operation of the facility and personnel in the preparation of CSPs and for performing other functions as
described in this chapter.
1.2 Administration
For the purposes of this chapter, "administration" means the direct application of a sterile product or preparation to a single patient by
injecting, infusing, or otherwise providing a sterile product or preparation in its «nal form.
Administration of medication is out of the scope of this chapter. Standard precautions such as the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) safe injection practices apply to administration. See 〈800〉 for additional recommendations for the administration of
hazardous drugs.
1.3 Immediate-Use CSPs
When all of the following conditions are met, compounding of CSPs for direct and immediate administration is not subject to the
requirements for Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3 CSPs:
1. Aseptic techniques, processes, and procedures are followed, and written SOPs are in place to minimize the potential for contact
with nonsterile surfaces, introduction of par ticulate matter or biological ¬uids, and mix-ups with other conventionally
manufactured products or CSPs.
2. Personnel are trained and demonstrate competency in aseptic processes as they relate to assigned tasks and the facility's SOPs.
3. The preparation is performed in accordance with evidence-based information for physical and chemical compatibility of the drugs
(e.g., approved labeling, stability and compatibility studies).
4. The preparation involves not more than 3 different sterile products.
5. Any unused star ting component from a single-dose container must be discarded after preparation is complete. Single-dose
containers must not be used for more than one patient.
Ã. Administration begins within 4 h following the star t of preparation. If administration has not begun within 4 h following the star t of
preparation, it must be promptly, appropriately, and safely discarded.
7. Unless directly administered by the person who prepared it or administration is witnessed by the preparer, the CSP must be labeled
with the names and amounts of all active ingredients, the name or initials of the person who prepared the preparation, and the 4-h
time period within which administration must begin.
Handling of sterile hazardous drugs (HDs) must additionally comply with 〈800〉.
1.4 Preparation Per Approved Labeling
Compounding does not include mixing, reconstituting, or other such acts that are performed in accordance with directions contained in
approved labeling or supplemental materials provided by the product’s manufacturer.
Preparing a conventionally manufactured sterile product in accordance with the directions in the manufacturer’s approved labeling is
out of scope of this chapter only if
1. The product is prepared as a single dose for an individual patient; and
2. The approved labeling includes information for the diluent, the resultant strength, the container closure system, and storage time.
See 〈800〉 for additional recommendations for the preparation of hazardous drugs.
Proprietary bag and vial systems:
Docking and activation of proprietary bag and vial systems in accordance with the manufacturer’s
labeling for immediate administration to an individual patient is not considered compounding and may be performed outside of an
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Class 5 environment.
Docking of the proprietary bag and vial systems for future activation and administration is considered compounding and must be
performed in an ISO Class 5 environment in accordance with this chapter, with the exception of 14. Establishing Beyond-Use Dates.
Beyond-use dates (BUDs) for proprietary bag and vial systems must not be longer than those speci«ed in the manufacturer’s labeling.
1.5 CSP Categories
This chapter distinguishes three categories of CSPs: Category 1, Category 2, and Category 3, primarily based on the state of
environmental control under which they are compounded, the probability for microbial growth during the time they will be stored, and the
time period within which they must be used.
Category 1 CSPs are compounded under the least controlled environmental conditions and therefore are assigned a BUD of 12 h or
less at controlled room temperature or 24 h or less when refrigerated, if compounded in accordance with all of the applicable
requirements for Category 1 CSPs in this chapter.
Category 2 CSPs require more environmental controls and testing than Category 1 CSPs and may be assigned a BUD of greater than 12
h at controlled room temperature or more than 24 h if refrigerated, but not exceed the limits established in Table 13 (see 14. Establishing
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 3 ===
Beyond-Use Dates), if compounded in accordance with all of the applicable requirements for Category 2 CSPs in this chapter.
Category 3 CSPs undergo sterility testing, supplemented by endotoxin testing when applicable, and have more requirements than
Category 2 CSPs for personnel quali«cation, use of sterile garb, use of sporicidal disinfectants, frequency of environmental monitoring,
and stability determination. Category 3 CSPs may be assigned longer BUDs than those set for Category 2 CSPs but not exceeding the
limits in Table 14 (see 14. Establishing Beyond-Use Dates), if compounded in accordance with all applicable requirements for Category 3
CSPs in this chapter (see 14.4 Additional Requirements for Category 3 CSPs).
The requirements that are not speci«cally described as applicable to Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3, are applicable to the
compounding of all CSPs unless the CSP is otherwise described in 1.1 Scope.
Category 1, Category 2, and Category 3 CSPs can be compounded by using only sterile star ting ingredients, or by using some or all
nonsterile star ting ingredients. If all components used to compound are sterile from the star t, the sterility of the components must be
maintained during compounding to produce a CSP
.
If one or more of the star ting components being used to compound is not sterile, the sterility of the compounded preparation must be
achieved through a sterilization process (e.g., terminal sterilization in the «nal sealed container) or sterilizing «ltration, and then sterility
must be maintained if the CSP is subsequently manipulated. When compounding with nonsterile star ting components, supplies, or
equipment, the quality of the components, the effectiveness of the sterilization step, and bacterial endotoxin mitigation strategies are
critical to achieving a sterile preparation that is free from excessive bacterial endotoxins.
2. PERSONNEL TRAINING AND EVALUATION
All personnel who compound or have direct oversight of compounding personnel must be initially trained and quali«ed by
demonstrating knowledge and competency in compounding CSPs according to the requirements in this section before being allowed to
perform their job functions independently. Designated person(s) are responsible for creating and implementing a training program for
personnel and for ensuring that compounders, personnel who have direct oversight of compounders, and personnel who perform
restocking or cleaning and disinfection duties are initially trained and quali«ed by demonstrating knowledge and competency in
maintaining the quality of the sterile compounding environment before being allowed to perform their job functions independently.
Training and observation may be performed by the designated person(s) or an assigned trainer. Personnel who compound or have direct
oversight of compounding personnel must complete training initially and at least every 12 months in appropriate sterile compounding
principles and practices as described below (see 2.1 Demonstrating Knowledge and Competency of Core Skills). Personnel who only
perform restocking or cleaning and disinfecting duties outside of the primary engineering control (PEC) must complete ongoing training
as required by the facility's SOPs. Personnel compounding only immediate-use CSPs must complete training as required by the facility's
SOPs (see 1.3 Immediate-Use CSPs).
Each compounding facility must develop a written training program that describes the required training, the frequency of training, and
the process for evaluating the performance of individuals who compound, have direct oversight of compounding personnel, perform in-
process checks, «nal veri«cation, and dispensing of CSPs. This program must equip personnel with the appropriate knowledge and train
them in the required skills necessary to perform their assigned tasks, and SOPs should specify the training required for such tasks.
Training and evaluation of personnel must be documented (see 20. Documentation).
2.1 Demonstrating Knowledge and Competency of Core Skills
Before beginning to compound CSPs independently or have direct oversight of compounding personnel, personnel must complete
training and be able to demonstrate knowledge of principles and competency of skills for performing sterile manipulations and achieving
and maintaining appropriate environmental conditions as applicable to their assigned job functions. This must be completed initially and
at least every 12 months in at least the following:
Hand hygiene
Garbing
Cleaning and disinfection
Calculations, measuring, and mixing
Aseptic technique
Achieving and/or maintaining sterility (and apyrogenicity if compounding with nonsterile components)
Use of equipment
Documentation of the compounding process (e.g., master formulation and compounding records)
Principles of high-e­ciency par ticulate air (HEPA)-«ltered unidirectional air¬ow within the ISO Class 5 area
Proper use of PECs
Principles of movement of materials and personnel within the compounding area
If the facility has only one person in the compounding operation, that person must document that they have obtained training and
demonstrated competency, and they must comply with the other requirements of this chapter.
2.2 Demonstrating Competency in Garbing and Hand Hygiene
Before beginning to compound Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3 CSPs or have direct oversight of compounding personnel,
personnel must successfully complete an initial garbing competency evaluation no fewer than 3 separate times. The 3 successful
completions must be in succession—failure of any of the 3 initial garbing competency evaluations requires repeat testing until personnel
successfully complete 3 evaluations in a row. The garbing competency evaluation consists of a visual observation and gloved «nger tip
and thumb sampling (GFT) of both hands (see Box 1). Each of the 3 initial competency evaluations must occur after performing a
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 4 ===
separate and complete hand hygiene and full garbing procedure. All garbing competencies must be completed with gloved «nger tip and
thumb sampling after garbing (see Box 1) and a documented visual audit while performing hand hygiene and garbing procedures (see 3.
Personal Hygiene and Garbing). Gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling after garbing, but before applying sterile 70% IPA to gloves, must be
performed on donned sterile gloves on both hands in a classi«ed area or segregated compounding area (SCA).
Failure is indicated by visual observation of improper hand hygiene and garbing procedures and/or gloved «nger tip and thumb
sampling results that exceed the action levels in Table 1. Results of the evaluation and corrective actions, in the event of failure, must be
documented and the documentation maintained to provide a record and long-term assessment of personnel competency. Documentation
must at a minimum include the name of the person evaluated; evaluation date and time; media and components used including
manufacturer, expiration date, and lot number; star ting temperature for each interval of incubation; dates of incubation; results and
identi«cation of the observer and personnel reading and documenting the results. Microbial identi«cation of the colony-forming units
(cfu) is not required for gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling.
After the initial garbing competency evaluations, compounding personnel must successfully complete the garbing competency (see
Table 1) at least one time every 6 months for personnel compounding Category 1 and Category 2 CSPs, and at least one time every 3
months for personnel compounding Category 3 CSPs. Personnel who have direct oversight of compounding personnel, but do not
compound, must complete a garbing competency evaluation every 12 months. The evaluation should correspond to the type of garbing
activities of the personnel they oversee. Personnel who have direct oversight of compounding personnel must not compound unless they
successfully complete the garbing competency evaluation at the same intervals required for compounding personnel.
Box 1. Gloved Finger tip and Thumb Sampling Procedures
Use one sampling media device (e.g., plates, paddles, or slides) per hand, containing general microbial growth agar (e.g.,
trypticase soy agar [TSA]) supplemented with neutralizing additives (e.g., lecithin and polysorbate 80) as this agar suppor ts
both bacterial and fungal growth.
Label each media device with a personnel identi«er, right or left hand, and the date and time of sampling.
Do not apply sterile 70% isopropyl alcohol (IPA) to gloves immediately before touching the media device because this could
cause a false-negative result. Using a separate media device for each hand, collect samples from all gloved «nger tips and
thumbs from both hands by rolling «nger tip pads and thumb pad over the agar surface.
Incubate the media device at 30°–35° for no less than 48 h and then at 20°–25° for no less than 5 additional days. Samples
must be incubated in an incubator. Handle and store media devices to avoid contamination and prevent condensate from
dropping onto the agar during incubation and affecting the accuracy of the cfu reading (e.g., inver t plates).
Record the number of cfu per hand (left hand, right hand).
Determine whether the cfu action level is exceeded by counting the total number of cfu from both hands.
2.3 Competency Testing in Aseptic Manipulation
Before beginning to compound Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3 CSPs independently or have direct oversight of compounding
personnel, personnel must successfully complete an aseptic manipulation competency evaluation. The aseptic manipulation competency
evaluation consists of a visual observation, media-«ll testing, followed by a gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling on both hands, and
surface sampling of the direct compounding area to assess aseptic technique and related practices (see Box 2).
For personnel compounding Category 1 and Category 2 CSPs, the aseptic manipulation competency must occur initially and at least
every 6 months thereafter. For personnel compounding Category 3 CSPs, the aseptic manipulation competency must occur initially and at
least every 3 months thereafter. Personnel who have direct oversight of compounding personnel must complete an aseptic manipulation
competency evaluation annually. The evaluation should correspond to the type of activities of the personnel they oversee but does not
require the same quantities. Personnel who have direct oversight of compounding personnel must not compound unless they
successfully complete the aseptic manipulation competency evaluation that simulates the most di­cult and challenging aseptic
compounding procedures encountered by the person at the same intervals required for compounding personnel.
When performing a media-«ll test, simulate the most di­cult and challenging aseptic compounding procedures encountered by the
person replacing all the components used in the CSPs with soybean–casein digest media. The simulation must capture elements that
could potentially affect the sterility of the CSP including but not limited to:
Factors associated with the length of the process that can pose contamination risk (e.g., operator fatigue, quality of equipment)
Number of aseptic additions or transfers
Number, type, and complexity of manipulations
Number of personnel in the buffer room or SCA
If using commercial sterile microbial growth media, a cer ti«cate of analysis (COA) must be obtained from the supplier stating that the
lot of the growth media will suppor t the growth of microorganisms. Store microbial growth media in accordance with manufacturer
instructions and initiate the media-«ll test by the expiration date of the media. If preparing sterile microbial growth media in-house for
sterile-to-sterile media-«ll testing, the growth promotion capability of the media must be demonstrated for each batch and documented
as described in Sterility Tests 〈71〉, Culture Media and Incubation Temperatures, Growth Promotion Test of Aerobes, Anaerobes, and Fungi.
Failure is indicated by visible turbidity or other visual manifestations of growth in the media in one or more container closure unit(s) on
or before the end of the incubation period. Microbial identi«cation of the cfu is not required for media-«ll testing.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 5 ===
Gloved Finger tip and Thumb Sampling
Action Levels
(cfu, total from both hands)
After garbing
>0
After media-«ll testing
>3
Immediately following the media-«ll test, gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling must be performed on both hands and inside of an ISO
Class 5 PEC. If conducting gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling in a compounding aseptic isolator (CAI), compounding aseptic
containment isolator (CACI), or a pharmaceutical isolator, samples must be taken from the sterile gloves placed over the gloves attached
to the restricted-access barrier system (RABS) or pharmaceutical isolator sleeves.
Successful completion of the gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling after media-«ll testing is de«ned as ≤3 cfu as a total from both
hands. See Table 1 for action levels for gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling results. Microbial identi«cation of the cfu is not required for
gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling.
Surface sampling of the direct compounding area must occur in accordance with the requirements in 6.3 Monitoring Surfaces for Viable
Par ticles. A failure in the media «ll, gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling, or surface sample constitutes an overall failure of the aseptic
manipulation competency.
Results of the evaluation and corrective actions must be documented and the documentation maintained to provide a record and long-
term assessment of personnel competency. Documentation must at a minimum include 1) the name of the person evaluated, 2)
evaluation date and time, 3) media and components used including their manufacturer or supplier, 4) expiration dates and lot numbers, 5)
star ting temperature for each interval of incubation, 6) dates of incubation, 7) the results, and 8) the names or other identi«cation of the
observer and the person who reads and documents the results.
Box 2. Media-Fill Testing Procedures
If all of the star ting components are sterile to begin with, manipulate them in a manner that simulates sterile-to-sterile
compounding activities, and transfer the sterile soybean–casein digest media into the same types of container closure systems
commonly used at the facility. Do not fur ther dilute the media unless speci«ed by the manufacturer.
If some of the star ting components are nonsterile to begin with, dissolve a commercially available nonsterile soybean–casein
digest powder in nonbacteriostatic water to make a 3% nonsterile solution. Manipulate it in a manner that simulates nonsterile-
to-sterile compounding activities. Prepare at least 1 container as the positive control to demonstrate growth promotion, which
is indicated by visible turbidity upon incubation.
Once the compounding simulation is completed and the «nal containers are «lled with the test media, perform a gloved
«nger tip and thumb sample on each hand and surface sample of the direct compounding area inside the PEC. Take the
samples prior to disinfecting gloves and PEC. Handle and store samples to avoid contamination and prevent condensate from
dropping onto the agar during incubation and affecting the accuracy of the cfu reading (e.g., inver t containers).
Incubate the «nal containers at 20°–25° and 30°–35° for a minimum of 7 days at each temperature band to detect a broad
spectrum of microorganisms. The order of the incubation temperatures must be described in the facility’s SOPs. Final
containers must be incubated in an incubator.
Failure is indicated by visible turbidity or other visual manifestations of growth in the media in one or more container closure
unit(s) on or before 14 days.
T
able 1. Action Levels for Gloved Finger tip and Thumb Sampling
a
a
Action levels are based on the total cfu count from both hands.
T
able 2. Initial Training and Competency
Personnel Function
De«ned by Facility
SOPs
Required in 〈797〉 and Supplemented by Facility SOPs
Training and
Competency in
Maintaining the
Quality of the Sterile
Compounding
Environment
Training and
Competency in
Sterile
Compounding
Principles and
Practices
Garbing
Competency
(Including GFT)
Media Fill with
Post-GFT and
Surface Sampling
Compounder
X
X
X
X
Designated person
and personnel with
X
X
X
X
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 6 ===
Personnel Function
De«ned by Facility
SOPs
Required in 〈797〉 and Supplemented by Facility SOPs
Training and
Competency in
Maintaining the
Quality of the Sterile
Compounding
Environment
Training and
Competency in
Sterile
Compounding
Principles and
Practices
Garbing
Competency
(Including GFT)
Media Fill with
Post-GFT and
Surface Sampling
direct oversight of
compounding
personnel
Personnel who
restock or clean
and disinfect the
sterile
compounding
area
a
X
Personnel who
perform in-process
checks or «nal
veri«cation of
CSPs
a
X
Personnel who only
compound
immediate-use
CSPs
X
Others (e.g.,
maintenance
personnel,
cer ti«ers,
contractors,
inspectors,
surveyors)
a
X
a
Personnel who do not compound nor have direct oversight of compounding personnel.
T
able 3. Ongoing Training and Competency
Personnel Function
De«ned by Facility SOPs
Required 〈797〉 and Supplemented by Facility SOPs
Training and Competency
in Sterile Compounding
Principles and Practices
Garbing Competency
(Including GFT)
Media Fill with Post-GFT
and Surface Sampling
Compounder
At least every 12
months
Category 1 and 2 at
least every 6 months
Category 3 at least
every 3 months
Category 1 and 2 at
least every 6 months
Category 3 at least
every 3 months
Designated person and
personnel with direct
oversight of
compounding personnel
At least every 12
months unless
compounding
a
At least every 12
months unless
compounding
a
At least every 12
months unless
compounding
a
Personnel who restock
or clean and disinfect
X
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 7 ===
Personnel Function
De«ned by Facility SOPs
Required 〈797〉 and Supplemented by Facility SOPs
Training and Competency
in Sterile Compounding
Principles and Practices
Garbing Competency
(Including GFT)
Media Fill with Post-GFT
and Surface Sampling
the sterile compounding
area
b
Personnel who perform
in-process checks or
«nal veri«cation of
CSPs
b
X
Personnel who only
compound immediate-
use CSPs
X
Others (e.g.,
maintenance personnel,
cer ti«ers, contractors,
inspectors, surveyors)
b
X
a
If compounding, follow compounder requirements.
b
Personnel who do not compound or have direct oversight of compounding personnel.
3. PERSONAL HYGIENE AND GARBING
Personal hygiene and garbing are essential to maintain microbial control of the environment. Most microorganisms detected in
cleanrooms are transferred from individuals. Squamous cells are normally shed from the human body at a rate of 10
6
 or more per hour,
and those skin par ticles are covered with microorganisms. Individuals entering a compounding area must be properly garbed and must
maintain proper personal hygiene to minimize the risk of contamination to the environment and/or CSPs.
Individuals that may have a higher risk of contaminating the CSP and the environment (e.g., personnel with rashes, recent tattoos,
oozing sores, conjunctivitis, or active respiratory infections) must repor t these conditions to the designated person(s). The designated
person(s) is responsible for evaluating whether these individuals should be excluded from working in compounding areas before their
conditions have resolved because of the risk of contaminating the CSPs and the environment.
3.1 Personnel Preparation
All personnel entering a compounding area where Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3 CSPs are prepared must take appropriate
steps to minimize microbial contamination of the environment and of the CSPs, including hand hygiene (see 3.2 Hand Hygiene), garbing
(see 3.3 Garbing Requirements), and consideration of needed materials to be brought into the compounding area.
Food (including mints, gum, etc.) and drinks must not enter anterooms, buffer rooms, or segregated compounding areas.
Before entering a compounding area, individuals must remove any items that are not easily cleanable or are not necessary for
compounding. At a minimum, individuals must:
Remove personal outer garments (e.g., bandanas, coats, hats, jackets, sweaters, vests)
Remove all cosmetics because they shed ¬akes and par ticles
Remove all hand, wrist, and other exposed jewelry, including piercings that could interfere with the effectiveness of garbing (e.g.,
the «t of gloves, cuffs of sleeves, and eye protection) or otherwise increase the risk of contamination of the CSP
. Cover any jewelry
that cannot be removed.
Not wear earbuds or headphones
Not bring electronic devices that are not necessary for compounding or other required tasks into the compounding area
Keep nails clean and neatly trimmed to minimize par ticle shedding and avoid glove punctures. Nail products (e.g., polish, ar ti«cial
nails, and extenders) must not be worn
Wipe eyeglasses, if worn
The designated person(s) may permit accommodations to personnel preparation as long as the quality of the CSP and environment will
not be affected. Accommodations must be documented.
3.2 Hand Hygiene
Any person entering a compounding area where Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3 CSPs are prepared must wash hands and
forearms up to the elbows with soap and water before initiating compounding activities. Brushes must not be used for hand hygiene.
Hand dryers must not be used. To minimize the risk of extrinsic contamination, disposable soap containers must not be re«lled or topped
off.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 8 ===
Box 3. Hand Washing Procedures
Clean underneath «ngernails under warm running water using a disposable nail cleaner.
Wash hands and forearms up to the elbows with soap and water for at least 30 s.
Dry hands and forearms up to the elbows completely with low-lint disposable towels or wipers.
The order of hand washing and garbing depends on the placement of the sink (see 4.4 Water Sources). The order of garbing must be
determined by the facility and documented in the facility’s SOPs. Hands must be sanitized with alcohol-based hand rub before donning
sterile gloves (see Box 4). Sterile gloves must be donned in a classi«ed room or SCA.
Box 4. Hand Sanitizing Procedures
Apply an alcohol-based hand rub to dry skin.
Apply product to one hand and rub hands together, covering all surfaces of hands and «ngers, until hands are dry.
Allow hands to dry thoroughly before donning sterile gloves.
3.3 Garbing Requirements
Any person entering a compounding area where Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3 CSPs are prepared must be properly garbed.
Garb must be donned and doffed in an order that reduces the risk of contamination. The required garb, manner of storage, and order of
garbing must be determined by the facility and documented in the facility’s SOPs. When preparing Category 2 or Category 3 CSPs, all garb
should be donned in a classi«ed area before entering the buffer room. If hand hygiene is completed outside of a classi«ed area, alcohol-
based hand rub must be used prior to donning garb. Skin must not be exposed inside the ISO Class 5 PEC (e.g., gloves must not be
donned or doffed inside the ISO Class 5 PEC exposing bare hands). Donning and do­ng garb should not occur in the same area at the
same time. The minimum garbing requirements for preparing Category 1 and Category 2 CSPs include the following:
Low-lint garment with sleeves that «t snugly around the wrists and an enclosed neck (e.g., gown or coverall)
Low-lint covers for shoes
Low-lint cover for head that covers the hair and ears, and if applicable, cover for facial hair
Low-lint face mask
Sterile powder-free gloves
If using a RABS (i.e., a CAI or CACI), disposable gloves should be worn inside the gloves attached to the RABS sleeves. Sterile
gloves must be worn over the gloves attached to the RABS sleeve
Garb must be replaced immediately if it becomes visibly soiled or if its integrity is compromised. Gowns and other garb must be stored
in a manner that minimizes contamination (e.g., away from sinks to avoid splashing). If compounding Category 1 and Category 2 CSPs,
gowns may be reused within the same shift by the same person if the gown is maintained in a classi«ed area or adjacent to, or within, the
SCA in a manner that prevents contamination. When personnel exit the compounding area, garb, except for gowns, cannot be reused and
must be discarded or laundered before reuse. The facility's SOPs must describe disinfection procedures for reusing goggles, respirators,
and other reusable equipment.
If the facility compounds Category 3 CSPs, additional garbing requirements must be continuously met in the buffer room in which
Category 3 CSPs are prepared. The following additional garbing requirements must be followed in the buffer room where Category 3
CSPs are prepared for all personnel regardless of whether Category 3 CSPs are compounded on a given day:
1. Do not allow any exposed skin in the buffer room (i.e., face and neck must be covered).
2. All low-lint outer garb must be sterile, including the use of sterile sleeves over gauntlet sleeves when a RABS is used.
3. Disposable garbing items must not be reused, and laundered garb must not be reused without being laundered and resterilized with a
validated cycle.
4. The facility’s SOPs must describe disinfection procedures for reusing goggles, respirators, and other reusable equipment.
If compounding an HD, appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) must be worn and disposed of in accordance with 〈800〉.
Gloves:
Gloves must be sterile and powder free. Application of sterile 70% IPA to gloves must occur immediately before compounding and
regularly throughout the compounding process.
All gloves must be inspected for holes, punctures, or tears and must be replaced immediately if such defects are detected.
The RABS sleeves and gloves and the pharmaceutical isolator sleeves and gloves should be changed per the manufacturer’s
recommendations and as de«ned in the facility’s SOPs.
4. F
ACILITIES AND ENGINEERING CONTROLS
Sterile compounding facilities must be designed, out«tted, and maintained properly to minimize the risk of contamination of CSPs. The
required air quality must be achieved and maintained through PECs and secondary engineering controls (SECs). The anteroom, buffer
room, and SCA must be separated from areas not directly related to compounding. The anteroom and buffer room must be appropriately
controlled to achieve and maintain the required air quality classi«cations. The design of the facility should take into account the number
of personnel and their movements, and the impact the placement of equipment, supplies, and components could have on the
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 9 ===
ISO Class
Par ticle Count per Cubic Meter
b
3
35.2
4
352
5
3520
6
35,200
7
352,000
8
3,520,000
maintenance of air quality. The number of operations being performed, the equipment (e.g., PECs, car ts, computers), the personnel in the
compounding area (and in adjacent areas), and the complexity of the compounding procedures are critical considerations for maintaining
control of environmental conditions in the facility.
4.1 Protection from Airborne Contaminants
Sterile compounding facilities must be designed to minimize the risk of airborne contamination of the area in which sterile
compounding occurs. Proper design and controls are required to minimize the risk of exposure of CSPs to airborne contaminants.
4.1.1 Air quality standards:
The ISO standards for air quality in controlled environments are provided in Table 4 and referenced throughout
this chapter.
T
able 4. ISO Classi«cation of Par ticulate Matter in Room Air
a
a
Adapted from ISO 14644-1, Cleanrooms and associated controlled environments—Par t 1: Classi«cation of air cleanliness by par ticle
concentration.
b
Limits for number of par ticles ≥0.5 µm measured under dynamic operating conditions.
4.1.2 Design requirements to maintain air quality:
Facilities used for compounding CSPs must be designed so that air quality improves
with movement through separate operational areas to the PEC. Classi«ed areas in which the air quality is controlled (see Table 4) include
anterooms, buffer rooms, and PECs.
Anterooms providing access only to positive-pressure buffer rooms must meet at least ISO Class 8 classi«cation. Anterooms
providing access to negative-pressure buffer rooms must meet at least ISO Class 7 classi«cation (see 〈800〉). Typically, personnel
hand hygiene and garbing procedures, staging of components, and other activities that potentially generate higher levels of
par ticulates are performed in the anteroom. Anterooms are also transition areas to ensure that proper air classi«cation and
pressure relationships are maintained between classi«ed and unclassi«ed areas.
A buffer room must meet at least ISO Class 7 air quality. Activities in the buffer room must be controlled to minimize any effects on
air quality in the area where CSPs are prepared.
Category 1, Category 2, and Category 3 CSPs must be compounded in an ISO Class 5 or better PEC. If compounding only Category 1
CSPs, the PEC may be placed in an unclassi«ed SCA.
4.2 Facility Design and Environmental Controls
In addition to minimizing airborne contamination, sterile compounding facilities must be designed and controlled to provide a well-
lighted and comfor table working environment (see Physical Environments That Promote Safe Medication Use 〈1066〉). The cleanroom suite
should be maintained at a temperature of 20° or cooler and a relative humidity of 60% or below to minimize the risk of microbial
proliferation and to provide comfor table conditions for compounding personnel attired in the required garb. The temperature and humidity
must be monitored in each room of the cleanroom suite each day that compounding is performed, either manually or by a continuous
recording device. The results of the temperature and humidity readings must be documented at least once daily or stored in the
continuous recording device and must be retrievable. The temperature and humidity readings must be reviewed as described in the
facility’s SOPs. Temperature and humidity in the cleanroom suite must be controlled through a heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) system. Free-standing air conditioners, humidi«ers, and dehumidi«ers must not be used within the classi«ed area or the SCA.
Temperature and humidity monitoring devices must be veri«ed for accuracy at least every 12 months or as required by the manufacturer.
The designated person(s) is responsible for ensuring that each area related to CSP preparation meets the classi«ed air quality standard
appropriate for the activities to be conducted in that area. The designated person(s) must also ensure that the ISO Class 5 areas are
located, operated, maintained, monitored, and cer ti«ed to have appropriate air quality.
4.2.1 Types of SECs and design:
 The PEC must be located in the buffer room of the cleanroom suite or the SCA in a manner that
minimizes conditions that could increase the risk of microbial contamination. For example, strong air currents from opened doors,
personnel tra­c, or air streams from the HVAC system(s) can disrupt the unidirectional air¬ow of an open-faced PEC such as a laminar
air¬ow workbench (LAFW). Access to the SEC must be restricted to authorized personnel and required materials.
Cleanroom suite:
The ISO-classi«ed anteroom and buffer room must be separated from the surrounding unclassi«ed areas of the facility
by «xed walls and doors, and controls must be in place to minimize the ¬ow of lower-quality air into the more controlled areas. The
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 10 ===
classi«ed rooms must be equipped with a pressure-differential monitoring system. Air supplied to the cleanroom suite must be
introduced through HEPA «lters that are located in the ceiling of the buffer room and anteroom.
Air returns in the cleanroom suite must be low on the wall unless a visual smoke study demonstrates an absence of stagnant
air¬ow. This smoke study along with environmental monitoring must be repeated whenever a change is made to the placement of
equipment within the room or any other alteration is performed within the cleanroom suite that affects the quality of the air (e.g.,
HVAC alterations, change of HEPA «lter units).
The anteroom must have a line of demarcation to separate the clean side from the dir ty side. The anteroom is entered through the
dir ty side, and the clean side is the area closest to the buffer room. Alternatively, facilities may be designed with two separate
anterooms—a dir ty anteroom and a clean anteroom. The anteroom is entered through the dir ty anteroom, and the clean anteroom is
the area closest to the buffer room.
It is also critical to control materials (e.g., supplies and equipment) as they move from classi«ed areas of lower quality to those of
higher quality (e.g., from an ISO Class 8 anteroom to an ISO Class 7 buffer room to an ISO Class 5 PEC) to minimize the in¬ux of
contaminants. Airlocks and interlocking doors may be used to facilitate better control of air balance between areas of differing ISO
classi«cation (e.g., between the buffer room and anteroom) or between a classi«ed area and an unclassi«ed area (e.g., between the
anteroom and a hallway). If a pass-through chamber is used, both doors must never be opened at the same time, and doors should be
interlocking.
Due to the interdependence of the various rooms or areas that make up a sterile compounding facility, it is essential to carefully
de«ne and control the dynamic interactions permitted between areas and rooms. Consider the placement of door closures, door
surfaces, and the movement of the doors, all of which can affect air¬ow. Seals and sweeps should not be installed at doors between
buffer rooms and anterooms. Access doors should be hands-free. Tacky mats must not be placed within ISO-classi«ed areas. If
compounding both sterile and nonsterile preparations (e.g., presterilization procedures), the respective PECs must be placed in
separate rooms unless those PECs are su­ciently effective that the room can continuously maintain ISO Class 7 classi«cation. If the
PECs used for sterile and nonsterile compounding are placed in the same room, they must be placed at least 1 m apar t, and par ticle-
generating activity must not be performed when sterile compounding is in process.
Segregated compounding area (SCA):
A PEC may be located within an unclassi«ed area without an anteroom or buffer room. This type of
design is called an SCA. Only Category 1 CSPs may be compounded in an SCA. The SCA must be located away from unsealed windows,
doors that connect to the outdoors, and tra­c ¬ow, all of which may adversely affect the air quality in the PEC. An SCA must not be
located where environmental control challenges (e.g., restrooms, warehouses, or food preparation areas) could negatively affect the air
quality of the PEC within the SCA. The impact of activities (e.g., patient care activities) that will be conducted around or adjacent to the
SCA must be considered carefully when designing such an area. The area within 1 m of the PEC should be dedicated only for sterile
compounding (e.g., not storage, hand hygiene, donning and do­ng garb, or other highly par ticle-generating activities such as patient
care).
4.2.2 The CSP compounding environment:
The PEC must be cer ti«ed to meet ISO Class 5 or better conditions (see Table 4) during dynamic
operating conditions and must be designed to minimize the risk of contamination during compounding of CSPs.
Unidirectional air¬ow must be maintained in the PEC. HEPA-«ltered air must be supplied by the PEC at a velocity su­cient to sweep
par ticles away from critical sites and maintain unidirectional air¬ow during operations. Proper design, control, and use minimizes
turbulence and creation of eddies or stagnant air in the PEC.
4.2.3 Types of PECs and placement:
Proper placement of the PEC is critical to ensuring an ISO Class 5 environment for preparing CSPs.
Placement of the PEC must allow for cleaning around the PEC. See Table 5 for a summary of minimum requirements for the placement of
PECs for preparing non-HD CSPs.
Types of PECs and their placement include the following:
Laminar air¬ow system (LAFS):
An LAFS provides an ISO Class 5 or better environment for sterile compounding. The LAFS provides
unidirectional HEPA-«ltered air¬ow that is designed to minimize the risk of contamination of a sterile compounding environment. The
unidirectional air¬ow within the LAFS helps protect the direct compounding area (DCA) from process-generated contamination (e.g.,
opening wrappings of sterile containers, compounder movement) as well as from outside sources.
Types of LAFS and their placement include the following:
Laminar air¬ow workbench (LAFW):
An LAFW is a device that provides an ISO Class 5 or better environment for sterile compounding.
The LAFW provides either horizontal or ver tical unidirectional HEPA-«ltered air¬ow. [Note—An LAFW must not be used for preparation
of antineoplastic and/or active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) HDs (see 〈800〉).]
Integrated ver tical laminar ¬ow zone (IVLFZ):
An IVLFZ is a designated ISO Class 5 area serving as the PEC within an ISO Class 7 or
cleaner buffer room. In the IVLFZ, unidirectional air¬ow is created by placing HEPA «lters over the entire surface of the worktables and
by effective placement of air returns. The unidirectional HEPA-«ltered zone must be separated from the ISO Class 7 area with a
physical barrier to direct the air¬ow downward over the work area to separate the DCA from potential sources of contamination.
Strategic location of air returns in addition to full coverage of HEPA «lters above the work surface is required. Both static and dynamic
smoke studies verifying a continuous ¬ow of HEPA-«ltered air void of turbulence, dead air zones, and re¬uxing from the HEPA «lters to
and across the entire work area and to the air returns must be documented (e.g., with video).
[Note—Dynamic air¬ow smoke pattern
tests have shown that it is di­cult to achieve this type of design and also achieve and maintain unidirectional air¬ow under dynamic
operating conditions.]
[Note—An IVLFZ must not be used for preparation of antineoplastic and/or API HDs (see 〈800〉).]
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 11 ===
Class II biological safety cabinet (BSC):
A Class II BSC is a ventilated cabinet with an open front and inward and downward
unidirectional HEPA-«ltered air¬ow and HEPA-«ltered exhaust. The BSC is designed to provide worker protection from exposure to
airborne drugs and to provide an ISO Class 5 or better environment for preparing CSPs. [Note—The exhaust air from the BSC must be
externally vented for preparation of antineoplastic and/or API HDs (see 〈800〉).]
Placement of LAFS:
The LAFS must be located out of tra­c patterns and away from room air currents that could disrupt the intended
air¬ow patterns inside the PEC. If used to prepare only Category 1 CSPs, the ISO Class 5 PEC may be located in an unclassi«ed SCA. If
used to prepare Category 2 or Category 3 CSPs, the LAFS must be located within a cleanroom suite with an ISO Class 7 or better buffer
room with an ISO Class 8 or better anteroom. A dynamic air¬ow smoke pattern test must be performed in the PEC initially and at least
every 6 months to ensure that 1) the LAFS is properly placed into the facility and 2) compounders understand how to utilize the
unidirectional air¬ow to maintain «rst air in the DCA.
Restricted-access barrier system (RABS):
A RABS is an enclosure that provides HEPA-«ltered ISO Class 5 unidirectional air. It allows for
the ingress and/or egress of materials through de«ned openings that have been designed and validated to preclude the transfer of
environmental air contamination and are generally not to be opened during compounding operations. RABS include compounding
aseptic isolators (CAIs) and compounding aseptic containment isolators (CACIs). In a CAI or CACI, glove por ts are used to provide
physical separation between the surrounding area and the aseptic manipulations.
Compounding aseptic isolator:
A CAI is designed for compounding non-HD CSPs. It is designed to maintain an ISO Class 5 environment
throughout the compounding and material transfer processes. Air exchange into the CAI from the surrounding environment must not
occur unless the air has «rst passed through a HEPA «lter. [Note—A CAI must not be used for preparation of antineoplastic and/or API
HDs (see 〈800〉).]
Compounding aseptic containment isolator:
A CACI is designed to provide worker protection from exposure to undesirable levels of
airborne drug throughout the compounding and material transfer processes and to maintain an ISO Class 5 environment for
compounding sterile HD preparations (see 〈800〉).
Placement of RABS:
If used to prepare only Category 1 CSPs, the ISO Class 5 environment may be achieved by placing the RABS in an
unclassi«ed SCA. If used to prepare Category 2 or Category 3 CSPs, the RABS must be located within a cleanroom suite with an ISO
Class 7 or better buffer room with an ISO Class 8 or better anteroom. For placement of a CACI used for the preparation of
antineoplastic and/or API HDs, see 〈800〉.
When a RABS is used, the recovery time after opening the transfer chamber to achieve ISO Class 5 air quality must be documented
(e.g., by the manufacturer), and internal procedures must be developed to ensure that adequate recovery time is allowed after
opening and closing the RABS, both before and during compounding operations. A dynamic air¬ow smoke pattern test must be
performed in the PEC under dynamic operating conditions initially and at least every 6 months to ensure that 1) the RABS is properly
integrated into the facility and 2) compounders understand how to utilize the unidirectional air¬ow to maintain «rst air in the DCA.
Pharmaceutical isolator:
A pharmaceutical isolator provides isolation from the surrounding area and maintains ISO Class 5 air quality
during dynamic operating conditions. [Note—A CAI or CACI is not a pharmaceutical isolator.] A pharmaceutical isolator comprises four
elements:
1. Controlled workspace
2. Transfer device(s)
3. Access device(s)
4. Integral decontamination system
Placement of pharmaceutical isolators:
A pharmaceutical isolator used to prepare only Category 1 CSPs can be placed in an
unclassi«ed SCA. If the pharmaceutical isolator is used to prepare Category 2 or Category 3 CSPs, the pharmaceutical isolator must be
placed in an ISO Class 8 or better room. [Note—An anteroom is not required when using a pharmaceutical isolator.] A dynamic air¬ow
smoke pattern test must be performed in the PEC initially and at least every 6 months to ensure that 1) the pharmaceutical isolator is
properly placed in the facility and 2) compounders understand how to utilize the unidirectional air¬ow to maintain «rst air in the work
zone.
T
able 5. Summary of Minimum Requirements for Placement of PECs for Compounding Non-HD CSPs
a
PEC Type
Device Type
Placement for
Compounding Only
Category 1 CSPs
Placement for
Compounding Category 2
and 3 CSPs
LAFS
LAFW
Unclassi«ed SCA
ISO Class 7 positive-
pressure buffer room with
an ISO Class 8 positive-
pressure anteroom
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 12 ===
Compounding Area
ACPH Requirement
Unclassi«ed SCA
No requirement
ISO Class 7 room(s)
≥30 ACPH
IVLFZ
N/A
b
ISO Class 7 positive-
pressure buffer room with
an ISO Class 8 positive-
pressure anteroom
BSC
Unclassi«ed SCA
ISO Class 7 positive-
pressure buffer room with
an ISO Class 8 positive-
pressure anteroom
RABS
CAI or CACI
Unclassi«ed SCA
ISO Class 7 positive-
pressure buffer room with
an ISO Class 8 positive-
pressure anteroom
Pharmaceutical isolator
Pharmaceutical isolator
Unclassi«ed SCA
ISO Class 8 positive-
pressure room
a
For compounding HDs, see 〈800〉.
b
An IVLFZ must not be used in an unclassi«ed area.
If a robotic enclosure is used as the PEC, or placed within the PEC, a dynamic air¬ow smoke pattern test must be performed
initially and at least every 6 months thereafter to ensure that 1) it is properly integrated into the facility, 2) there is no turbulence or
re¬uxing at any critical site(s), 3) room air does not enter the PEC where sterile products and/or preparations may be exposed, and
4) all processes can be performed without introducing contamination to the DCA(s).
4.2.4 Air exchange requirements:
For cleanroom suites, adequate HEPA-«ltered air¬ow to the buffer room(s) and anteroom(s) is required
to maintain the appropriate ISO classi«cation during compounding activities. Air¬ow is measured in terms of the number of air changes
per hour (ACPH). The ACPH may need to be higher to maintain the required ISO classi«cation and microbial state of control depending on
the following factors:
Number of personnel permitted to work in the area
Number of par ticles that may be generated from activities and processes in the area
Equipment located in the room
Room pressure
See Table 6 for a summary of ACPH requirements for non-HD sterile compounding areas. Additional ACPH requirements include:
A minimum of 30 total HEPA-«ltered ACPH must be supplied to ISO Class 7 rooms:
The total HEPA-«ltered air change rate must be adequate to maintain ISO Class 7 during dynamic operating conditions
considering the factors listed above
At least 15 ACPH of the total air change rate in a room must come from the HVAC through HEPA «lters located in the ceiling
The HEPA-«ltered air from the PEC, when added to the HVAC-supplied HEPA-«ltered air, must increase the total HEPA-«ltered
ACPH to at least 30 ACPH
If the PEC is used to meet the minimum total ACPH requirements, the PEC must not be turned off except for maintenance
Rooms where activity levels are high may require more HEPA-«ltered ACPH to maintain ISO Class 7 air quality under dynamic
operating conditions
The ACPH from HVAC, ACPH contributed from the PEC, and the total ACPH must be documented on the cer ti«cation repor t
A minimum of 20 total HEPA-«ltered ACPH must be supplied to ISO Class 8 rooms:
The total HEPA-«ltered air change rate must be adequate to maintain ISO Class 8 under dynamic operating conditions
considering the factors listed above
At least 15 ACPH of the total air change rate in a room must come from the HVAC through HEPA «lters located in the ceiling
Rooms where activity levels are high may require more HEPA-«ltered ACPH to maintain ISO Class 8 air quality under dynamic
operating conditions
The total ACPH must be documented on the cer ti«cation repor t
T
able 6. Summary of ACPH Requirements for Non-HD Sterile Compounding Areas
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 13 ===
Compounding Area
ACPH Requirement
ISO Class 8 room(s)
≥20 ACPH
4.2.5 Establishing and maintaining pressure differentials:
Continuous differential positive pressure is required to minimize air¬ow from an
area with lower air-quality classi«cation to an area of higher air-quality classi«cation. In a cleanroom suite, a minimum differential positive
pressure of 0.020-inch water column is required between adjacent ISO-classi«ed areas (e.g., between the buffer room and anteroom). The
pressure differential between the anteroom and the unclassi«ed area must not be less than 0.020-inch water column. No pressure
differential is required between the SCA and the surrounding area. See 〈800〉 for pressure requirements for compounding HD CSPs.
Where pressure differentials are required, a pressure differential monitoring device must be used to continuously monitor the pressure
differentials. The quantitative results from the pressure monitoring device must be reviewed and documented at least daily on the days
when compounding is occurring.
4.2.6 Facilities preparing Category 2 or Category 3 CSPs from nonsterile star ting components:
Weighing, measuring, or otherwise
manipulating components could generate airborne chemical par ticles (e.g., API or added substances). If preparing Category 2 or Category
3 CSP from nonsterile component(s), presterilization procedures, such as weighing and mixing, must be completed in an ISO Class 8 or
better environment (e.g., anteroom or buffer room). Presterilization procedures must be performed in single-use containment glove bags,
containment ventilated enclosures (CVEs), BSCs, or CACIs to minimize the risk of airborne contamination. CVEs, BSCs, or CACIs used for
presterilization procedures must be cer ti«ed at least every 6 months.
Presterilization procedures must not adversely affect the required air quality of the SEC as demonstrated during cer ti«cation under
dynamic operating conditions. Personnel must follow the hygiene and garbing requirements as described in 3. Personal Hygiene and
Garbing during presterilization procedures.
4.3 Creating Areas to Achieve Easily Cleanable Conditions
4.3.1 Cleanroom suite:
The surfaces of ceilings, walls, ¬oors, doors, door frames, «xtures, shelving, work surfaces, counters, and cabinets
in the classi«ed area must be smooth, impervious, free from cracks and crevices, and nonshedding so they can be cleaned and disinfected
and to minimize spaces in which microorganisms and other contaminants can accumulate. Surfaces should be resistant to damage (e.g.,
rust) by cleaning agents, sporicidal and other types of disinfectants, and tools used to clean. Junctures between the ceiling and the walls
and between the walls and the ¬oor must be sealed to eliminate cracks and crevices where dir t can accumulate. If ceilings consist of
inlaid panels, the panels must be caulked around each panel to seal them to the suppor t frame.
Walls must be constructed of, or may be covered with, durable material (e.g., epoxy painted walls or heavy-gauge polymer) and the
integrity of the surface must be maintained. Panels must be joined together and sealed to each other and the suppor t structure. Floors
must include coving to the sidewall, or the juncture between the ¬oor and the wall must be caulked. Classi«ed areas should minimize
dust-collecting overhangs, such as utility pipes, and ledges, such as windowsills. If overhangs or ledges are present, they must be easily
cleanable. The exterior lens surface of ceiling light «xtures must be smooth, mounted ¬ush, and sealed. Any other penetrations through
the ceiling or walls must be sealed.
4.3.2 SCA:
The SCA and all surfaces (e.g., walls, ¬oors, counters, and equipment) in the SCA must be clean, uncluttered, and dedicated to
compounding. Surfaces in the SCA should be smooth, impervious, free from cracks and crevices, and non-shedding so they can be easily
cleaned and disinfected and to minimize spaces in which microorganisms and other contaminants can accumulate. Surfaces should be
resistant to damage (e.g., rust) by cleaning agents, sporicidal and other types of disinfectants, and tools used to clean. Dust-collecting
overhangs, such as utility pipes, and ledges, such as windowsills, should be minimized. If overhangs or ledges are present, they must be
easily cleanable.
4.4 Water Sources
The facility where CSPs are prepared must be designed so that activities such as hand hygiene and garbing will not adversely affect the
ability of the PEC to function as designed. Sinks should enable hands-free use. Surfaces of the sink(s) must be cleaned and disinfected
each day of use, and a sporicidal disinfectant must be applied at least monthly (see 7.1 Agents and Supplies for Cleaning, Disinfecting, and
Applying Sporicidal Disinfectants).
In facilities with a cleanroom suite, the sink used for hand hygiene may be placed either inside or outside of the anteroom. If the sink is
located outside of the anteroom, it must be located in a clean space to minimize the risk of bringing contaminants into the anteroom. If
the sink is located inside the anteroom, it may be placed on either the clean side or the dir ty side of the anteroom. [Note—The order of
hand washing and garbing depends on the placement of the sink (see 3.2 Hand Hygiene and 3.3 Garbing Requirements)]. The buffer room
must not contain plumbed water sources [e.g., sink(s), eyewash(es), shower(s), or ¬oor drain(s)]. The anteroom must not contain ¬oor
drain(s). If installed, sprinkler systems should be recessed and covered, and the covers should be easily cleanable.
In a facility with an SCA design, a hand-washing sink must be placed not closer than 1 m to the PEC and may be either inside the SCA
or in close proximity to the SCA.
4.5 Placement and Movement of Materials
Only furniture, equipment, and other materials necessary for performing compounding activities are permitted in a classi«ed area or
SCA, and they should be low-shedding and easily cleaned and disinfected. Their number, design, location, and manner of installation must
not impact environmental air quality and must promote effective cleaning and disinfecting. No shipping car ton(s) or other corrugated or
uncoated cardboard are allowed in a classi«ed area or SCA.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 14 ===
Car ts used to transpor t components or equipment into classi«ed areas must be constructed from nonporous materials with cleanable
casters and wheels to promote mobility and ensure ease of cleaning and disinfection. In a cleanroom suite, car ts must not be moved
from the dir ty side to the clean side of the anteroom unless the entire car t, including casters, is cleaned and disinfected.
Only equipment necessary for performing compounding activities is permitted in the PEC. Proper placement of equipment in a PEC
must be initially veri«ed by a dynamic air¬ow smoke pattern test to demonstrate minimal disruption in air¬ow. The dynamic air¬ow
smoke pattern test must be repeated if equipment is placed in a different location. Equipment and other items used in a classi«ed area or
SCA should not be removed except for calibration, servicing, cleaning, or other activities associated with maintenance. If removed, these
items must be cleaned and wiped with sterile 70% IPA or a suitable disinfectant before they are returned to the classi«ed area or the SCA.
Materials necessary for performing compounding activities that have been exposed in patient care and treatment areas must not enter
anterooms, buffer rooms, or segregated compounding areas unless thoroughly cleaned and disinfected. The designated person(s) is
responsible for addressing other areas of risk in the facility’s SOPs. The designated person(s) may permit accommodations as long as
the quality of the CSP and environment will not be affected. Accommodations must be documented.
5. CERTIFICATION AND RECERTIFICATION
Before a compounding area is used to compound either Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3 CSPs, it must be independently cer ti«ed
using the requirements in this chapter and when applicable, manufacturer speci«cations. Cer ti«cation indicates that the compounding
area is meeting its design and air quality speci«cations (see Table 4).
Cer ti«cation of the classi«ed areas including the PEC must be performed initially, and recer ti«cation must be performed at least every 6
months and must include:
Air¬ow testing: Air¬ow testing is performed to determine acceptability of the air velocity, the room air exchange rate, and the room
pressure differential in doorways between adjacent rooms to ensure consistent air¬ow and that the appropriate quality of air is
maintained under dynamic operating conditions. The ACPH from HVAC, ACPH contributed from the PEC, and the total ACPH must
be documented on the cer ti«cation repor t.
HEPA «lter integrity testing: HEPA «lters must be leak tested at the factory and then leak tested again after installation and as par t
of recer ti«cation.
Total par ticle count testing: (See 5.1 Total Airborne Par ticle Sampling.) Total par ticle count testing must be performed under
dynamic operating conditions using calibrated electronic equipment.
Dynamic air¬ow smoke pattern test: Smoke pattern tests must be performed for each PEC during dynamic operating conditions to
demonstrate unidirectional air¬ow and sweeping action over and away from the preparation(s).
Classi«ed areas additionally must be recer ti«ed if there are changes to the area such as redesign, construction, replacement or
relocation of any PEC, or alteration in the con«guration of the room that could affect air¬ow or air quality.
All cer ti«cation and recer ti«cation records must be reviewed by the designated person(s) to ensure that the classi«ed environments
meet the minimum requirements in this chapter. The number of personnel present in each PEC and SEC during total par ticle-count tests
and dynamic air¬ow smoke-pattern tests must be documented. Records must be maintained in accordance with the requirements in 20.
Documentation.
A corrective action plan must be implemented and documented in response to any out-of-range results. Data collected in response to
corrective actions must be reviewed to con«rm that the actions taken have been effective.
5.1 T
otal Airborne Par ticle Sampling
The engineering control equipment function must function as designed to ensure that the levels of total airborne par ticles remain
within acceptable limits during compounding (see Table 4). Total airborne par ticle count testing must be conducted in all classi«ed areas
during dynamic operating conditions at least every 6 months to measure the performance of the engineering controls that are being used
to provide the speci«ed levels of air cleanliness (e.g., in the ISO Class 5 PEC and ISO Class 7 and 8 rooms).
Total airborne par ticle sampling sites must be selected in all classi«ed areas. Measurements of total airborne par ticles must be taken
in each PEC at locations where there is greatest risk to the exposed CSPs, containers, and closures. When conducting sampling of the
PEC, care should be taken to avoid disturbing the unidirectional air¬ow within the PEC. All sampling sites and procedures must be
described in the facility’s SOPs. Measurements of total airborne par ticles in other classi«ed areas, including the buffer room(s) and
anteroom(s), should be taken at representative locations that re¬ect the quality of air in the room(s).
Data evaluation and action levels:
If levels measured during the total air sampling program exceed the criteria in Table 4 for the ISO
classi«cation of the area sampled, the cause must be investigated and corrective action taken and documented. Data collected in
response to corrective actions must be reviewed to con«rm that the actions taken have been effective. Some examples of corrective
action include process or facility improvements or HEPA «lter replacement or repair. The extent of the investigation should be consistent
with the deviation and should include an evaluation of trends.
6. MICROBIOLOGICAL AIR AND SURF
ACE MONITORING
An effective microbiological air and surface monitoring program provides information on the environmental quality of the compounding
area. In addition, an effective microbiological air and surface monitoring program identi«es environmental quality trends over time,
identi«es potential routes of contamination, and allows for implementation of corrective actions to minimize the risk of CSP
contamination. Sterile compounding facilities must develop and implement written procedures for microbiological air and surface
monitoring (see 17. SOPs). All microbiological air and surface monitoring procedures, the test results, and the corrective actions must be
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 15 ===
documented, and the records must be maintained in accordance with the requirements in 20. Documentation. Data collected in response
to corrective actions must be reviewed to con«rm that the actions taken have been effective.
6.1 General Monitoring Requirements
The microbiological air and surface monitoring program must include 1) viable impact volumetric airborne par ticulate sampling and 2)
surface sampling. The goals of a microbiological air and surface monitoring program are to determine whether contamination is present
at unacceptable levels and to assess whether proper personnel practices are being followed, cleaning and disinfecting agents are
effective, and environmental quality is maintained.
The microbiological air and surface monitoring program involves the collection and evaluation of samples from various air and surface
locations to detect airborne and surface contaminants. The data from microbiological airborne and surface sampling are then used to
assess risks for contamination, potential routes of contamination, and the adequacy of cleaning and disinfecting agents and procedures.
Regular review of the sampling data must be performed to detect trends and the results of the review must be documented.
In addition, results from microbiological air and surface sampling must be reviewed in conjunction with personnel data (i.e., training
records, visual observations, competency assessments) to assess the state of control and to identify potential risks of contamination.
Corrective action in response to any adverse «ndings is required to maintain the necessary environmental quality for preparation of CSPs.
Data must also be reviewed following corrective actions to con«rm that the actions taken have been effective in achieving the required
microbiological air and surface quality levels (see Table 4, Table 7, and Table 8).
Microbiological air and surface monitoring must be performed initially for sterile compounding facilities to establish a baseline level of
environmental quality. After initial sampling, the environment in which sterile compounding activities are performed must be monitored
according to the minimum frequencies described in this section to ensure that the environment remains suitable for sterile compounding.
Evaluating results collected over a period of time can be useful in identifying trends or determining that a signi«cant change has
occurred, even when the results fall within the speci«ed levels.
Microbiological air and/or surface monitoring must be conducted in all classi«ed areas during dynamic operating conditions to con«rm
that the required environmental quality is maintained. In addition to the speci«c sampling frequencies described in this section, sampling
must be performed in the following circumstances:
In conjunction with the cer ti«cation of new facilities and equipment
After any servicing of facilities or equipment (see 4. Facilities and Engineering Controls)
In response to identi«ed problems (e.g., positive growth in sterility tests of CSPs)
In response to identi«ed trends (e.g., repeated positive gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling results, failed media «ll testing, or
repeated observations of air or surface contamination)
In response to changes that could impact the sterile compounding environment (e.g., change in cleaning agents)
The microbiological air and surface monitoring program must be clearly described in the facility’s SOPs, which must include a diagram
of the sampling locations, procedures for collecting samples, frequency of sampling, size of samples (e.g., surface area, volume of air),
time of day of sampling in relation to activities in the compounding area, and action levels that will trigger corrective action.
The times and locations of sampling should be carefully selected based on their relationship to the activities performed in the area. It is
impor tant to obtain samples from locations that pose the highest possible risk of contamination to the CSP and that are likely to be
representative of the conditions throughout the area. To obtain air and surface samples that are representative of the typical
compounding conditions at the facility, in all PECs and classi«ed rooms, air sampling must be conducted during dynamic operating
conditions and surface sampling should be performed at the end of a compounding activity or shift but before the area has been cleaned
and disinfected. The monitoring program must be designed and conducted in a manner that minimizes the chance that the sampling
itself will contribute to contamination of the CSP or the environment.
It is impor tant that personnel are trained and competent in air and surface sampling procedures to ensure accurate and reproducible
sampling. All impaction air samplers must be serviced and calibrated as recommended by the manufacturer.
6.2 Monitoring Air Quality for Viable Airborne Par ticles
A monitoring program for viable airborne par ticles must be developed and implemented to assess microbiological air quality in all
classi«ed areas.
6.2.1 Viable air sampling—timing and locations:
Volumetric active air sampling of all classi«ed areas using an impaction air sampler must
be conducted in each classi«ed area [e.g., ISO Class 5 PEC and ISO Class 7 and 8 room(s)] during dynamic operating conditions. For
entities compounding Category 1 and Category 2 CSPs, this must be completed at least every 6 months. For entities compounding any
Category 3 CSPs, this must be completed within 30 days prior to the commencement of any Category 3 compounding and at least monthly
thereafter regardless of the frequency of compounding Category 3 CSPs. Air sampling sites must be selected in all classi«ed areas.
6.2.2 Viable air sampling procedures:
When conducting sampling of the PEC, care should be taken to avoid disturbing unidirectional
air¬ow. See Box 5 for active air sampling procedures. A general microbiological growth media that suppor ts the growth of bacteria and
fungi must be used (e.g., TSA). COAs from the manufacturer must verify that the sampling media devices meet the expected growth
promotion, pH, and sterilization requirements. Samples must be incubated in an incubator at the temperatures listed in Box 5. The
incubator temperature must be monitored during incubation, either manually or by a continuous recording device, and the results must be
reviewed and documented as described in the facility’s SOPs. The incubator must be placed in a location outside of the sterile
compounding area.
Box 5. Active Air Sampling Procedures for Viable Airborne Monitoring
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 16 ===
1. Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for operation of the impaction air sampler, including placement of media device(s).
2. Using the impaction air sampler, test at least 1 cubic meter or 1000 L of air from each location sampled.
3. At the end of each sampling period, retrieve the media device and cover it. Handle and store media devices to avoid
contamination and prevent condensate from dropping onto the agar during incubation and affecting the accuracy of the cfu
reading (e.g., inver t plates).
4. Incubate the media device at 30°–35° for no less than 48 h. Examine for growth. Record the total number of discrete colonies of
microorganisms on each media device as cfu per cubic meter of air on an environmental sampling form based on sample type
(i.e., viable air), sample location, and sample date.
5. Then incubate the media device at 20°–25° for no less than 5 additional days. Examine for growth. Record the total number of
discrete colonies of microorganisms on each media device as cfu per cubic meter of air on an environmental sampling form
based on sample type (i.e., viable air), sample location, and sample date.
Ã. Alternatively, to shor ten the overall incubation period, two sampling media devices may be collected for each sample location
and incubated concurrently.
A. Both media devices could be TSA or one media device could be TSA and the other fungal media (e.g., malt extract agar
[MEA] or Sabouraud dextrose agar [SDA]).
B. Incubate each media device in a separate incubator. Incubate one media device at 30°–35° for no less than 48 h, and
incubate the other media device at 20°–25° for no less than 5 days. If fungal media are used as one of the samples,
incubate the fungal media sample at 20°–25° for no less than 5 days.
C. Count the total number of discrete colonies of microorganisms on each media device, and record these results as cfu per
cubic meter of air.
D. Record the results of the sampling on an environmental sampling form based on sample type (i.e., viable air), and include
the sample location and sample date.
ISO Class
Air Sampling Action Levels
[cfu/cubic meter (1000 liters) of air/media device]
5
>1
7
>10
8
>100
6.2.3 Viable air sampling data evaluation and action levels:
Evaluate cfu counts against the action levels in Table 7 and examine counts in
relation to previous data to identify adverse results or trends. If two sampling media devices are collected at a single location, all recovered
growth on each must be documented and action levels applied to each sampling media device separately. If levels measured during the
viable air monitoring program exceed the levels in Table 7 for the ISO classi«cation levels of the area sampled, the cause must be
investigated and corrective action must be taken. Data collected in response to corrective actions must be reviewed to con«rm that the
actions taken have been effective. The corrective action plan must be dependent on the cfu count and the microorganism recovered.
Some examples of corrective action include process or facility improvements, personnel training, cleaning and disinfecting, or HEPA «lter
repair and/or replacement. The extent of the investigation should be consistent with the deviation and should include an evaluation of
trends. The corrective action plan must be documented and should include resampling of failed areas to con«rm corrective action was
successful. If levels measured during viable air sampling exceed the levels in Table 7, an attempt must be made to identify any
microorganisms recovered to the genus level (see Microbial Characterization, Identi«cation, and Strain Typing 〈1113〉) with the assistance of
a microbiologist.
T
able 7. Action Levels for Viable Airborne Par ticle Air Sampling
6.3 Monitoring Surfaces for Viable Par ticles
Surface sampling is an impor tant tool used to assist in maintenance of a suitably controlled environment for compounding CSPs.
Surface sampling is useful for evaluating facility cleaning and material handling procedures, work surface cleaning and disinfecting
procedures, and personnel competency in work practices such as cleaning and disinfecting. All sampling sites and procedures must be
described in the facility’s SOPs.
6.3.1 Surface sampling—timing and locations:
Each classi«ed area, including each room and the interior of each ISO Class 5 PEC and
pass-through chambers connecting to classi«ed areas, must be sampled for microbial contamination using a risk-based approach.
Samples should be taken from the following classi«ed areas:
Equipment contained within the PEC
Staging or work area(s) near the PEC
Frequently touched surfaces
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 17 ===
1. Remove the cover from the surface sampling media device. Using a rolling motion, «rmly press the media surface onto the
surface to be sampled. The media device will leave a residue of growth media on the sample site. After sampling, clean and
disinfect the sampled area to remove the residue from the surface.
2. Cover each media device. Handle and store media devices to avoid contamination and prevent condensate from dropping
onto the agar during incubation and affecting the accuracy of the cfu reading (e.g., inver t plates).
3. Incubate media device(s) at 30°–35° for no less than 48 h. Examine for growth. Record the total number of discrete colonies
of microorganisms on each media device as cfu per media device on an environmental sampling form based on sample type
(i.e., surface), sample location, and sample date.
4. Incubate the media device at 20°–25° for no less than 5 additional days. Examine for growth. Record the total number of
discrete colonies of microorganisms on each media device (cfu per sample) on the environmental sampling record based on
sample type (i.e., surface), sample location, and sample date.
5. Alternatively, to shor ten the overall incubation period, two surface sampling media devices may be collected for each sample
location and incubated concurrently.
A. Both media devices could be TSA or one media device could be TSA and the other fungal media (e.g., malt extract agar
[MEA] or Sabouraud dextrose agar [SDA]). Media must be supplemented with neutralizing additives (e.g., lecithin and
polysorbate 80).
B. Incubate each media device in a separate incubator. Incubate one media device at 30°–35° for no less than 48 h, and
incubate the other media device at 20°–25° for no less than 5 days. If fungal media are used, incubate the fungal media
device at 20°–25° for no less than 5 days.
C. Count the total number of discrete colonies of microorganisms on each media device, and record these results as cfu
per media device.
D. Record the results of the sampling on an environmental sampling form based on sample type (i.e., surface), and include
the sample location and sample date.
Surface sampling in the DCA must also be conducted in conjunction with media-«ll testing to assess aseptic manipulation
competency (see 2.3 Competency Testing in Aseptic Manipulation)
When conducted, surface sampling should be performed at the end of a compounding activity or shift but before the area has been
cleaned and disinfected.
For entities compounding Category 1 and Category 2 CSPs, surface sampling of all classi«ed areas, and pass-through chambers
connecting to classi«ed areas, must be conducted at least monthly (see Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing
Environments 〈1116〉).
For entities compounding any Category 3 CSPs, surface sampling of all classi«ed areas, and pass-through chambers connecting to
classi«ed areas, must be completed prior to assigning a BUD longer than the limits established in Table 13, and at least weekly (see
〈1116〉) on a regularly scheduled basis regardless of the frequency of compounding Category 3 CSPs. Additionally, surface sampling
must be conducted within the PEC used to prepare Category 3 CSPs, at the end of each batch before cleaning and disinfection occurs,
unless a self-enclosed robotic device is used. When a self-enclosed robotic device is used as the PEC to prepare Category 3 CSPs,
surface sampling must be conducted at least once daily at the end of compounding operations, before cleaning and disinfection occurs.
6.3.2 Surface sampling procedures:
See Box 6 for the procedures for surface sampling on ¬at surfaces. Surface sampling media devices
(e.g., plates, paddles, or slides) containing microbial growth media must be used for sampling ¬at surfaces. COAs from the manufacturer
must verify that the sampling media devices meet the expected growth promotion, pH, and sterilization requirements. Surface sampling
media devices must contain general microbial growth media (e.g., TSA) supplemented with neutralizing additives (e.g., lecithin and
polysorbate 80) to neutralize the effects of any residual disinfecting agents. Surface sampling media devices must have a raised convex
surface. Sterile swabs wetted with sterile water or a sterile neutralizing buffer may be used when sampling irregular surfaces and di­cult-
to-reach locations such as crevices, corners, and spaces between surfaces. After sampling, the sampled area must be thoroughly cleaned
and disinfected (see 7. Cleaning, Disinfecting, and Applying Sporicidal Disinfectants and Sterile 70% IPA).
Samples must be incubated in an incubator at the temperatures listed in Box 6. The incubator temperature must be monitored during
incubation, either manually or by a continuous recording device, and the results must be reviewed and documented. The incubator must
be placed in a location outside of the sterile compounding area.
Box 6. Surface Sampling Procedures
6.3.3 Surface sampling data evaluation and action levels:
Evaluate cfu counts against the action levels in Table 8, and examine counts in
relation to previous data to identify adverse results or trends. If two sampling media devices are collected at a single location, all recovered
growth on each must be documented and action levels applied to each sampling media device separately. If levels measured during
surface sampling exceed the levels in Table 8 for the ISO classi«cation levels of the area sampled, the cause must be investigated and
corrective action must be taken. Data collected in response to corrective actions must be reviewed to con«rm that the actions taken have
been effective. The corrective action plan must be dependent on the cfu count and the microorganism recovered. Some examples of
corrective action include process or facility improvements, personnel training, cleaning and disinfecting, or HEPA «lter replacement and/or
repair. The extent of the investigation should be consistent with the deviation and should include an evaluation of trends. The corrective
action plan must be documented. If levels measured during surface sampling exceed the levels in Table 8, an attempt must be made to
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 18 ===
ISO Class
Surface Sampling Action Levels (cfu/media device)
5
>3
7
>5
8
>50
Type of Agent
Purpose
Cleaning
An agent, usually containing a surfactant, used for the removal of
substances (e.g., dir t, debris, microbes, and residual drugs or
chemicals) from surfaces.
Disinfectant
A chemical or physical agent used on inanimate surfaces and
objects to destroy fungi, viruses, and bacteria.
Sporicidal
A chemical or physical agent that destroys bacterial and fungal
spores when used at a su­cient concentration for a speci«ed
contact time. It is expected to kill all vegetative microorganisms.
identify any microorganism recovered to the genus level (see 〈1113〉) with the assistance of a microbiologist.
T
able 8. Action Levels for Surface Sampling
7. CLEANING, DISINFECTING, AND APPL
YING SPORICIDAL DISINFECTANTS AND STERILE 70% IP
A
Surfaces in classi«ed areas used to prepare Category 1, Category 2, and Category 3 CSPs must be:
Cleaned
Disinfected
Sporicidal disinfectants applied
according to the frequencies described in Table 10 for each CSP category.
Additionally, in a PEC, sterile 70% IPA must be applied after cleaning and disinfecting, or after the application of a one-step disinfectant
cleaner or sporicidal disinfectant, to remove any residue. Sterile 70% IPA must also be applied immediately before initiating
compounding. During the compounding process sterile 70% IPA must be applied to the horizontal work surface, including any removable
work trays, of the PEC at least every 30 min if the compounding process takes 30 min or less. If the compounding process takes more
than 30 min, compounding must not be disrupted, and the work surface of the PEC must be disinfected immediately after compounding.
These activities are impor tant because surfaces in classi«ed areas and SCAs are a potential source of microbial contamination of
CSPs.
The process of cleaning involves removing organic and inorganic materials from surfaces, usually with a manual or mechanical
process and a cleaning agent. The process of disinfecting involves destruction of microorganisms, usually with a chemical agent. The
process of applying a sporicidal disinfectant involves the destruction of bacterial and fungal spores. See Table 9 for a summary of the
purposes of the cleaning, disinfectant, and sporicidal disinfectants.
T
able 9. Purpose of Cleaning, Disinfecting, and Sporicidal Disinfectants
Surfaces must be cleaned prior to being disinfected with an EPA-registered disinfectant (or equivalent for entities outside the US)
unless an EPA-registered (or equivalent for entities outside the US) one-step disinfectant cleaner is used to accomplish both the cleaning
and disinfection in one step. A sporicidal disinfectant must also be applied. Some EPA-registered (or equivalent) one-step disinfectant
cleaners may have sporicidal proper ties. Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces and applying a sporicidal disinfectant must occur at the
minimum frequencies speci«ed in Table 10.
All cleaning and disinfecting activities must be performed by trained and appropriately garbed personnel using facility-approved agents
and procedures, which must be described in written SOPs. Personnel must be trained if there are any changes in the cleaning and
disinfecting procedures. Cleaning must be performed in the direction of clean to dir ty areas. The same ¬oor mop may be used in both the
buffer and anteroom, but only in that order. Mops used in areas where HDs are compounded must be dedicated for use only in those
areas.
The frequency, method(s), and location(s) of cleaning, disinfecting, and applying sporicidal disinfectants must be established in written
SOPs, in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and must be followed by all cleaning personnel. The manufacturer’s directions
or published data for the minimum contact time must be followed for each of the cleaning, disinfecting, and sporicidal disinfectants used.
When sterile 70% IPA is used, it must be allowed to dry. All cleaning, disinfecting, and application of sporicidal disinfectants must be
documented according to the facility's SOPs.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 19 ===
Site
Cleaning
Disinfecting
b
Applying
Sporicidal Disinfectant
PEC(s) and equipment inside
the PEC(s)
Equipment and all
interior surfaces of the
PEC daily on days when
compounding occurs
and when surface
contamination is known
or suspected
Equipment and all
interior surfaces of the
PEC daily on days when
compounding occurs
and when surface
contamination is known
or suspected
Monthly for entities
compounding Category
1 and/or Category 2
CSPs
Weekly for entities
compounding Category
3 CSPs
Removable work tray of the
PEC, when applicable
Work surface of the tray
daily on days when
compounding occurs
All surfaces and the
area underneath the
work tray monthly
Work surface of the tray
on days when
compounding occurs
All surfaces and the
area underneath the
work tray monthly
Work surfaces of the
tray monthly
All surfaces and the
area underneath the
work tray monthly
Pass-through chambers
Daily on days when
compounding occurs
Daily on days when
compounding occurs
Monthly for entities
compounding Category
1 and/or Category 2
CSPs
Weekly for entities
compounding Category
3 CSPs
Work surface(s) outside the
PEC
Daily on days when
compounding occurs
Daily on days when
compounding occurs
Floor(s)
Daily on days when
compounding occurs
Daily on days when
compounding occurs
Wall(s), door(s), and door
frame(s)
Monthly
Monthly
Monthly
Ceiling(s)
c
Storage shelving and bin(s)
Equipment outside the PEC(s)
T
able 10. Minimum Frequency for Cleaning and Disinfecting Surfaces and Applying Sporicidal Disinfectants in Classi«ed Areas and
in the SCA
a
a
Cleaning of sinks is described in 4.4 Water Sources.
b
Many disinfectants registered by the EPA are one-step cleaning and disinfecting agents, which means that the disinfectant has been
formulated to be effective in the presence of light-to-moderate soiling without a separate cleaning step.
c
Ceilings of the SCA are required to be cleaned, disinfected, and applied with sporicidal disinfectant only when visibly soiled and when
surface contamination is known or suspected.
7.1 Agents and Supplies for Cleaning, Disinfecting, and Applying Sporicidal Disinfectants
7.1.1 Agents:
Cleaning and disinfecting agents must be selected and used with careful consideration of compatibilities, effectiveness, and
user safety. Considerations when selecting and using disinfectants include their antimicrobial activity, inactivation by organic matter,
residue, shelf life, preparation requirements of the agent, and suitability for surfaces being disinfected. After the disinfectant or sporicidal
disinfectant is applied to the surface, the agent must be allowed to dwell for the minimum contact time speci«ed by the manufacturer.
Cleaning, disinfecting and sporicidal agents used within the PEC must be sterile. When diluting concentrated cleaning and disinfecting
agents for use in the PEC, sterile water must be used. In classi«ed areas outside of the PEC, sterile cleaning and disinfecting agents
should be used. When diluting concentrated cleaning and disinfecting agents for use outside of the PEC, sterile water should be used.
7.1.2 Supplies:
All cleaning and disinfecting supplies (e.g., wipers, sponges, pads, and mop heads) with the exception of tool handles and
holders must be low lint. In addition, cleaning and disinfecting supplies used in the PEC must be sterile with the exception of tool handles
and holders, which must be cleaned and disinfected prior to use in a PEC.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 20 ===
If necessary, remove visible par ticles, debris, or residue with an appropriate solution (e.g., Sterile Water for Injection or Sterile
Water for Irrigation) using sterile, low-lint wipers.
Using a sterile low-lint wiper, apply a sterile cleaning agent followed by a sterile EPA-registered disinfectant or apply a sterile
EPA-registered (or equivalent for entities outside the US) one-step disinfectant cleaner to equipment and all interior surfaces of
the PEC.
Ensure the contact time speci«ed by the manufacturer is achieved.
Using a sterile low-lint wiper, apply sterile 70% IPA to equipment and all interior surfaces in the PEC.
Allow the surface to dry completely before beginning compounding.
If necessary, remove visible par ticles, debris, or residue with an appropriate solution (e.g., Sterile Water for Injection or Sterile
Water for Irrigation) using sterile, low-lint wipers.
After cleaning and disinfecting (see Box 7), apply the sterile sporicidal disinfectant using a sterile low-lint wiper to all surfaces
and the area underneath the work tray; if the sporicidal disinfectant is a sterile EPA-registered (or equivalent for entities outside
the US) one-step disinfectant sporicidal cleaner, separate cleaning and disinfecting steps are not required.
Ensure the contact time speci«ed by the manufacturer is achieved.
Using a sterile low-lint wiper, apply sterile 70% IPA to all interior surfaces, including underneath the work tray.
Allow the surface to dry completely before beginning compounding.
Wipers, sponges, pads, and mop heads should be disposable. If disposable cleaning supplies are used, they must be discarded after
each cleaning activity. Reusable cleaning tools must be made of cleanable materials (e.g., handles should not be made of wood or any
other porous material) and must be cleaned and disinfected before and after each use. Reusable cleaning tools must be dedicated for
use in the classi«ed areas or SCA and must not be removed from these areas except for disposal. They must be discarded as
determined based on the condition of the tools. Cleaning supplies used in the classi«ed areas and SCAs must be disposed of in a
manner that minimizes the potential for dispersing contaminants into the air (e.g., with minimal agitation, away from work surfaces).
Once opened, sterile cleaning and disinfecting agents and supplies (e.g., closed containers of sterile wipers) and sterile 70% IPA may
be reused for a time period speci«ed as by the manufacturer and/or described in the facility written SOPs.
7.2 Procedures for Cleaning, Disinfecting, and Applying Sporicidal Disinfectants and Sterile 70% IP
A in the PEC
Clean, disinfect, and apply a sporicidal disinfectant to equipment and all interior surfaces in the PEC at the minimum frequencies
speci«ed in Table 10. See Box 7 and Box 8 for procedures for cleaning, disinfecting, and applying a sporicidal disinfectant in the PEC.
Box 7. Procedures for Cleaning and Disinfecting the PEC
Box 8. Procedures for Applying a Sporicidal Disinfectant in the PEC
8. INTRODUCING ITEMS INTO THE SEC AND PEC
8.1 Introducing Items into the SEC
Before any item is introduced into the clean side of anteroom(s), placed into pass-through chamber(s), or brought into the SCA,
providing that packaging integrity will not be compromised, it must be wiped with a sporicidal disinfectant, EPA-registered disinfectant, or
sterile 70% IPA using low-lint wipers by personnel wearing gloves. If an EPA-registered disinfectant or sporicidal disinfectant is used, the
agent must be allowed to dwell for the minimum contact time speci«ed by the manufacturer. If sterile 70% IPA is used, it must be allowed
to dry. The wiping procedure should not compromise the packaging integrity or render the product label unreadable.
8.2 Introducing Items into the PEC
Just before any item is introduced into the PEC, it must be wiped with sterile 70% IPA using sterile low-lint wipers and allowed to dry
before use. When sterile items are received in sealed containers designed to keep them sterile until opening, the sterile items may be
removed from the covering as the supplies are introduced into the ISO Class 5 PEC without the need to wipe the individual sterile supply
items with sterile 70% IPA. The wiping procedure must not render the product label unreadable.
8.3 Use of Sterile 70% IP
A on Critical Sites within the PEC
Critical sites (e.g., vial stoppers, ampule necks, and intravenous bag septums) must be wiped with sterile 70% IPA in the PEC to provide
both chemical and mechanical actions to remove contaminants. The sterile 70% IPA must be allowed to dry before personnel enter or
puncture stoppers and septums or break the necks of ampules.
9. EQUIPMENT
, SUPPLIES, AND COMPONENTS
9.1 Equipment
PECs are described in 4.2.3 Types of PECs and placement. Other equipment used in compounding CSPs (e.g., automated compounding
devices [ACDs] and balances) should be of suitable composition such that the surfaces that contact components are not reactive or
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 21 ===
sorptive. Equipment that must be brought into classi«ed areas must be wiped with a sporicidal disinfectant, EPA-registered disinfectant,
or sterile 70% IPA using low-lint wipers.
Equipment must be placed in a manner that facilitates sterile compounding operations. The equipment must be capable of operating
properly and within required performance parameters. Compounding personnel must follow established SOPs for the calibration,
maintenance, cleaning, and use of the equipment based on the manufacturer’s recommendations. Personnel must maintain records from
equipment calibration, veri«cation, and maintenance in accordance with the requirements in 20. Documentation.
ACDs and other similar equipment are designed to assist in the compounding of preparations by delivering speci«c volumes of
solution(s) automatically under computerized control.
Before using ACDs or other similar equipment, compounding personnel must conduct an accuracy assessment before the «rst use and
again each day the equipment is used to compound CSPs. The precision of the equipment can be monitored based on an assessment of
day-to-day variations in its accuracy measures. Compounding personnel must maintain a daily record of the accuracy measurements on
the days the equipment is in use. Corrective actions must be implemented if accuracy measurements are outside the manufacturer’s
speci«cation.
Weighing, measuring, or otherwise manipulating components that could generate airborne chemical par ticles (e.g., active
pharmaceutical ingredients [APIs], added substances, conventionally manufactured products) must be evaluated to determine if these
activities must be performed in a PEC or other closed system processing device (e.g., single use containment glove bag) to reduce the
potential exposure to personnel or contamination of the facility or CSPs (See 4.2.6 Facilities preparing Category 2 or Category 3 CSPs from
nonsterile star ting component(s)). The process evaluation must be carried out in accordance with the facility’s SOPs and the assessment
must be documented.
9.2 Supplies
Supplies (e.g., beakers, utensils, needles, syringes, «lters, and tubing sets) should be of suitable composition such that the surfaces
that contact components are not reactive or sorptive. Supplies in direct contact with the CSP must be sterile and depyrogenated.
9.3 Components
Compounding personnel must follow the facility’s SOPs, which must address the selection, receipt, evaluation, handling, storage, and
documentation of all CSP components, including all ingredients and container closures.
9.3.1 Component selection:
 Conventionally manufactured sterile products should be used when available and appropriate for the intended
CSP
.
When APIs are used:
Must comply with the criteria in the USP–NF monograph, if one exists
Must have a COA that includes the speci«cations (e.g., compendial requirements for quality) and that test results for the
component show that the API meets expected quality
In the United States, must be manufactured by an FDA-registered facility
Outside of the United States, must comply with the laws and regulations of the applicable regulatory jurisdiction
For all components other than APIs:
Must comply with the criteria in the USP–NF monograph, if one exists
Must be accompanied by documentation (e.g., COA, labeling) that includes the speci«cations and test results and shows that the
component meets the speci«cations
In the US, should be manufactured by an FDA-registered facility
If a component cannot be obtained from an FDA-registered facility, the designated person(s) must select an acceptable
and reliable source (see Good Distribution Practices for Bulk Pharmaceutical Excipients 〈1197〉). The compounding facility
must establish the identity, strength, purity, and quality of the ingredients obtained from that supplier by reasonable means.
Reasonable means may include but are not limited to visual inspections, evaluation of a COA supplied by the manufacturer,
and/or veri«cation by analytically testing a sample to determine conformance with the COA or other speci«cations.
Outside of the US, must comply with the laws and regulations of the applicable regulatory jurisdiction
When CSPs are used as components, see 16. Use of CSPs as Components. All APIs and other components used must be evaluated for
suitability for use in sterile drug preparation. Components labeled with “not for pharmaceutical use”, “not for injectable use”, “not for
human use” or an equivalent statement must not be used to compound for these purposes.
Each lot of commercially available sterile, depyrogenated containers and container closure systems must be accompanied by a COA
or other documentation showing conformance with established speci«cations (i.e., sterility and depyrogenation requirements). If
sterilization and depyrogenation of supplies or container closure systems are performed on site, the e­cacy of each process must be
established and documented (see Sterilization of Compendial Ar ticles 〈1229〉).
9.3.2 Component receipt:
Upon receipt of each lot of a component, the external packaging must be examined for evidence of deterioration
and other aspects of unacceptable quality. Facility personnel must verify the labeling and condition of the component [e.g., whether the
outer packaging is damaged and whether temperature-sensing indicators show that the component has been exposed to excessive
temperature(s)].
Any component found to be of unacceptable quality must be promptly rejected, clearly labeled as rejected, and segregated from active
stock to prevent use before appropriate disposal. Any other lots of that component from that vendor must be examined to determine
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 22 ===
whether other lots have the same defect.
The date of receipt by the compounding facility must be clearly marked on each API or added substance package that lacks a vendor
expiration date. Packages of components (i.e., API and added substances) that lack a vendor’s expiration date must be assigned a
conservative expiration date, not to exceed 1 year after receipt by the compounding facility.
9.3.3 Component evaluation before use:
Compounding personnel must ascer tain before use that components for CSPs are of the correct
identity, appropriate quality, within expiry date and have been stored under appropriate conditions. The following information should be
used to make this determination: prescription or medication order, compounding record (CR), master formulation record (if used), vendor
label(s), COA(s) of API(s) and other component(s), product labeling of any conventionally manufactured sterile products, labeling of
CSP(s), and documentation of the compounding facility’s storage conditions and practices.
All components must be reinspected before use. All packages must be reinspected to detect container breaks, looseness of the cap
or closure, and deviation from the expected appearance, aroma, and/or texture of the contents that might have occurred during storage.
Sterile container closures must be visually reinspected to ensure that they are free from defects that could compromise sterility and that
they are otherwise suitable for their intended use.
Any component found to be of unacceptable quality must be promptly rejected, clearly labeled as rejected, and segregated from active
stock to prevent use before appropriate disposal. Any other lots of that component from that vendor must be examined to determine
whether other lots have the same defect.
9.3.4 Component handling and storage:
All components must be handled and stored in a manner that prevents contamination, mix-ups,
and deterioration.
Components must be stored in closed containers under temperature, humidity, and lighting conditions consistent with those indicated
in o­cial monographs or speci«ed by the suppliers and/or manufacturers.
Personnel must monitor temperature in the area(s) where components are stored either manually at least once daily on days that the
facility is open or by a continuous temperature recording device to determine whether the temperature remains within the appropriate
range. The results of the temperature readings must be documented on a temperature log or stored in the continuous recording device
and must be retrievable. All monitoring equipment must be calibrated or veri«ed for accuracy as recommended by the manufacturer or
every 12 months if not speci«ed by the manufacturer.
10. STERILIZATION AND DEPYROGENATION
When selecting the sterilization method for CSPs prepared from one or more nonsterile star ting components or using nonsterile
supplies or devices, personnel must take into consideration the nature of the component(s), their physical and chemical proper ties, and
the intended container closure system.
The sterilization method used must sterilize the CSP without degrading its physical and chemical stability (e.g., affecting its strength,
purity, or quality) or the packaging integrity. (See also the 〈1229〉 series of chapters.)
The following must be considered when selecting an appropriate sterilization method:
Terminal sterilization (e.g., steam, dry heat, or irradiation) is the preferred method unless the speci«c CSP or container closure system
cannot tolerate terminal sterilization
Steam sterilization is not an option if moisture, pressure, or the temperatures used would degrade the CSP or if there is insu­cient
moisture to sterilize the CSP within the «nal, sealed, container closure system
Filtration may not be an option for some compounded preparations, for example preparations with suspended drug par ticles or
emulsions with a signi«cant droplet size.
CSPs that are terminally sterilized (e.g., steam, dry heat, or irradiation) must use a process intended to achieve a probability of a
nonsterile unit (PNSU) of 10
−6
. [Note—This is also called the sterility assurance level (SAL).] A PNSU of 10
−6
 is equivalent to a probability
that 1 unit in a million is nonsterile. A PNSU value cannot be applied to CSPs that are aseptically «lled into a sterile container following
sterilization by «ltration because sterilization by «ltration is not terminal sterilization.
Injectable compounded preparations that contain nonsterile components or that come into contact with nonsterile devices (e.g.,
containers, tubing) during any phase of the compounding procedure must be sterilized within 6 h after completing the preparation to
minimize the generation of bacterial endotoxins in CSPs.
A description of the terminal sterilization and depyrogenation process, including the temperature, pressure (if applicable), duration,
permissible load conditions for each cycle, and the use of biological indicators and endotoxin challenge vials (ECVs) must be included in
the facility’s SOPs.
SOPs must include training and competency of personnel on all sterilization methods and equipment used by the facility. In addition,
the SOPs must include a schedule and method for establishing and verifying the effectiveness of the terminal sterilization and
depyrogenation methods selected, as well as the methods for maintaining and cleaning the sterilizing and depyrogenation equipment.
10.1 Depyrogenation
See Dry Heat Depyrogenation 〈1228.1〉. Dry heat depyrogenation must be used to render glassware, metal, and other thermostable
containers and components pyrogen free. Depyrogenation processes typically operate at a range of temperatures, from approximately
170°–400°, depending on the exposure time (e.g., a cycle might hold the items at 250° for 30 min to achieve sterility and depyrogenation).
The duration of the exposure period must include su­cient time for the items to reach the depyrogenation temperature. The items must
remain at the depyrogenation temperature for the duration of the depyrogenation period.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 23 ===
The effectiveness of the dry heat depyrogenation cycle must be established initially and veri«ed annually using ECVs to demonstrate
that the cycle is capable of achieving a ≥3-log reduction in endotoxins (see Bacterial Endotoxins Test 〈85〉). The effectiveness of the
depyrogenation cycle must be re-established if there are changes to the depyrogenation cycle described in SOPs (e.g., changes in load
conditions, duration, or temperature). This veri«cation must be documented.
Items that are not thermostable must be depyrogenated by multiple rinses with sterile, nonpyrogenic water (e.g., Sterile Water for
Injection or Sterile Water for Irrigation) and then thoroughly drained or dried immediately before use in compounding See Depyrogenation
by Rinsing 〈1228.4〉.
10.2 Sterilization by Filtration
See Sterilizing Filtration of Liquids 〈1229.4〉. Sterilizing «lters must be sterile, depyrogenated, have a nominal pore size of 0.22 µm or
smaller, and be appropriate for pharmaceutical use. Sterilizing «lters with labeling that states “for laboratory use only” or a similar
statement must not be used for compounding CSPs. Sterilizing «lters must be cer ti«ed by the manufacturer to retain at least 10
7
microorganisms of a strain of Brevundimonas diminuta per square centimeter of upstream «lter surface area under conditions similar to
those in which the CSPs will be «ltered (i.e., pressure, ¬ow rate, and volume «ltered).
The designated person(s) must ensure—from available published information, from supplier documentation, or through direct
challenge (e.g., «ltering the CSP)—that the «lters 1) are chemically and physically compatible with all ingredients in the CSP (e.g., water-
miscible alcohols may damage «lter integrity); 2) are chemically stable at the pressure and temperature conditions that will be used; and
3) have enough capacity to «lter the required volumes. The «lter dimensions and the CSP to be sterilized by «ltration should permit the
sterilization process to be completed without the need for replacement of the «lter during the process. Filter units used to sterilize CSPs
must be subjected to the manufacturers’ recommended integrity testing, such as a post-use bubble point test. If multiple «lters are
required for the compounding process, each of the «lters must pass a «lter-integrity test.
When CSPs are known to contain excessive par ticulate matter, a pre«ltration step must be performed using a «lter of larger nominal
pore size (e.g., 1.2 µm) or a separate «lter of larger nominal pore size should be placed upstream of (i.e., prior to) the sterilizing «lter to
remove gross par ticulate contaminants before the CSP is passed through the sterilizing-grade «lter. Excessive par ticulate matter
requiring a pre«ltration step could potentially be a signal of an inappropriate formulation, and therefore the formulation and the process
should be assessed and modi«ed if necessary. CSPs that were prepared using a «lter that failed integrity tests must be discarded or, after
investigating the cause of the failure and selection of an appropriate «lter, re«ltered for sterilization not more than one additional time.
10.3 Sterilization by Steam Heat
Temperatures used to achieve sterilization by steam heat are lower than those used to achieve depyrogenation. The process of thermal
sterilization using saturated steam under pressure (i.e., autoclaving) is the preferred method for terminal sterilization of aqueous CSPs in
their «nal, sealed container closure system (see Steam Sterilization by Direct Contact 〈1229.1〉). Steam sterilization is not an option if
moisture, pressure, or the temperatures used would degrade the CSP
.
To achieve sterility when steam sterilization is used, all materials must be directly exposed to steam under adequate pressure for the
length of time necessary, as determined by use of appropriate biological indicators, to render the items sterile (e.g., 20−60 min at 121°
saturated steam under a pressure of 15 psi, depending on the volume or size of the CSP being sterilized). The duration of the exposure
period must include su­cient time for the entire contents of the CSP and other items to reach the sterilizing temperature. The CSP and
other items must remain at the sterilizing temperature for the duration of the sterilization period.
CSPs must be placed in the autoclave to allow steam to reach the CSPs without entrapment of air. Flat, stainless-steel trays with low
sides or ventilated bottoms will permit steam contact. When preparing items that must be wrapped for steam sterilization, wrap them in
low-lint protective fabric or paper or seal in envelopes that will permit steam penetration and are designed to minimize the risk of post-
sterilization microbial contamination. For CSPs, immediately before «lling containers that will be steam sterilized, solutions must be
passed through a «lter with a nominal pore size of not larger than 1.2 µm for removal of par ticulate matter.
Sealed containers must be able to generate steam internally. Stoppered and crimped empty vials must contain a small amount of
sterile water to generate steam.
The effectiveness of steam sterilization must be veri«ed and documented with each sterilization run or load by using appropriate
biological indicators, such as spores of Geobacillus stearothermophilus (ATCC 12980, ATCC 7953, or equivalent; see Biological Indicators
for Sterilization 〈1229.5〉), and other con«rmation methods such as physicochemical indicators (see Physicochemical Integrators and
Indicators for Sterilization 〈1229.9〉).
The steam supplied must be generated using water per the manufacturer’s recommendation. A calibrated data recorder or char t must
be used to monitor each cycle and to examine for cycle irregularities (e.g., deviations in temperature or pressure). The date, run, and load
numbers of the steam sterilizer used to sterilize a CSP must be documented in the CR.
10.4 Sterilization by Dry Heat
Dry heat may be used for those items that cannot be sterilized by steam or other means when the moisture would damage the material
or the wrapping material is impermeable (see Dry Heat Sterilization 〈1229.8〉). Sterilization by dry heat requires higher temperatures and
longer exposure times than sterilization by steam. The duration of the exposure period must include su­cient time for the entire contents
of CSPs and other items to reach the sterilizing temperature. The CSP and other items must remain at the sterilizing temperature for the
duration of the sterilization period. Immediately before «lling ampules and vials that will be sterilized by dry heat, CSP solutions must be
passed through a «lter with a nominal pore size of not larger than 1.2 µm for removal of par ticulate matter.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 24 ===
Dry heat sterilization is usually performed in an oven designed for sterilization at 160° or higher. If lower temperatures are used, they
must be shown to achieve effective sterilization (see 〈1229.8〉, Validation of Dry Heat Sterilization, Biological Indicators).
Heated air must be evenly distributed throughout the chamber, which is typically accomplished by an air blower. The calibrated oven
must be equipped with temperature controls and a timer. During sterilization, su­cient space must be left between materials to allow for
circulation of the hot air. A calibrated data recorder or char t must be used to monitor each cycle and the data must be reviewed to identify
cycle irregularities (e.g., deviations in temperature or exposure time).
The effectiveness of the dry heat sterilization method must be veri«ed and documented with each sterilization run or load using
appropriate biological indicators such as spores of Bacillus atrophaeus (ATCC 9372; see 〈1229.5〉) and other con«rmation methods (e.g.,
temperature-sensing devices). The date, run, and load numbers of the dry heat oven used to sterilize a CSP must be documented in the
CR.
11. MASTER FORMULATION AND COMPOUNDING RECORDS
11.1 Creating Master Formulation Records
A master formulation record (MFR) is a detailed record of procedures that describes how the CSP is to be prepared. An MFR must be
created for all CSPs prepared from nonsterile ingredient(s) or CSPs prepared for more than one patient. Any changes or alterations to the
MFR must be approved and documented according to the facility’s SOPs. Box 9 lists the information that must be included in an MFR.
Box 9. Master Formulation Records
An MFR must include at least the following information:
Name, strength or activity, and dosage form of the CSP
Identities and amounts of all ingredients; if applicable, relevant characteristics of components (e.g., par ticle size, salt form,
purity grade, solubility)
Type and size of container closure system(s)
Complete instructions for preparing the CSP
, including equipment, supplies, a description of the compounding steps, and any
special precautions
Physical description of the «nal CSP
BUD and storage requirements
Reference source to suppor t the stability of the CSP
Quality control (QC) procedures (e.g., pH testing, «lter integrity testing)
Other information as needed to describe the compounding process and ensure repeatability (e.g., adjusting pH and tonicity;
sterilization method, such as steam, dry heat, irradiation, or «lter)
11.2 Creating Compounding Records
A CR documents the compounding of each CSP
. A CR must be created for all Category 1, Category 2, and Category 3 CSPs. A CR must
also be created for immediate-use CSPs prepared for more than one patient. The CR must be created to document the compounding
process. A prescription or medication order or label may serve as the CR. If an ACD, work¬ow management system, or other similar
equipment is used, the required information in the CR may be stored electronically as long as it is retrievable and contains the required
information (see Box 10). An MFR can serve as the basis for preparing the CR. For example, a copy of the MFR can be made that contains
spaces for recording the information needed to complete the CR. Box 10 lists the information that must be included in a CR.
Box 10. Compounding Records
CRs must include at least the following information:
Name, strength or activity, and dosage form of the CSP
Date and time of preparation of the CSP
Assigned internal identi«cation number (e.g., prescription, order, or lot number)
A method to identify the individuals involved in the compounding process and individuals verifying the «nal CSP
Name of each component
Vendor, lot number, and expiration date for each component for CSPs prepared for more than one patient and for CSPs
prepared from nonsterile ingredient(s)
Weight or volume of each component
Strength or activity of each component
Total quantity compounded
Final yield (e.g., quantity, containers, number of units)
Assigned BUD and storage requirements
Results of QC procedures (e.g., visual inspection, «lter integrity testing, pH testing)
If applicable, the CR must also include:
MFR reference for the CSP
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 25 ===
Calculations made to determine and verify quantities and/or concentrations of components
12. RELEASE INSPECTIONS AND TESTING
All release testing procedures (e.g., visual inspections and testing) must be included in the facility’s documentation (see 11. Master
Formulation and Compounding Records and 17. SOPs). Any out-of-speci«cation results must be investigated, and a corrective action plan
must be implemented and documented as par t of the quality assurance (QA) and QC program (see 18. Quality Assurance and Quality
Control).
12.1 Visual Inspection
At the completion of compounding, before release and dispensing, the CSP must be visually inspected to determine whether the
physical appearance of the CSP is as expected (e.g., free of inappropriate visible par ticulates or other foreign matter, discoloration, or
other defects). The CSP label must be visually inspected to con«rm that the CSP and its labeling match the prescription or medication
order. The inspection also must include a visual inspection of container closure integrity (e.g., checking for leakage, cracks in the
container, or improper seals). Any CSP found to be of unacceptable quality (e.g., observed defects) must be promptly rejected, clearly
labeled as rejected, and segregated from active stock to prevent use before appropriate disposal.
When a CSP will not be released or dispensed on the day of preparation, a visual inspection must be conducted immediately before it is
released or dispensed to make sure that the CSP does not exhibit any defects such as precipitation, cloudiness, or leakage, which could
develop during storage. Any CSP found to be of unacceptable quality (e.g., observed defects) must be promptly rejected, clearly labeled
as rejected, and segregated from active stock to prevent use before appropriate disposal. Defects that indicate sterility or stability
problems must be investigated to determine the cause according to the facility’s SOPs (see 18. Quality Assurance and Quality Control).
12.2 Sterility Testing
Sterility testing is not required for Category 1 CSPs (see Table 12). For Category 2 CSPs assigned a BUD that requires sterility testing
(see Table 13) and all Category 3 CSPs, the testing must be performed according to 〈71〉 or a validated alternative method (see 〈1223〉)
that is noninferior to 〈71〉 testing.
If sterility testing is performed, the minimum quantity of each container to be tested for each media is speci«ed in 〈71〉, Table 2, and the
number of containers required to be tested in relation to the batch size is speci«ed in 〈71〉, Table 3, except as described below. The
maximum batch size for all CSPs requiring sterility testing must be limited to 250 «nal yield units.
If the number of CSPs to be compounded in a single batch is less than the number of CSPs needed for testing as speci«ed in 〈71〉,
Table 3, additional units must be compounded to perform sterility testing as follows:
If 1–39 CSPs are compounded in a single batch, the sterility testing must be performed on a number of units equal to 10% of the
number of CSPs prepared, rounded up to the next whole number. For example:
If 1 CSP is compounded, 10% of 1 rounded up to the next whole number would indicate that 1 additional CSP must be
prepared for sterility testing
If 39 CSPs are compounded, 10% of 39 rounded up to the next whole number would indicate that 4 additional CSPs must be
prepared for sterility testing
If more than 40 CSPs are prepared in a single batch, the sample sizes speci«ed in 〈71〉, Table 3 must be used.
If sterility testing is performed according to 〈71〉, the Method Suitability Test from that chapter must be performed to ensure that
contamination can be recovered. If performing sterility testing according to 〈71〉, the Membrane Filtration method from that chapter is the
method of choice when the CSP formulation permits. The preferred alternative is the 〈71〉, Test for Sterility of the Product to Be Examined,
Direct Inoculation of the Culture Medium method. If an alternative method is used for sterility testing, the method must be validated (see
〈1223〉) and demonstrated to be suitable for that CSP formulation.
Sterility tests resulting in failures must prompt an investigation into the possible causes and must include identi«cation of the
microorganism, as well as an evaluation of the sterility testing procedure, compounding facility, process, and/or personnel that may have
contributed to the failure. The source(s) of the contamination, if identi«ed, must be corrected, and the facility must determine whether the
conditions causing the sterility failure affect other CSPs. The investigation and resulting corrective actions must be documented.
12.3 Bacterial Endotoxins Testing
Category 1 injectable CSPs do not require testing for bacterial endotoxins. Category 2 injectable CSPs compounded from one or more
nonsterile component(s) and assigned a BUD that requires sterility testing (see Table 13) and Category 3 injectable CSPs compounded
from one or more nonsterile component(s) must be tested to ensure that they do not contain excessive bacterial endotoxins (see 〈85〉).
Category 2 injectable CSPs compounded from one or more nonsterile component(s) and assigned a BUD that does not require sterility
testing should be tested for bacterial endotoxins. In the absence of a bacterial endotoxin limit in an o­cial USP–NF monograph or other
CSP formula source, the CSP must not exceed the endotoxin limit calculated as described in 〈85〉 for the appropriate route of
administration for humans. CSPs for nonhuman species must not exceed the endotoxin limit calculated as described in 〈85〉 based on the
largest recommended dose and weight (or average weight for more than a single animal) of the target animal species unless a different
limit is scienti«cally suppor ted. CSPs administered epidurally should have the same endotoxin limit as that of intrathecally administered
CSPs. See also Guidelines on the Endotoxins Test 〈1085〉.
13. LABELING
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 26 ===
Term
De«nition
Applicability
BUD
Either the date, or hour and date, after
which a CSP must not be used. The BUD is
determined from the date and time that
preparation of the CSP is initiated
Applies to all CSPs
Expiration date
The time during which a product can be
expected to meet the requirements of the
USP–NF monograph, if one exists, or
maintain expected quality provided it is
kept under the speci«ed storage
conditions.
Applies to all conventionally manufactured
products, APIs, and added substances
Category 1, Category 2, and Category 3 CSPs must be labeled with appropriate, legible identifying information to prevent errors during
storage, dispensing, and use. The term labeling designates all labels and other written, printed, or graphic matter on the immediate
container or on or inside any package or wrapper in which it is enclosed, except any outer shipping container. The term label designates
that par t of the labeling that is on the immediate container. See Labeling 〈7〉.
All labeling must be in compliance with laws and regulations of the applicable regulatory jurisdiction.
The label on each immediate container of the CSP must, at a minimum, display prominently and legibly the following information:
Assigned internal identi«cation number (e.g., barcode, prescription, order, or lot number)
Active ingredient(s) and their amount(s), activity(ies), or concentration(s)
Storage conditions if other than controlled room temperature
BUD
Dosage form
Total amount or volume if it is not obvious from the container
If it is a single-dose container, a statement stating such when space permits
If it is a multiple-dose container, a statement stating such
The labeling on the CSP must display the following information, as applicable:
Route(s) of administration
Special handling instructions
Warning statements
Compounding facility name and contact information if the CSP is to be sent outside of the facility or healthcare system in which it
was compounded
The labeling on the CSP should indicate that the preparation is compounded.
Labeling procedures must be followed as described in the facility’s SOPs to prevent labeling errors and CSP mix-ups. The label of the
CSP must be veri«ed to ensure that it conforms with the
1. Prescription or medication order;
2. MFR, if required (see 11.1 Creating Master Formulation Records); and
3. CR, if required (see 11.2 Creating Compounding Records)
Change to read:
14. ESTABLISHING BEYOND-USE DATES
14.1 Terminology
Each CSP label must state the date, or the hour and date, beyond which the preparation must not be used and must be discarded (i.e.,
the BUD). The BUD is determined from the date and time that preparation of the CSP is initiated. The BUD is not intended to limit the time
during which the CSP is administered (e.g., infused).
BUDs and expiration dates are not the same. An expiration date identi«es the time during which a conventionally manufactured
product, API, or added substance can be expected to meet the requirements of a USP–NF monograph, if one exists, or maintain expected
quality provided it is kept under the speci«ed storage conditions. The expiration date limits the time during which a conventionally
manufactured product, API, or added substance may be dispensed or used (see 〈7〉, Labels and Labeling for Products in Other Categories,
Expiration Date and Beyond-Use Date). Expiration dates are assigned by manufacturers based on analytical and performance testing of the
sterility, chemical and physical stability, and packaging integrity of the product. Expiration dates are speci«c to a par ticular formulation in
its container and at stated exposure conditions of illumination and temperature. See Table 11 for a summary of terms.
T
able 11. Summary of Terms
14.2 Parameters to Consider in Establishing a BUD
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 27 ===
BUDs for CSPs should be established conservatively to ensure that the drug maintains its required characteristics (i.e., stability and
sterility) until its BUD.
When establishing a BUD for a CSP
, compounders must consider parameters that may affect quality, including but not limited to:
Chemical and physical stability proper ties of the drug and/or its formulation
Materials of composition of the container closure system and compatibility of the container closure system with the «nal
preparation (e.g., leachables, interactions, adsorption, and storage conditions)
The BUDs for CSPs are based primarily on factors that affect the achievement and maintenance of sterility, which include but are not
limited to the following:
Conditions of the environment in which the CSP is prepared
Aseptic processing and sterilization method
Star ting components (e.g., sterile or nonsterile ingredients)
Whether or not sterility testing is performed
Storage conditions (e.g., packaging and temperature)
14.2.1 Terminal sterilization methods and aseptic processing:
 A CSP may be prepared by the following methods (see 10. Sterilization and
Depyrogenation):
Terminal sterilization, which includes compounding with sterile and/or nonsterile star ting ingredient(s) and subsequent sterilization
with a process intended to achieve a PNSU of 10
−6
 (e.g., steam, dry heat, irradiation).
Aseptic processing, which includes 1) compounding with only sterile star ting ingredient(s) or 2) compounding with nonsterile
ingredient(s) followed by sterilization by «ltration. [Note—Sterilization by «ltration is not a form of terminal sterilization.]
Terminal sterilization is the preferred method of sterilization, unless the speci«c CSP or container closure system cannot tolerate
terminal sterilization. Table 13 allows for longer BUDs for terminally sterilized CSPs than for aseptically processed CSPs because
terminal sterilization using a veri«ed method provides reasonable assurance that a CSP will be sterile.
14.2.2 Star ting components:
The use of one or more nonsterile star ting component(s) is a risk factor to be considered when preparing a
CSP
. A longer BUD is permitted for CSPs that are aseptically processed from conventionally manufactured sterile star ting component(s)
than from one or more nonsterile star ting component(s).
14.2.3 Sterility testing:
Sterility testing (see 12.2 Sterility Testing) of a CSP can provide additional assurance of the absence of
contamination, although passing a sterility test does not guarantee that all units of a batch of CSPs are sterile because contamination may
not be uniformly distributed throughout the batch. A longer BUD is permitted if sterility testing results are within acceptable limits. The
maximum batch size for all CSPs requiring sterility testing must be limited to 250 «nal yield units.
14.2.4 Storage conditions:
Storage in colder conditions (i.e., in a refrigerator or freezer [see Packaging and Storage Requirements 〈659〉])
has been shown to slow the growth of most microorganisms. However, the chemical and physical stability of the CSP and its components
must be considered when storing in colder conditions (e.g., some formulations may precipitate when stored in a refrigerator or freezer). A
longer BUD is permitted in Table 12 and Table 13 for CSPs stored in colder conditions than for CSPs stored at controlled room temperature.
If the CSP will be stored in a frozen state, the container closure system must be able to withstand the physical stress (i.e., without
breaking or cracking) during storage in a freezer. The CSP must be thawed in appropriate conditions to avoid compromising the physical
and chemical stability of the preparation and its components (e.g., do not heat in a microwave). Once the CSP is thawed, the CSP must
not be refrozen.
CSPs may be stored under different storage conditions before they are used (e.g., CSPs may «rst be frozen, then thawed in the
refrigerator, and «nally kept at controlled room temperature before administration). The storage time of a CSP must not exceed the
original BUD placed on the CSP for its labeled storage condition, and BUDs must not be additive. For example, an aseptically processed
CSP prepared from one or more nonsterile star ting component(s) cannot be stored for 45 days in a freezer, then 4 days refrigerated, and
then 24 h at controlled room temperature for a total of 50 days. Once a CSP has been stored under a condition that would require a
shor ter BUD (e.g., controlled room temperature), the CSP must be used within the time frame for that storage condition (in the previous
example, 24 h).
14.3 Establishing a BUD for a CSP
BUDs for CSPs must be established in accordance with Table 12 for Category 1 CSPs, Table 13 for Category 2 CSPs and Table 14 for
Category 3 CSPs. One day is equivalent to 24 h.
The BUD limits in these tables are based on the risk of microbial contamination or not achieving and maintaining sterility despite
implementation of the requirements in this chapter. The CSP formulation must remain chemically and physically stable, and its packaging
must maintain its integrity for the duration of the BUD.
A shor ter BUD must be assigned when the stability of the CSP or its components is less than the hours or days stated in the applicable
table below. Additionally:
The BUD must not exceed the shor test remaining expiration date of any of the commercially available star ting components.
For CSPs prepared from one or more compounded components, the BUD should generally not exceed the shor test BUD of any of
the individual compounded components. However, there may be acceptable instances when the BUD of the «nal CSP exceeds the
BUD assigned to compounded components (e.g., pH-altering solutions). If the assigned BUD of the «nal CSP exceeds the BUD of
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 28 ===
Storage Conditions
Controlled Room Temperature
(20°–25°)
Refrigerator
(2°–8°)
≤12 h
≤24 h
Preparation Characteristics
Storage Conditions
Compounding Method
Sterility Testing
Performed and Passed
Controlled Room
Temperature
(20°–25°)
Refrigerator
(2°–8°)
Freezer
(−25° to −10°)
Aseptically
processed CSPs
No
Prepared from one or
more nonsterile star ting
component(s): 1 day
Prepared from one or
more nonsterile star ting
component(s): 4 days
Prepared from one or
more nonsterile star ting
component(s): 45 days
Prepared from only
sterile star ting
components:
4 days
Prepared from only
sterile star ting
components:
10 days
Prepared from only
sterile star ting
components:
45 days
Yes
30 days
45 days
60 days
Terminally sterilized
CSPs
No
14 days
28 days
45 days
Yes
45 days
60 days
90 days
the compounded components, the physical, chemical, and microbiological quality of the «nal CSP must not be negatively
impacted.
Table 12 establishes the longest permitted BUDs for Category 1 CSPs. Category 1 CSPs may be prepared in an SCA or cleanroom suite
(see 4.2 Facility Design and Environmental Controls).
T
able 12. BUD Limits for Category 1 CSPs
a
a
A shor ter BUD must be assigned when the physical and chemical stability of the CSP is less than the BUD limit stated in the table.
Table 13 establishes the longest permitted BUDs for Category 2 CSPs. Category 2 CSPs must be prepared in a cleanroom suite (see 4.2
Facility Design and Environmental Controls).
T
able 13. BUD Limits for Category 2 CSPs
a
a
A shor ter BUD must be assigned when the physical and chemical stability of the CSP is less than the BUD limit stated in the table.
14.4 Additional Requirements for Category 3 CSPs
14.4.1 Assigning Category 3 BUDs:
Increasing the storage time of a CSP introduces additional risk for chemical degradation, physical
incompatibilities, the compromising of the container closure system, and microbial proliferation. To address these risks and maintain a
higher state of environmental control, additional requirements must be met when assigning BUDs for Category 3 CSPs in accordance with
Table 14. Category 3 CSPs must not be assigned a BUD longer than the limits in Table 14.
14.4.2 Facility and Personnel Requirements for Category 3 CSPs:
In addition to the requirements in this section, other facility and
personnel requirements related to compounding Category 3 CSPs are addressed throughout the chapter.
Category 3 personnel competency requirements apply to personnel who par ticipate in or oversee the compounding of Category 3
CSPs (see 2.2 Demonstrating Competency in Garbing and Hand Hygiene and 2.3 Competency Testing in Aseptic Manipulation).
Category 3 garbing requirements apply to all personnel entering the buffer room where Category 3 CSPs are compounded and apply
at all times regardless of whether Category 3 CSPs are being compounded on a given day (see 3.3 Garbing Requirements).
Increased environmental monitoring requirements apply to all classi«ed areas where Category 3 CSPs are compounded and apply
at all times regardless of whether Category 3 CSPs are being compounded on a given day (see 6.2 Monitoring Air Quality for Viable
Airborne Par ticles and 6.3 Monitoring Surfaces for Viable Par ticles).
The frequency of application of sporicidal disinfectants applies to all classi«ed areas where Category 3 CSPs are compounded and
applies at all times regardless of whether Category 3 CSPs are being compounded on a given day (see Table 10).
14.4.3 Stability Requirements for Category 3 CSPs:
The BUD assigned to a Category 3 CSP must be suppor ted by stability data obtained
using a stability-indicating analytical method that is able to distinguish the active ingredient from its degradants and impurities (e.g., by
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 29 ===
Preparation Characteristics
Storage Conditions
Compounding Method
Controlled Room Temperature
(20°–25°)
Refrigerator
(2°–8°)
Freezer
(−25° to −10°)
Aseptically processed, sterility
tested, and passing all
applicable tests for Category 3
CSPs
60 days
90 days
120 days
Terminally sterilized, sterility
tested, and passing all
applicable tests for Category 3
CSPs
90 days
120 days
180 days
forced degradation studies) and quantify the amount of the active ingredient.
The Category 3 CSP must be prepared according to the exact formulation (API and other ingredients of identical grade and
procedures) from which the stability data are derived.
The Category 3 CSP must be packaged and stored in a container closure of the same materials of composition as that used in the
study.
The analytical method must be validated based on characteristics such as those described in 〈1225〉.
The compounding facility must have documentation of the stability study, including a description of the methodology (e.g., number
of samples taken, storage conditions), validation of the method, the stability-indicating analytical method, and all of the results of
the study.
If the Category 3 CSP is an injection (Par ticulate Matter in Injections 〈788〉) or if it is an ophthalmic solution (▲
Subvisible Par ticulate
Matter in Intraocular Solutions 〈789〉▲ (CN 1-May-2024)
), par ticulate-matter testing is conducted once per formulation with acceptable
results.
Once for each formulation and for each container closure system in which it will be packaged, the container closure system used is
evaluated for and conforms to container closure integrity to the end of the BUD (see Package Integrity Evaluation—Sterile Products
〈1207〉).
14.4.4 Release testing for Category 3 CSPs
Each time the Category 3 CSP is prepared, it is sterility tested and meets the requirements of 〈71〉 or a validated alternative method
(see Table 14) that is noninferior to 〈71〉 testing.
Each time the Category 3 CSP is prepared, it is tested for endotoxins for acceptable results, if endotoxin testing is required under 12.3
Bacterial Endotoxins Testing.
Table 14 establishes the longest permitted BUDs for Category 3 CSPs. If all of the conditions described for Category 3 CSPs in this
chapter are not met, the applicable BUD in Table 13 must not be exceeded.
T
able 14: BUD Limits for Category 3 CSPs
a
a
A shor ter BUD must be assigned when the physical and chemical stability of the CSP is less than the BUD limit stated in the table.
14.5 Multiple-Dose CSPs
A compounded multiple-dose container is designed to contain more than one dose, intended to be entered or penetrated multiple
times, and usually contains a preservative. A preservative is intended to inhibit the growth of microorganisms and minimize the risk of
contamination. The use of preservatives must be appropriate for the CSP formulation and the route of administration. For example, the
preservative must not be inactivated by any ingredients in the CSP
, and some preservatives are not always appropriate for the patient
(e.g., neonates) or route of administration (e.g., intrathecal or ophthalmic injection). The use of preservatives, however, must not be
considered a substitute for aseptic technique.
A multiple-dose CSP must be prepared as a Category 2 or Category 3 CSP
. An aqueous multiple-dose CSP must additionally pass
antimicrobial effectiveness testing in accordance with Antimicrobial Effectiveness Testing 〈51〉. The compounder may rely on
antimicrobial effectiveness testing 1) conducted (or contracted for) once for each formulation in the par ticular container closure system
in which it will be packaged or 2) results from an FDA-registered facility or published in peer-reviewed literature sources, provided that the
CSP formulation (including any preservative) and container closure system are exactly the same as those tested, unless a bracketing
study is performed. Antimicrobial effectiveness testing may be performed on a low concentration and a high concentration of the active
ingredient in the formulation to establish preservative effectiveness across various strengths of the same formulation (e.g., bracketing).
The concentration of all other ingredients (including preservatives) must be the same throughout the bracketing study.
After a multiple-dose CSP container is initially entered or punctured, the multiple-dose container must not be used for longer than the
assigned BUD or 28 days if suppor ted by antimicrobial effectiveness testing results (see 〈51〉) on the CSP
, whichever is shor ter.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 30 ===
The container closure system used to package the multiple-dose CSP must be evaluated for and conform to container closure integrity
(see 〈1207〉). The container closure integrity test needs to be conducted only once on each formulation and on «ll volume in the par ticular
container closure system in which the multiple-dose CSP will be packaged.
Multiple-dose, nonpreserved, aqueous topical, and topical ophthalmic, CSPs:
The beyond-use date of a multiple-dose, aqueous,
nonpreserved CSP intended for topical, including topical ophthalmic, administration may be assigned in accordance with 14.5 Multiple-
Dose CSPs. However, unpreserved aqueous, topical, including topical ophthalmic, formulations, are at high risk of microbial proliferation if
contaminated during preparation or use.
To minimize the risk of patient harm, the requirement for passing antimicrobial effectiveness testing in accordance with 〈51〉 is not
required only if the preparation is:
Prepared as a Category 2 or Category 3 CSP
For use by a single patient
Labeled (in the label or labeling) to indicate that once opened, it must be discarded after 24 h when stored at controlled room
temperature and/or that once opened, it must be discarded after 72 h when stored under refrigeration
15. USE OF CONVENTIONALL
Y MANUF
ACTURED PRODUCTS AS COMPONENTS
This section addresses the time within which an entered or punctured conventionally manufactured product must be used.
15.1 Use of Conventionally Manufactured Single-Dose Containers
A conventionally manufactured single-dose container is a container closure system that holds a sterile product for parenteral
administration (injection or infusion) that is not required to meet the antimicrobial effectiveness testing requirements. If a single-dose vial
is entered or punctured only in an ISO Class 5 or cleaner air, it may be used up to 12 h after initial entry or puncture as long as the labeled
storage requirements during that 12-h period are maintained. Opened single-dose ampules must not be stored for any time period.
15.2 Use of Conventionally Manufactured Multiple-Dose Containers
A conventionally manufactured product in a multiple-dose container is intended to contain more than one dose of a drug product (see
〈659〉, General De«nitions, Injection Packaging Systems). Once initially entering or puncturing the multiple-dose container, the multiple-
dose container must not be used for more than 28 days (see 〈51〉) unless otherwise speci«ed by the manufacturer on the labeling.
15.3 Use of Conventionally Manufactured Pharmacy Bulk Packages
A conventionally manufactured pharmacy bulk package is a container of a sterile product for parenteral use that contains many single
doses. The contents are intended for use in a pharmacy admixture program and are restricted to the sterile preparation of admixtures for
infusion or, through a sterile transfer device, for the «lling of empty sterile containers. The pharmacy bulk package must be used
according to the manufacturer’s labeling (see 〈659〉, General De«nitions, Injection Packaging Systems). The pharmacy bulk package must
be entered or punctured only in an ISO Class 5 PEC.
16. USE OF CSPs AS COMPONENTS
This section addresses the use of CSPs (e.g., multiple-dose CSPs, single-dose CSPs, and compounded stock solutions) as components
to prepare «nal CSPs.
When a CSP is used as a component, care must be taken to minimize the risk of contamination of both the star ting component CSP
and the «nal CSP(s).
Component CSP: The component CSP must be assigned a BUD consistent with 14. Establishing Beyond-Use Dates and must be
stored under conditions for its assigned BUD when not in use.
Final CSP: The «nal CSP must be assigned a BUD consistent with 14. Establishing Beyond-Use Dates.
16.1 Use of Compounded Multiple-Dose CSPs
A multiple-dose CSP is designed to contain more than one dose of sterile preparation, intended to be entered or punctured multiple
times, and usually contains a preservative. Multiple-dose CSPs are required to meet the criteria for antimicrobial effectiveness testing
(see 〈51〉) and the requirements in 14.5 Multiple-Dose CSPs. Multiple-dose CSPs must be stored under the conditions upon which its BUD
is based (e.g., refrigerator or controlled room temperature). After a multiple-dose CSP is initially entered or punctured, the multiple-dose
CSP must not be used for longer than the assigned BUD or 28 days, whichever is shor ter. This time limit for entering or puncturing is not
intended to restrict the BUD of the «nal CSP
. See 14. Establishing Beyond-Use Dates
16.2 Use of Compounded Single-Dose CSPs and CSP Stock Solutions
When a compounded single-dose CSP or CSP stock solution is used as a component to compound additional CSPs, the original
compounded single-dose CSP or CSP stock solution must be entered or punctured in ISO Class 5 or cleaner air and must be stored under
the conditions upon which its BUD is based (e.g., refrigerator or controlled room temperature). The component CSP may be used for
sterile compounding for up to 12 h or its assigned BUD, whichever is shor ter, and any remainder must be discarded. This time limit for
entering or puncturing is not intended to restrict the BUD of the «nal CSP
. See 14. Establishing Beyond-Use Dates.
17. SOPs
Facilities that prepare CSPs must develop SOPs for the compounding process and other suppor t activities. SOPs must include the
types of CSPs that are prepared (i.e., Category 1, Category 2, Category 3). A designated person(s) must ensure that SOPs are appropriate
and are implemented, which includes ensuring that personnel demonstrate competency in performing every procedure that relates to
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 31 ===
their job function. A designated person(s) must follow up to ensure that corrective actions are taken if problems, deviations, failures, or
errors are identi«ed. The corrective action must be documented.
All personnel who perform or oversee compounding or suppor t activities must be trained in the SOPs. All compounding personnel must
be trained to:
Recognize potential problems, deviations, failures, or errors associated with preparing a CSP (e.g., those related to equipment,
facilities, materials, personnel, the compounding process, or testing) that could potentially result in contamination or other adverse
impact on CSP quality
Repor t any problems, deviations, failures, or errors to the designated person(s)
SOPs must be reviewed initially and at least every 12 months by the designated person(s) to ensure that they re¬ect current practices,
and the review must be documented. Any changes or alterations to an SOP must be made only by a designated person(s) and must be
documented. Revisions to SOPs must be communicated to all personnel involved in these processes and procedures, and personnel
should document acknowledgment of the communication.
18. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL
QA is a system of procedures, activities, and oversight that ensures that the compounding process consistently meets quality
standards. QC is the sampling, testing, and documentation of results that, taken together, ensure that speci«cations have been met
before release of the CSP
. See Quality Assurance in Pharmaceutical Compounding 〈1163〉.
A facility’s QA and QC programs must be formally established and documented in the facility’s SOPs that ensure that all aspects of the
preparation of CSPs are conducted in accordance with the requirements in this chapter (〈797〉) and the laws and regulations of the
applicable regulatory jurisdiction. Designated person(s) must ensure that the facility has formal, written QA and QC programs that
establish a system of:
1. Adherence to procedures
2. Prevention and detection of errors and other quality problems
3. Evaluation of complaints and adverse events
4. Appropriate investigations and corrective actions
The facility’s SOPs must describe the roles, duties, and training of the personnel responsible for each aspect of the QA program.
Designated person(s) responsible for the QA program must have the training, experience, responsibility, and authority to perform these
duties. The overall QA and QC program must be reviewed at least once every 12 months by the designated person(s). The results of the
review must be documented, and appropriate action must be taken if needed.
18.1 Noti«cation About and Recall of Out-of-Speci«cation Dispensed CSPs
If a CSP is dispensed or administered before the results of release testing are known, the facility must have procedures in place to:
Immediately notify the prescriber of a failure of speci«cations with the potential to cause patient harm (e.g., sterility, strength,
purity, bacterial endotoxin, or other quality attributes)
Recall any unused dispensed CSPs and quarantine any stock remaining in the pharmacy
Investigate if other lots are affected and recall if necessary
An SOP for recall of out-of-speci«cation dispensed CSPs must contain:
Procedures to determine the severity of the problem and the urgency for implementation and completion of the recall
Procedures to determine the distribution of any affected CSP
, including the date and quantity of distribution
Procedures to identify patients who have received the CSP
Procedures for disposal and documentation of the recalled CSP
Procedures to investigate and document the reason for failure
The sterile compounding facility must document the implementation of the recall procedures. The recall must be repor ted to
appropriate regulatory bodies as required by laws and regulations of the applicable regulatory jurisdiction.
18.2 Complaint Handling
Compounding facilities must develop and implement SOPs for handling complaints. Complaints may include but are not limited to
concerns or repor ts on the quality, labeling, or possible adverse reactions related to a speci«c CSP
.
A designated person(s) must review all complaints to determine whether the complaint indicates a potential quality problem with the
CSP
. If it does, a thorough investigation into the cause of the problem must be initiated and completed. The investigation must consider
whether the quality problem extends to other CSPs. Corrective action, if necessary, must be implemented for all potentially affected
CSPs.
Consider whether to initiate a recall of potentially affected CSPs and whether to cease sterile compounding processes until all
underlying problems have been identi«ed and corrected.
A readily retrievable written or electronic record of each complaint must be kept by the facility, regardless of the source of the
complaint (e.g., email, telephone, or mail). The record must contain the name of the complainant or other unique identi«er, the date the
complaint was received, the nature of the complaint, and the response to the complaint. In addition, to the extent that the information is
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 32 ===
known, the following should be recorded: the name and strength of the CSP and the assigned internal identi«cation number (e.g.,
prescription, order, or lot number).
The record must also include the «ndings of any investigation and any follow-up. Records of complaints must be easily retrievable for
review and evaluation for possible trends and must be retained in accordance with the record-keeping requirements in 20. Documentation.
A CSP that is returned in connection with a complaint must be quarantined until it is destroyed after completion of the investigation and
in accordance with laws and regulations of the applicable regulatory jurisdiction.
18.3 Adverse Event Repor ting
Adverse events potentially associated with the quality of CSPs must be repor ted in accordance with the facility's SOPs and all laws and
regulations of the applicable regulatory jurisdiction. If the investigation into an adverse event reveals a quality problem with a CSP that is
likely to affect other patients, those patients and prescribers potentially affected must be informed.
19. CSP HANDLING, STORAGE, P
ACKAGING, SHIPPING, AND TRANSPORT
Processes and techniques for handling, storing, packaging, and transpor ting CSPs must be outlined in the facility's SOPs. Personnel
who will be handling, storing, packaging, and transpor ting CSPs within the facility must be trained in accordance with the relevant SOPs,
and the training must be documented.
19.1 Handling and Storing CSPs
CSPs must be handled in a manner that maintains CSP quality and packaging integrity. To help ensure that CSP quality is maintained
during storage at the compounding facility, personnel must monitor conditions in the storage areas. A controlled temperature area (see
〈659〉) must be established and monitored to ensure that the temperature remains within the appropriate range for the CSP
. The
temperature must be monitored each day, either manually or by a continuous recording device. The results of the temperature readings
must be documented in a temperature log per facility SOPs or stored in the continuous temperature recording device and must be
retrievable. Temperature monitoring devices must be veri«ed for accuracy at least every 12 months or as required by the manufacturer.
The compounding facility must detect and minimize temperature excursions that are outside the temperature limits within the
controlled temperature areas. When it is known that a CSP has been exposed to temperatures either below or above the storage
temperature limits for the CSP
, a designated person(s) must determine (e.g., by consulting literature or analytical testing) whether the CSP
is expected to retain its integrity or quality. If this cannot be determined, it must be discarded.
19.2 Packaging of CSPs
Packaging materials should protect CSPs from damage, leakage, contamination, degradation, and adsorption while preventing
inadver tent exposure to transpor t personnel. The facility must select appropriate shipping containers and packaging materials based on
the product speci«cations, information from vendors, and the mode of transpor t.
Alternative modes of transpor t and/or special packaging (e.g., tamper-evident closures) may be needed to protect the quality of CSPs.
If the CSP is sensitive to light, light-resistant packaging materials must be used. In some cases, the CSP must be packaged in a special
container (e.g., a cooler) to protect it from temperature ¬uctuations.
19.3 Shipping and Transpor ting CSPs
Compounding personnel must select modes of transpor t that are expected to deliver properly packed CSPs in an undamaged, sterile,
and stable condition. Inappropriate transpor t can adversely affect the quality of CSPs. For example, preparation-speci«c considerations
should be given to physical shaking that might occur during pneumatic tube transpor t or undue exposure to heat, cold, or light. When
shipping or transpor ting CSPs that require special handling (e.g., CSPs with stability concerns), personnel must include speci«c handling
instructions on the exterior of the container.
20. DOCUMENTATION
All facilities where CSPs are prepared must have and maintain written or electronic documentation to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements in this chapter. This documentation must include, but is not limited to, the following:
Personnel training, competency assessments, and quali«cation records including corrective actions for any failures
Cer ti«cation repor ts, including corrective actions for any failures
Environmental air and surface monitoring procedures and results
Equipment records (e.g., calibration, veri«cation, and maintenance repor ts)
Receipt of components
SOPs, MFRs (if required), and CRs (if required)
Release inspection and testing records
Information related to complaints and adverse events including corrective actions taken
Results of investigations and corrective actions
Documentation must comply with all laws and regulations of the applicable regulatory jurisdiction. Records must be legible and stored
in a manner that prevents their deterioration and/or loss. All required documentation for a par ticular CSP (e.g., MFR, CR, and release
inspection and testing results) must be readily retrievable for at least 2 years after preparation or as required by laws and regulations of
the applicable regulatory jurisdiction or accrediting organization(s), whichever is longer.
21. COMPOUNDING ALLERGENIC EXTRACTS
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 33 ===
Licensed allergenic extracts are mixed and diluted into prescription sets for an individual patient, even though these allergenic extract
combinations are not speci«ed in the approved licenses for the licensed biological products (e.g., Biological License Applications [BLA]).
Allergenic extract prescription sets must follow standards at least as stringent as those in this section as follows:
21.1 Personnel Quali«cations for Compounding Allergenic Extract Prescription Sets
A designated person(s) with training and exper tise in allergen immunotherapy is responsible for ensuring that personnel who will be
preparing allergenic extract prescription sets are trained, evaluated, and supervised.
Before beginning to independently prepare allergenic extracts, all compounding personnel must complete training and be able to
demonstrate knowledge of principles and skills for sterile compounding.
Annual personnel training and competency must be documented. Personnel must demonstrate knowledge and competency in these
procedures by passing written or electronic testing before they can be allowed to compound allergenic extract prescription sets.
Before being allowed to independently compound, all compounders must successfully complete gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling
on both hands (see Box 1 and Table 1) no fewer than 3 separate times. Each «nger tip and thumb evaluation must occur after
performing separate and complete hand hygiene and garbing procedures. After the initial competency evaluation, compounding
personnel must successfully complete gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling on both hands at least every 12 months thereafter.
Compounding personnel must have their sterile technique and related practices evaluated at least every 12 months as demonstrated
by successful completion of a media-«ll test (see Box 2). If compounding outside of a PEC, the post-media-«ll surface sample is not
required.
Personnel who fail competency evaluations must successfully pass reevaluations in the de«cient area(s) before they can resume
compounding of allergenic extract prescription sets. The designated person(s) must identify the cause of failure and determine
appropriate retraining requirements.
Personnel who have not compounded an allergenic extract prescription set in more than 6 months must be evaluated in all core
competencies before resuming compounding duties.
21.2 Personnel Hygiene and Garbing for Compounding Allergenic Extract Prescription Sets
Before beginning compounding of allergenic extract prescription sets, personnel must perform hand hygiene (see Box 3) and garbing
procedures according to the facility's SOPs.
The minimum garb requirements include:
A low-lint garment with sleeves that «t snugly around the wrists and an enclosed neck (e.g., gowns)
A low-lint, disposable head cover that covers the hair and ears and, if applicable, a disposable cover for facial hair
Face mask
Sterile powder-free gloves
Throughout the compounding process, personnel must apply sterile 70% IPA onto all surfaces of the gloves and allow them to dry
thoroughly.
21.3 Facilities for Compounding Allergenic Extract Prescription Sets
The compounding process must occur in an ISO Class 5 PEC or in a dedicated allergenic extract compounding area (AECA). The PEC
or AECA used to compound allergenic extract prescription sets must be located away from unsealed windows, doors that connect to
the outdoors, and tra­c ¬ow, all of which may adversely affect the air quality. Neither a PEC nor an AECA may be located where
environmental control challenges (e.g., restrooms, warehouses, or food preparation areas) could negatively affect the air quality. The
PEC or the work surfaces in the AECA must be located at least 1 m away from a sink. The impact of activities that will be conducted
around or adjacent to the PEC or AECA must be considered carefully when designing such an area.
If used, the PEC must be cer ti«ed at least every 6 months (see 5. Cer ti«cation and Recer ti«cation).
If used, a visible perimeter must de«ne the AECA.
Access to the AECA during compounding must be restricted to authorized personnel.
During compounding activities, no other activity is permitted in the AECA.
The surfaces of walls, ¬oors, «xtures, shelving, counters, and cabinets in the AECA must be cleanable.
Carpet is not allowed in the AECA.
Surfaces should be resistant to damage by cleaning and disinfecting agents.
The surfaces in the AECA upon which the allergenic extract prescription sets are prepared must be smooth, impervious, free
from cracks and crevices, and non-shedding to allow for easy cleaning and disinfecting.
Dust-collecting overhangs such as utility pipes, ledges, and windowsills should be minimized. If overhangs or ledges are
present, they must be easily cleanable.
The AECA must be designed and controlled to provide a well-lighted working environment, with temperature and humidity
controls for the comfor t of compounding personnel wearing the required garb.
21.4 Cleaning and Disinfecting for Compounding Allergenic Extract Prescription Sets
In a PEC, all interior surfaces of the PEC must be cleaned and disinfected each day of use before compounding begins and when
surface contamination is known or suspected. Apply sterile 70% IPA to the horizontal work surface between each prescription set.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 34 ===
In an AECA, all work surfaces in the AECA where direct compounding is occurring must be cleaned and disinfected each day of use
before compounding begins and when surface contamination is known or suspected. Apply sterile 70% IPA to the horizontal work
surface between each prescription set.
If present, walls, doors, and door frames within the perimeter of the AECA must be cleaned and disinfected monthly and when
surface contamination is known or suspected.
Ceilings within the perimeter of the AECA must be cleaned and disinfected when visibly soiled and when surface contamination
is known or suspected.
Vial stoppers on packages of conventionally manufactured sterile ingredients must be wiped with sterile 70% IPA to ensure that the
critical sites are wet and allowed to dry before they are used to compound allergenic extract prescription sets.
21.5 Establishing BUDs for Allergenic Extract Prescription Sets
The BUD for the prescription set must be no later than the earliest expiration date of any allergenic extract or any diluent that is par t of
the prescription set, and the BUD must not exceed 1 year from the date the prescription set is mixed or diluted.
21.6 Labeling for Allergenic Extract Prescription Sets
The label of each vial of an allergenic extract prescription set must display the following prominently and understandably:
Patient name
Type and fractional dilution of each vial, with a corresponding vial number
BUD
Storage conditions
21.7 Shipping and Transpor ting Allergenic Extract Prescription Sets
If shipping or transpor ting allergenic extract prescription sets, compounding personnel must select modes of transpor t that are
expected to deliver properly packed prescription sets in an undamaged, sterile, and stable condition. Inappropriate transpor t can
adversely affect the quality of allergenic extract prescription sets.
When shipping or transpor ting allergenic extract prescription sets that require special handling, personnel must include speci«c
handling instructions on the exterior of the container.
21.8 Documentation for Compounding Allergenic Extract Prescription Sets
All facilities where allergenic extract prescription sets are prepared must have and maintain written or electronic documentation to
include, but not limited to, the following:
SOPs describing all aspects of the compounding process
Personnel training records, competency assessments, and quali«cation records including corrective actions for any failures
Cer ti«cation repor ts of the PEC, if used, including corrective actions for any failures
Temperature logs for refrigerator(s)
CRs for individual allergenic extract prescription sets (see Box 10)
Information related to complaints and adverse events including corrective actions taken
Investigations and corrective actions
GLOSSARY
ACD:
Automated compounding device.
ACPH:
Air changes per hour.
Active pharmaceutical ingredient (API):
Any substance or mixture of substances intended to be used in the compounding of a preparation,
thereby becoming the active ingredient in that preparation and furnishing pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the diagnosis,
cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans and animals or affecting the structure and function of the body. Also referred
to as Bulk drug substance. A conventionally manufactured drug product is not an API but is typically manufactured from an API(s).
Added substance:
An ingredient that is necessary to compound a preparation but is not intended or expected to cause a pharmacologic
response if administered alone in the amount or concentration contained in a single dose of the compounded preparation. The term is used
synonymously with the terms inactive ingredient, excipient, and pharmaceutical ingredient.
Administration:
The direct application of a sterile product or preparation to a single patient by injecting, infusing, or otherwise providing a
sterile product or preparation in its «nal form.
Airlock:
A space with interlocked doors, constructed to maintain air pressure control when items move between two adjoining areas
(generally with different air cleanliness standards). The intent of an airlock is to prevent ingress of par ticulate matter and microbial
contamination from a lesser-controlled area.
Alcohol-based hand rub:
An alcohol-containing preparation (liquid, gel, or foam) designed for application to the hands of healthcare
personnel to inactivate microorganisms and/or temporarily suppress their growth. Such preparations may contain one or more types of
alcohol, other active ingredients, excipients, and humectants.
Allergenic extract:
A biological substance used for the diagnosis and/or treatment of allergic diseases such as allergic rhinitis, allergic
sinusitis, allergic conjunctivitis, bee venom allergy, and food allergy.
Allergenic extract compounding area (AECA):
A designated space, area, or room that is not required to be classi«ed, with a visible
perimeter that is suitable for preparation of allergenic extract prescription sets.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 35 ===
Allergenic extract prescription set:
Combinations of licensed allergenic extracts that would be mixed and diluted to provide subcutaneous
immunotherapy to an individual patient, even though these allergenic extract combinations are not speci«ed in the approved BLAs for the
licensed biological products.
Anteroom:
An ISO Class 8 or cleaner room with «xed walls and doors where personnel hand hygiene, garbing procedures, and other
activities that generate high par ticulate levels may be performed. The anteroom is the transition room between the unclassi«ed area of the
facility and the buffer room.
Aseptic processing:
A method by which separate, sterile components (e.g., drugs, containers, or closures) are brought together under
conditions that maintain their sterility. The components can either be purchased as sterile or, when star ting with nonsterile components,
can be separately sterilized prior to combining (e.g., by membrane «ltration or by autoclave).
Aseptic technique:
A set of methods used to keep objects and areas free of microorganisms and thereby minimize infection risk to the
patient. It is accomplished through practices that maintain the microbe count at an irreducible minimum.
Assigned trainer:
One or more individuals assigned by the designated person(s) to be responsible and accountable for directly providing the
training, observation, and/or evaluation of personnel for the preparation of CSPs.
Batch:
More than one CSP prepared as described in the MFR in a single, discrete process, and expected to have uniform character and
quality, within speci«ed limits.
Beyond-use date (BUD):
The date, or hour and the date, after which a CSP must not be used, stored, or transpor ted. The date is determined
from the date and time the preparation is compounded.
Biological safety cabinet (BSC):
A ventilated cabinet that may be used for compounding. These cabinets are divided into three general
classes (Class I, Class II, and Class III). Class II BSCs are fur ther divided into types (Type A1, Type A2, Type B1, Type B2, and Type C1).
Biological safety cabinet (BSC), Class II:
A ventilated cabinet with an open front and inward and downward unidirectional HEPA-«ltered
air¬ow and HEPA-«ltered exhaust. A BSC used to prepare a CSP must be capable of providing an ISO Class 5 or better environment for
preparation of the CSPs.
BLA:
Biological license application.
Blood components:
Any therapeutic constituent of blood separated by physical or mechanical means (e.g., white cells, red cells, platelets,
plasma, serum). It is not intended to include plasma-derived products (e.g., albumin, coagulation factors, immunoglobulins) manufactured
under an approved BLA or equivalent.
BMBL:
Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories.
Buffer room:
An ISO Class 7 or cleaner room with «xed walls and doors where PEC(s) that generate and maintain an ISO Class 5
environment are physically located. The buffer room may only be accessed through the anteroom or another buffer room.
Bulk drug substance:
See the entry for Active pharmaceutical ingredient.
Category 1 CSP:
A CSP that is assigned a BUD of 12 h or less at controlled room temperature or 24 h or less refrigerated that is
compounded in accordance with all applicable requirements for Category 1 CSPs in this chapter.
Category 2 CSP:
A CSP that may be assigned a BUD of greater than 12 h at controlled room temperature or greater than 24 h refrigerated
that is compounded in accordance with all applicable requirements for Category 2 CSPs in this chapter.
Category 3 CSP:
A CSP that may be assigned a BUD exceeding the limits in Table 13 for Category 2 CSPs and is compounded in
accordance with all applicable requirements for Category 3 CSPs in this chapter.
CDC:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Cer ti«cate of analysis (COA):
A repor t from the supplier of a component, container, or closure that accompanies the supplier’s material and
contains the speci«cations and results of all analyses and a description of the material.
CFU:
Colony-forming units.
Classi«ed area:
An area that maintains an air quality classi«cation based on the ISO standards required in this chapter (see also the
de«nition for ISO class).
Cleaning:
The process of removing substances (e.g., organic and inorganic material) from objects and surfaces, normally accomplished by
manually or mechanically using water with detergents or enzymatic products.
Cleaning agent:
An agent, usually containing a surfactant, used for the removal of substances (e.g., dir t, debris, microbes, and residual
drugs or chemicals) from surfaces.
Cleanroom suite:
A classi«ed area that consists of both an anteroom and buffer room.
Component:
Any ingredient used in the compounding of a preparation, including any active ingredient, added substance, or conventionally
manufactured product.
Compounded sterile preparation (CSP):
A preparation intended to be sterile that is created by combining, admixing, diluting, pooling,
reconstituting, repackaging, or otherwise altering a drug product or bulk drug substance.
Compounded stock solution:
A sterile mixture of components that is used to compound additional CSPs.
Compounding:
The process of combining, admixing, diluting, pooling, reconstituting, repackaging, or otherwise altering a drug product or
bulk drug substance to create a sterile preparation.
Compounding area:
The area where compounding is occurring (i.e., a cleanroom suite, inside the perimeter of the SCA, or AECA).
Compounding aseptic containment isolator (CACI):
A type of RABS that uses HEPA «ltration to provide an ISO Class 5 unidirectional air
environment designed for the compounding of sterile HDs.
Compounding aseptic isolator (CAI):
A type of RABS that uses HEPA «ltration to provide an ISO Class 5 unidirectional air environment
designed for compounding of sterile non-HDs.
Compounding record (CR):
Documents the compounding of each CSP
.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 36 ===
Container closure system:
Packaging components that together contain and protect the dosage form. This includes primary packaging
components and secondary packaging components, if the latter are intended to provide additional protection.
Containment glove bag:
A single-use disposable glove bag that is capable of containing airborne chemical par ticles.
Containment ventilated enclosure (CVE):
A non-ISO classi«ed full or par tial enclosure that uses ventilation principles to capture, contain,
and remove airborne contaminants through HEPA «ltration and prevent their release into the work environment.
Conventionally manufactured product:
A pharmaceutical dosage form, usually the subject of an application approved by the applicable
national regulatory agency, that is manufactured under current good manufacturing practice conditions.
Critical site:
A location that includes any component or ¬uid pathway surfaces (e.g., vial septa, injection por ts, and beakers) or openings
(e.g., opened ampules and needle hubs) that are exposed and at risk of direct contact with air (e.g., ambient room or HEPA «ltered),
moisture (e.g., oral and mucosal secretions), or touch contamination.
Designated person(s):
One or more individuals assigned to be responsible and accountable for the performance and operation of the
facility and personnel as related to the preparation of CSPs.
Direct compounding area (DCA):
A critical area within the ISO Class 5 PEC where critical sites are exposed to unidirectional HEPA-«ltered
air, also known as «rst air.
Disinfectant:
A chemical or physical agent used on inanimate surfaces and objects to destroy fungi, viruses, and bacteria. Sporicidal
disinfectants are considered a special class of disinfectants that also are effective against bacterial and fungal spores.
Dynamic air¬ow smoke pattern test:
A PEC test in which a visible source of smoke, which is neutrally buoyant, is used to observe air
patterns within the unidirectional space (i.e., the DCA) under dynamic operating conditions (see the entry for Dynamic operating conditions).
This test is not appropriate for ISO Class 7 or ISO Class 8 cleanrooms that do not have unidirectional air¬ow (see the entry for Visual smoke
study).
Dynamic operating conditions:
Conditions in the compounding area in which operating personnel are present and simulating or performing
compounding. The conditions should re¬ect the largest number of personnel and highest complexity of compounding expected during
routine operations as determined by the designated person(s).
ECV:
Endotoxin challenge vial.
EP
A:
US Environmental Protection Agency.
Excipient:
See the entry for Added substance.
FDA:
US Food and Drug Administration.
Filter integrity test:
A test (e.g., bubble point test) of the integrity of a sterilizing grade «lter performed after the «ltration process to detect
whether the integrity of the «lter has been compromised.
Final yield:
The total number of containers actually prepared at the end of the compounding process prior to release testing.
First air:
The air exiting the HEPA «lter in a unidirectional air stream.
Formulation:
The speci«c qualitative and quantitative composition of the «nal CSP
.
Garb:
Items such as gloves, garments (e.g., gowns), shoe covers, head and facial hair covers, masks, and other items designed to reduce
par ticle-shedding from personnel and minimize the risk of contamination of CSP(s).
GFT:
Gloved «nger tip and thumb sampling.
Hazardous drug (HD):
Any drug identi«ed by at least one of the following six criteria: carcinogenicity, teratogenicity or developmental
toxicity, reproductive toxicity in humans, organ toxicity at low dose in humans or animals, genotoxicity, or new drugs that mimic existing
HDs in structure or toxicity.
High-e­ciency par ticulate air (HEP
A) «ltration:
Being, using, or containing a «lter designed to remove 99.97% of airborne par ticles
measuring 0.3-micron or greater in diameter passing through it.
HVAC:
Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning.
Integrated ver tical laminar ¬ow zone (IVLFZ):
A designated ISO Class 5 area serving as the PEC within an ISO Class 7 or cleaner buffer
room. In the IVLFZ, unidirectional air¬ow is created by placing HEPA «lters over the entire surface of the worktables and by effective
placement of air returns.
IP
A:
Isopropyl alcohol.
ISO:
International Organization for Standardization.
ISO class:
An air-quality classi«cation from the International Organization for Standardization.
Label:
The par t of the labeling on the immediate container.
Labeling:
All labels and other written, printed, or graphic matter on the immediate container or on or inside any packaging system or
wrapper in which the ar ticle is enclosed, except any outer shipping container.
Laminar air¬ow system (LAFS):
A device or zone within a buffer room that provides an ISO Class 5 or better air quality environment for
sterile compounding. The system provides a unidirectional HEPA-«ltered air¬ow.
Laminar air¬ow workbench (LAFW):
A device that is a type of LAFS that provides an ISO Class 5 or better air quality environment for sterile
compounding. The device provides a unidirectional HEPA-«ltered air¬ow.
Line of demarcation:
A visible line on the ¬oor that separates the clean and dir ty sides of the anteroom.
Low-lint wiper:
A wiper exhibiting few, if any, «bers or other contamination, visible without magni«cation, which is separate from, or easily
removed from, the wiper material in a dry condition.
Master formulation record (MFR):
A detailed record of procedures that describes how the CSP is to be prepared.
MEA:
Malt extract agar.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 37 ===
Media-«ll test:
A simulation used to qualify processes and personnel engaged in sterile compounding to ensure that the processes and
personnel are able to prepare CSPs without contamination.
Monograph:
A quality documentary standard within USP–NF that ar ticulates the quality expectations for a medicine including for its identity,
strength, purity, and performance. It also describes the tests to validate that a medicine and its ingredients meet these criteria.
Multiple-dose container:
A container of sterile product for parenteral administration (e.g., injection or infusion) that is designed to contain
more than one dose of the sterile product. A multiple-dose container is usually required to meet the antimicrobial effectiveness testing
criteria. See 〈659〉, Injection Packaging Systems, Multiple-dose container.
One-step disinfectant cleaner:
A product with an EPA-registered (or equivalent) claim that it can clean and disinfect a nonporous surface in
the presence of light to moderate organic soiling without a separate cleaning step.
Oversight:
The review, monitoring, and supervision of actions taken by personnel, bearing responsibility for those actions, and being
available for consultation if and when needed even if not physically present.
Pass-through chamber:
An enclosure with sealed doors on both sides that should be interlocked. The pass-through chamber is positioned
between two spaces for the purpose of minimizing par ticulate transfer while moving materials from one space to another.
Perimeter:
A visible demarcation (such as a door, walls, or visible marking on the ¬oor) that de«nes the SCA or AECA.
Pharmaceutical isolator:
An enclosure that provides HEPA-«ltered ISO Class 5 unidirectional air operated at a continuously higher pressure
than its surrounding environment and is decontaminated using an automated system. It uses only decontaminated interfaces or rapid
transfer por ts for materials transfer. [Note—A CAI or CACI is not a pharmaceutical isolator.]
Pharmacy bulk package:
A conventionally manufactured sterile product for parenteral use that contains many single doses intended for
use in a pharmacy admixture program. A pharmacy bulk package may either be used to prepare admixtures for infusion or, through a sterile
transfer device, for «lling sterile containers. See 〈659〉, Injection Packaging Systems, Pharmacy bulk package.
Positive-pressure room:
A room that is maintained at higher pressure than the adjacent spaces, and therefore the net air¬ow is out of the
room.
PPE:
Personal protective equipment.
Preservative:
A substance added to inhibit microbial growth.
Primary engineering control (PEC):
A device or zone that provides an ISO Class 5 air quality environment for sterile compounding.
Probability of a nonsterile unit (PNSU):
The probability of an item being nonsterile after it has been exposed to a veri«ed sterilization
process. A PNSU value can only be applied to terminal sterilization. [Note—This is also called the sterility assurance level (SAL).]
Pyrogen:
A substance that induces a febrile reaction in a patient.
Quality assurance (QA):
A system of procedures, activities, and oversight that ensures that the compounding process consistently meets
quality standards.
Quality control (QC):
The sampling, testing, and documentation of results that, taken together, ensure that speci«cations have been met
before release of the CSP
.
Reconstitution:
The process of adding a diluent to a conventionally manufactured product to prepare a sterile solution or suspension.
Release inspection and testing:
Visual inspection and testing performed to ensure that a preparation meets appropriate quality
characteristics.
Repackaging:
The act of removing a sterile product or preparation from its original primary container and placing it into another primary
container, usually of smaller size without fur ther manipulation.
Restricted-access barrier system (RABS):
An enclosure that provides HEPA-«ltered ISO Class 5 unidirectional air that allows for the ingress
and/or egress of materials through de«ned openings that have been designed and validated to preclude the transfer of contamination, and
that generally are not to be opened during operations. Examples of RABS include CAIs and CACIs.
SDA:
Sabouraud dextrose agar.
Secondary engineering control (SEC):
The area where the PEC is placed (e.g., a cleanroom suite or an SCA). It incorporates speci«c design
and operational parameters required to minimize the risk of contamination within the compounding area.
Segregated compounding area (SCA):
A designated space, area, or room that is not required to be classi«ed and is de«ned with a visible
perimeter. The SCA must contain a PEC and is suitable for preparation of Category 1 CSPs only.
Single-dose containers:
A container of sterile product for parenteral administration (e.g., injection or infusion) that is designed for use with
a single patient as a single injection/infusion. A single-dose container usually does not contain a preservative. See 〈659〉, Injection
Packaging Systems, Single-dose container.
SOP:
Standard operating procedure.
Speci«cation:
The tests, analytical methods, and acceptance criteria to which any component, CSP
, container closure system, equipment, or
other material used in compounding CSPs must conform to be considered acceptable for its intended use.
Sporicidal disinfectant:
A chemical or physical agent that destroys bacterial and fungal spores when used in su­cient concentration for a
speci«ed contact time. It is expected to kill all vegetative microorganisms.
Stability:
The extent to which a product or preparation retains physical and chemical proper ties and characteristics within speci«ed limits
throughout its expiration or BUD.
Sterility:
The absence of viable microorganisms.
Sterility assurance level (SAL):
See the entry for Probability of a nonsterile unit (PNSU).
Sterilization by «ltration:
Passage of a gas or liquid through a sterilizing-grade membrane to yield «ltrates that are sterile.
Sterilizing-grade «lter:
Filter membranes that are documented to retain 100% of a culture of 10
7
 microorganisms of a strain of
Brevundimonas diminuta per square centimeters of membrane surface under a pressure of not less than 30 psi. Such «lter membranes are
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations


=== PAGE 38 ===
nominally 0.22- or 0.2-µm pore size.
Terminal sterilization:
The application of a lethal process (e.g., steam, dry heat, irradiation) to sealed containers for the purpose of
achieving a predetermined PNSU of greater than 10
−6
 or a probability of less than one in one million of a nonsterile unit.
TSA:
Trypticase soy agar.
Unclassi«ed space:
A space not required to meet any air cleanliness classi«cation based on the ISO.
Unidirectional air¬ow:
Air within a PEC moving in a single direction in a uniform manner and at su­cient velocity to sweep par ticles away
from the DCA.
Verify:
To con«rm that a method, process, system, or equipment will perform as expected under the conditions of actual use.
Visual smoke study:
A test, used in ISO Class 7 and ISO Class 8 rooms that do not have unidirectional air¬ow, in which a visible source of
smoke, which is neutrally buoyant, is used to verify an absence of stagnant air¬ow. This test does not need to be performed under dynamic
operating conditions and is not appropriate for PECs (see the entry for Dynamic air¬ow smoke pattern test).
Work¬ow management system:
Technology comprised of hardware and/or software that allows for automation to assist in the veri«cation
of components of, and preparation of, CSPs and to document components and processes.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<797> PHARMACEUTICAL COMPOUNDING--
STERILE PREPARATIONS
Selma Mitiche
Associate Scienti«c Liaison
CMP2020
Compounding 2020
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. 47(6)
Current DocID: GUID-A4CAAA8B-6F02-4AB8-8628-09E102CBD703_8_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99925_08_01
DOI ref: n7zrj
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 3:26 PM
USP-NF 〈797〉 Pharmaceutical Compounding—Sterile Preparations
