10.1	
Challenging the Area with Operational Activities
The area being mapped should be challenged with specific known operational activities during the thermal mapping 
process. These activities should simulate normal processes and functions that would occur for routine operations, 
such as opening interior doors, opening exterior doors (Receiving Dock Doors, Shipping Dock Doors) running of 
equipment (e.g., thermo-formers, stretch wrappers, forklifts, conveyors) etc. where there is a potential impact to the 
conditions. By performing these functions and operating equipment during the execution of the mapping studies, 
cause and effect relationships can be identified for the thermal profile.
10.2	
Open Door Recovery Test
An example of a typical operational activity is to examine recovery time for the internal chamber temperature after 
opening the access door and simulating loading/unloading. It is recommended to determine the time that the chamber 
door may remain fully open before the monitoring sensors are no longer within the acceptable range. This test can 
also help to determine how quickly the monitoring sensor recovers and returns to the normal operating temperature 
range. For an open door recovery test for a new Controlled Temperature Chamber, it is recommended to:
•	
Use a minimum (simulated) load or no load in the storage unit (i.e., no thermal mass stored so the worst case)
•	
Locate temperature sensors as recommended for thermal mapping (with special attention to the sensors located 
in proximity to the storage locations nearest the door being tested)
It is recommended to set the data acquisition rate to 1 minute intervals on the mapping system for this test, because 
of uncertainty in the time that the test may take.
Generally, there are no specific acceptance criteria for this test unless a recovery time is specified in the unit 
manufacturer’s specifications.
It is recommended that the Open Door Recovery Test is performed as an integral part of the mapping study to enable 
acquisition of the mapping data showing the potential impact of the loading/unloading activities.
Note: for larger walk-in Controlled Temperature Chambers fitted with vinyl curtains, the units may be able to maintain 
the internal conditions (temperatures) indefinitely, as the impact of passing through the curtains is short term and has 
a negligible impact on the temperature. Vinyl curtains should be well-fitted, rest on the unit walls, and sit just clear of 
the floor.
10.3	
Power Outage/Thermal Degradation Test (recovery from power failure or power 
interruption)
Another type of test that may be helpful from a business continuity, disaster recovery, and operational perspective 
is a simulated Power Outage Test. This type of test would measure the amount of time the Controlled Temperature 
Chamber remained within the desired temperature range once electrical power was turned off.
Note: although it is expected the Controlled Temperature Chamber will have redundant and backup power supplies, 
the results from this test would provide data to define how quickly materials need to be moved to another location if 
the backup power systems failed. Doors to the storage chamber should remain closed during this test.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 52]
Page 50	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
For a power outage/thermal degradation (and subsequent recovery) test for a Controlled Temperature Chamber, it is 
recommended to:
•	
Use a minimum (simulated) load or with no load in the Controlled Temperature Chamber. This is another test that 
is recommended as commissioning activity referenced in OQ before the storage unit is put into use, if possible. 
Proofer question: should this instead be Controlled Temperature Chamber?
•	
Locate temperature sensors as recommended for thermal mapping
It is recommended to set the data acquisition rate to 1 minute intervals for this test, because of uncertainty in the time 
that the test may take.
Generally, there are no specific acceptance criteria for this test unless a recovery time is specified in the unit’s 
manufacturer’s specifications.
In addition, once power is restored to the Controlled Temperature Chamber, the amount of time required to have the 
area return to the appropriate required temperature can be of value for operational considerations for recovery from 
a disaster, or after a maintenance activity (i.e., elapsed time for recovery of temperature sensor(s) from the time from 
when power is restored until the last temperature sensor(s) return to acceptable range).
Note: this test was previously included in the USP, but has subsequently been removed.
Calibration and Calibration Strategies
There are benefits to be derived from a considered calibration strategy:
•	
Many of the instruments on the refrigeration system can only be calibrated when the system is emptied for major 
maintenance: therefore, they are calibrated following the manufactures recommendations
•	
The control sensor can be verified at a single point, as the control functions are usually based on whether the 
system is above or below the operating set point
•	
The monitoring sensors should be calibrated across the operating range, as they provide the data to support the 
quality determinations in support of product quality
Access Control
Areas where product is stored should have a system to prevent unauthorized access. This system can be part of a 
site keycard system, or use a lock and key with procedural controls which identify who holds, and is entitled to use, 
the key.
Dehumidification
Dehumidification should be considered for a cold room or freezer. The life of the equipment can be extended where 
there are fewer defrost cycles required (reduced expansion/contraction). Dehumidification can also reduce the risk 
of ice forming on a freezer floor, which presents a safety hazard. For large distribution facilities it may be worth 
considering the layout, and providing access to a walk-in freezer through a cold room, in order to reduce moisture in 
the freezer.
Equipment Durability
When specifying a new facility, it is worthwhile defining the system design life i.e., the expected operating lifespan 
without significant maintenance. High quality refrigeration systems can have an expected life of 12 to 15 years. 
Standby systems are usually installed for an installation holding material of a significant commercial value.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 53]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 51
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
11	 Packaged Transport Systems
11.1	
Active Shipping Containers: Unit Load Devices
Currently there are two types of Unit Load Devices (ULD) systems suitable for the shipping of temperature sensitive 
product, designed for use in aircraft. They are powered to either cool or heat the air within the container. A general system 
description of two systems which are commercially available at the time of publication is provided below for reference.
11.1.1	
System 1 Description
The Temperature Controlled Cargo Unit (TCCU) is designed for air and ground transport of temperature sensitive 
pharmaceutical products at 5°C (41°F) (The TCCU is designed to maintain the 5°C (41°F) storage temperature in 
transport mode for 72 hours when the ambient temperature is 30°C (86°F)). The TCCU is also designed to maintain 
5°C (41°F) during brief ambient temperature excursion events ranging from -40°C (-40ºF) to +60°C (+140°F).
For air transport, the TCCU is secured to a ULD that meets the requirements of TSO-C90c [23], allowing for use of a 
fork lift truck for relocating the system, but not a pallet jack.
The interior storage space is designed for the foot print of a 40 in × 48 in (102 cm × 122 cm) pallet containing 1100 lb 
(500 Kg) of product.
Interior dimensions of the storage space are 46 in high × 44 in wide × 51.5 in deep (117 cm high × 112 cm wide × 131 
cm deep). Access to the storage space is through a hinged door on the front of the TCCU.
The exterior dimensions of the TCCU are 58.5 in high × 80.0 in wide × 52.5 in deep (149 cm high × 203 cm wide × 
133 cm deep).
11.1.1.1	
Description of System 1 Controls
Cooling of the storage space is accomplished by fans circulating air over a “cold” plate. When the ambient 
temperature drops below the storage temperature, the fans circulate air across a “warm” plate. The fans are 
controlled by electronics that monitor the temperature of the storage space. The electronics includes a status panel to 
communicate the condition of the TCCU to the End User. A data logger monitors and records the temperature in the 
storage space. The TCCU includes a Global Positioning System (GPS)/Global System for Mobile (GSM) module that 
is used to transmit the TCCU’s location, the temperature in the storage area, and the charge status of the cold plate, 
the warm plate, and the 24 Volts of Direct Current (VDC) battery.
The TCCU has two modes of operation: the “recharge mode” and the “transport mode”.
In the recharge mode, the TCCU is connected to an Alternating Current (AC) power source between 100-240V, 50 or 
60Hz. A refrigeration system cools the cold plate, and a heater in the warm plate recharges the warm plate. The 24V 
Direct Current (DC) battery is also recharged while the TCCU is connected to AC power. The status panel indicates 
when the cold plate, the warm plate and the battery have been charged to full capacity.
In transport mode, the cargo is loaded into the TCCU and AC power is disconnected. The TCCU is in transport mode 
any time the AC power is disconnected from the unit. The 24VDC battery supplies power to the fans to circulate air 
across the “cold” plate or the “warm” plate to maintain 5°C (41°F) in the storage space. The electronic controls and 
status panel are also powered by the 24VDC battery during transport mode.
The control system indicators are described below:
• 
Power indicator: Illuminates when power is applied to the TCCU; when the battery switch/breaker is in the “on” 
position or when the TCCU is connected to AC power and the AC switch/breaker is in the “on” position
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 54]
Page 52	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
• 
Battery Charge indicator: applicable only in recharge mode; flashes while the battery is charging; continuously on 
when the battery is charged
• 
Battery Charge Low indicator: turns on for 2 seconds when switching to transport mode; flashes when the battery 
is low on charge when in transport mode; continuously on when on AC power and battery switch/circuit breaker 
is off
• 
Warm/Cool Plate Charge indicator: applicable only in recharge mode; flashes while the warm and cool plates are 
charging; continuously on when both the warm and cool plates are charged
• 
Warm/Cool Plate Low indicator: applicable only in transport mode; turns on for 2 seconds when switching to 
transport mode; flashes when the TCCU is low on warming or cooling capacity
• 
Warming indicator: illuminates when the warming fans are on
• 
Cooling indicator: illuminates when the cooling fans are on
The system is fitted with a data logger, and GSM module, that allows data on the system status, alarm status, and 
location to be transmitted.
11.1.2	
System 2 Description
This Temperature Controlled Container is designed for air and ground transport of temperature sensitive 
pharmaceutical products in the refrigerated or controlled room temperature ranges. The unit is designed to maintain 
the 5°C (41°F) storage temperature in transport mode for 30 hours when the ambient temperature is between -10°C 
(14°F) and 30°C (86°F). (Note: the unit is designed to be loaded with product at the storage temperature, it is not 
intended to warm or cool the load). The unit will also maintain 5°C (41°F) during brief ambient temperature excursion 
events ranging from -20°C to +40°C (-4°F to -40ºF).
The interior storage space is designed for a US 40 in × 48 in (102 cm × 122 cm) or EURO 47.3 in × 31.5 in (120 cm × 
80 cm) by pallet containing up to 2100 lb (953 Kg) of product.
Interior dimensions of the storage space are 51.7 in high × 51.9 in wide × 52.7 in deep (131 cm high × 132 cm wide × 
134 cm deep). Access to the storage space is through a hinged door on the front of the unit.
The exterior dimensions are 63.8 in high × 78.7 in wide × 60.4 in deep (162 cm high × 200 cm wide × 153 cm deep).
11.1.2.1	 Description of System 2 Controls
Cooling of the storage space is accomplished by an air circulation system that passes the air over two electrical 
heaters and an evaporator, powered by three cooling compressors. The air return temperature is monitored to control 
the supply air temperature.
The control has four incremental steps for cooling, and two for heating.
The unit uses two rechargeable Nickel-Metal Hydride (NiMH) batteries for powering the heating and cooling unit of 
the container. When the heating and cooling unit is not being used, the batteries are only used to power the control 
unit. When the container is plugged in for charging, the heating and cooling unit uses external power instead of 
battery power.
The control system indicators are:
• 
System on indicator: green Light Emitting Diode (LED)
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 55]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 53
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
• 
Charge indicator: blue LED (flashes during charging; fixed when the unit is fully charged)
• 
Alarm indicator: red LED
• 
Alert indicator: yellow LED
• 
Display: showing battery charge level, unit set point and operating temperature/alarm messages
Alerts are:
• 
Batteries at 30% charge level
• 
Inside temperature outside specification
• 
Ambient temperature outside specification
• 
Compressor “x” out of order or compressor “x” not starting
Alarms are:
• 
Failure of a refrigeration system
11.1.3	
Approaches for the Use of an Active Shipping Container
There are two possible approaches:
• 
Unit Qualification
• 
Supplier Assessment
11.1.3.1	 Unit Qualification
It is possible to map each individual unit, to confirm its satisfactory operation and to qualify the service supplier 
to ensure that their maintenance and calibration quality systems are robust, as this type of equipment is usually 
provided by a service supplier. The pharmaceutical or biopharmaceutical organization should specify use of the 
mapped units.
11.1.3.2	 Supplier Assessment
1. 
Qualification of the manufacturer of the units: the design and factory testing should be reviewed to ensure that it 
is robust
2. 
Qualification of the service supplier: the maintenance and calibration quality systems of service suppliers should 
be reviewed in order to ensure that they are robust
The second approach can provide a more flexible system. Usually the pharmaceutical or biopharmaceutical 
organization will include a temperature logger with the shipment, to provide independent assurance that the specified 
conditions were maintained during shipping.
Regardless of the approach, the method for loading and unloading the unit should be qualified and procedurally 
defined. Usually the unit arrives on site at temperature, the End User should confirm that the TCCU is visually clean, 
and load the unit. Loading may take place in CRT or cooled conditions.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 56]
Page 54	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
When the unit is unloaded the shipment should be placed into quarantine until the information from the data logger 
is checked to confirm that the shipment was within the defined limits for the duration of the shipment. If the shipment 
was not within the defined limits for the duration of the shipment, a Non-Conformance should be raised and the 
implications of the out of conditions incident should be investigated.
11.2	
Temperature Controlled Trailers
Temperature controlled over-the-road trailers can be used to move significant amounts of temperature sensitive 
pharmaceutical product. An approach offered in North America and Europe that takes into account the fact that trucks 
in most jurisdictions are manufactured to specifications that allow the End Users of these trucks to leverage accepted, 
voluntary industry standards and focus on the Critical Process Parameters (CPPs) that affect the operational 
performance of every load carried.
Trailers have a different set of environmental and usage profiles when compared to in situ custom-built Controlled 
Temperature Chambers which are owned and controlled by each pharmaceutical or biopharmaceutical organization 
e.g.:
• 
Loading and unloading operations
• 
Defrost cycles
• 
Loading patterns
Moisture, as a degradation element, is much more prevalent in trailers due to the operational profile i.e., continuous 
running for a several days, followed by periods of downtime when the trailer is empty. Rigorous inspection of each 
trailer should be performed prior to loading to account for potential damage by moisture along with potential damage 
to the sidewalls by forklifts. An approach that takes these differences into account while leveraging the construction 
standards is presented in this Section of this Guide.
These considerations apply to trailers used for long distance transport, as well as those used for local delivery 
purposes.
Distribution of temperature sensitive pharmaceutical or biopharmaceutical product via a temperature controlled trailer 
is a unit operation that requires Qualification. The mapping of every trailer is not considered a substitute for adopting 
a defined methodology that identifies suitable equipment and applies a control strategy to the day-to-day operations 
in order to maintain suitable temperature ranges for pharmaceuticals.
Intermodal containers have unique usage patterns, including power interruptions, during loading and unloading 
operations from the ship. These represent additional considerations to what is presented here and should be included 
in the qualification of ISO containers.
Manufacturers who build temperature controlled vehicles for the food and pharmaceutical/biopharmaceutical 
industry adhere to voluntary standards that allow the End User to take a “family” approach (i.e., several units of the 
same make and model) to performance qualification. The focus of activities should be on the key operational and 
maintenance elements. This can help to establish a high confidence for this distribution unit operation.
11.3	
Trailer Design
Trailers are designed to maintain product temperature. Product loaded into the trailer should be equilibrated to the 
appropriate temperature before loading. During transit, as heat or cold penetrates the walls, roof, and floor of the 
trailer, circulating airflows capture the environmental heat or cold. This environmental heat or cold is then conditioned 
to the desired temperature in the HVAC unit on the front of the trailer.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 57]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 55
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Note: fresh fruits and vegetables produce heat from respiration; this adds load and an allowance for normal 
degradation of the insulation is a design consideration factored into the sizing of the HVAC unit. Pharmaceutical and 
biopharmaceutical products do not give off respiration heat; therefore, the HVAC units have additional reserve cooling 
capacity when the trailers are used for hauling these products.
Depending on the geographical area, manufactures build and test trailers to meet the standards of one of two 
organizations:
1.	
In North America, the governing body is the American Trucking Association (ATA) Technology & Maintenance 
Council (TMC)
2.	
In Europe the standards are part of the Agreement on the International Carriage of Perishable Foodstuffs and on 
the Special Equipment to be Used for such Carriage (ATP)
The TMC specifies four general temperature ranges for perishable goods. These ranges coincide with the general 
storage ranges of many pharmaceutical drug products. The ATP recognizes three temperature ranges. Both the TMC 
and the ATP evaluate the insulation and HVAC unit in order to certify a unit.
In North America, manufacturers can voluntarily certify the capability to one of the performance criteria shown in Table 
11.1. Most trailers sold in North America are built to correspond to the F classification.
A stamped metal plate providing details of the certification of these trailers should be requested when the order is 
placed with the trailer manufacturer. Trailer manufactures may issue a plate with the certification post-manufacturing 
if the vehicle identification number is provided. A quality agreement with the carrier should confirm that the trailer, 
delivered as new, was either F or DF rated, regardless of the presence or absence of a stamped metal plate.
Table 11.1: TMC and ATP Trailer Classification Categories
11.4	
Insulation Degradation
The trailer floor, roof, walls, and doors are insulated with polyurethane. Polyurethane is a general term used to refer 
to a family of two part plastics. A blowing agent i.e., CO2 with other gases, provides the foamed characteristic of 
the material along with a very high insulation value. Over time the blowing agent gas migrates out of the substrate 
and it is replaced with air and water vapor. This transition occurs slowly over a period of years and is normal. The 
temperature control unit is sized accordingly to assure a useful life of 15 years with timely maintenance to protect the 
core insulation of the trailer.
11.5	
Trailer Validation Approach
A user requirement for this unit operation is straightforward; the product must be maintained at its designated storage 
condition and arrive at the destination in acceptable physical condition.
Certifying Organization
Application
TMC North America
ATP Europe
C65
FRA
Controlled Room Temperature
C35
FRB
Refrigerated
F
FRC
Frozen
DF
Deep Frozen
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 58]
Page 56	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
As the industry standards ensure that there is a minimal trailer-to-trailer difference for each classification as built, the 
validation approach falls to the firm to consider the impact of loading patterns, inspectional criteria, maintenance, 
as well as the specification of trailer classification for a matrix approach to assure suitability. The validation exercise 
is focused on the loading patterns and assuring that proper airflow can be achieved under conditions of heat and 
cold to maintain the product within acceptable temperature ranges. Even temperature distribution within the trailer 
is dependent on airflow. Loading practices that block airflow impede the addition or removal of heat and result in 
product temperature that may not be controlled within the required range.
A written protocol should be prepared to document temperatures nearest the product during seasonal extremes. The 
loading method should be documented. An alternative to actual over-the-road shipments may be the use of thermal 
chambers in which the loaded trailer can be placed to gather both hot and cold conditions.
The validation would utilize a typical trailer type available to the firm. As mentioned above, the F rated trailer is the 
most common. A successful study on an F rated trailer would also imply that a DF rated trailer would also be suitable 
because of additional insulation and conditioning capacity. The study should include a demonstration of the effects 
likely to occur, such as loading practices and defrost cycling that may briefly affect the internal air temperature of the 
trailer, but will not have an impact on packaged product.
11.6	
Trailer Loading Patterns
Loading patterns in a well maintained truck are the key determinate in assuring even product temperature within the 
trailer. The product should be loaded on pallets that allow free airflow the length of the trailer and the product should 
not be in contact with the walls of the trailer. Double stacking of refrigerated goods should be carefully considered, 
as airflow distribution in the rear of the trailer may not be sufficient to maintain uniform temperature under extreme 
conditions.
11.6.1	
Inspectional Criteria
The Quality Agreement between the carrier and the company should define the shared responsibilities of inspection. 
The following items should be inspected for each use as they have direct impact on suitability and function of the 
trailer:
• 
Air distribution chute intact
• 
Air supply, air returns and floor drains clear of debris
• 
Repairs to interior and exterior surfaces
• 
Door seals intact
• 
General cleanliness (visual inspection)
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 59]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 57
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
12	 Maintenance
The supplier of the refrigeration equipment should provide general recommendations for the maintenance of the 
equipment, in regard to the specific application. These recommendations may not recognize the high value of the 
stored goods in this application. The potential impact on the maintenance program should be assessed.
This Chapter discusses factors which should be considered in a maintenance program. For further information on 
maintenance programs see the ISPE Good Practice Guide on Maintenance [24].
12.1	
Cleaning of the Coils
The coils (unit cooler and air cooled condenser) should be cleaned regularly and checked for any damage to ensure 
that the performance levels are maintained. Damaged or distorted fins should be straightened with a suitable comb. 
This inspection should also ensure that there is no corrosion of the fins.
Regular inspection should also confirm that the defrost cycle is effective (where applicable), especially if the cycle is 
adjusted to account for seasonal variation.
General Cleaning
The approach to cleaning should be considered. Dry cleaning is preferred, in order to minimize risk of contamination. 
Regular inspection is recommended to ensure that there is no unseen microbial/fungicidal growth. Any growth 
detected should be addressed.
12.2	
Check the Condensate Pipework
The condensate pipework should be checked to ensure that it is not damaged and that it has the correct fall and flows 
freely. Trace heating or insulation also should be checked.
Periodic verification during operation is also recommended; this should ensure that the pipe supports are adequate 
and have not loosened.
12.3	
Functional Testing of the Unit Coolers/Defrost Elements
There is usually no feedback from the solenoid valve on the unit coolers, so the only way of checking their correct 
operation is to carry out, periodically, a functional check to verify the performance of each unit cooler.
12.4	
Leak Testing
It is considered a good practice to periodically check the pipe runs, as well as the equipment for leaks, using one of 
the electronic test devices now available. This may be a mandatory requirement, depending on region.
•	
The system refrigerant fluid level and pressure against the system specification should be periodically checked 
and documented. Early detection may help avoid system failure
•	
It may be necessary to keep a record of the refrigerant used for the system
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 60]
Page 58	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
•	
Equipment rooms may be fitted with leakage detectors/alarms; these should be calibrated and checked regularly
•	
End Users should be aware of the local regulatory requirements
12.5	
Thermal Scanning
The panels, doors, door seals, and sealing of utility penetrations can degrade over time (foamed panels may be 
better in this respect than panels filled with mineral wool). A thermal scan of the installation will allow any degradation 
to be seen and appropriate action taken. As a minimum, the penetrations should be visually inspected to ensure that 
they are sound with no leakage/ingress of condensation. For conduit penetrations, the internal sealing also should be 
checked to ensure that condensation is not leaking inside the conduit.
12.6	
System Alarms
The entire alarm system should be periodically tested by direct or simulated temperature change against the specified 
alarm set points and proper functionality of audible and visual alarms at local and/or remote alarm stations (e.g., 
emails, phone calls, or text based alerts) should be confirmed and documented.
Regardless of the root cause, product losses from cold storage-related failures can be prevented with the proper 
design and operation of the alarm system, and proper End User response to an alarm event. Periodic testing of the 
alarm system should help to ensure that it will work when needed.
The system maintenance procedures can be used to provide a confirmation that the system performance remains 
satisfactory, supporting a reduced requirement for remapping where appropriate. The data from the monitoring 
system should be reviewed periodically, to look for any negative performance trends. Suggested maintenance 
procedures for different system types are suggested.
CRT Storage Area (Warehouse)
1.	
The building envelope should be inspected to ensure that there is no visible degradation of the materials of 
construction, or of seals/curtains that would impact ingress of unconditioned air.
2.	
The system alarm history for the period since the last system maintenance (temperature monitoring system, 
HVAC system temperature/humidity, and airflow volume sensors as applicable) should be reviewed to see if 
there are any negative performance trends indicated, observations should be noted in the maintenance record.
3.	
The HVAC system should be visually checked to ensure that the system balance remains as commissioned; 
through verification that balancing dampers remain in their as commissioned/ marked settings.
4.	
Heating/cooling coils are checked and cleaned, if necessary.
5.	
The control system records should be checked to confirm that control valves are not operating at 100% 
(indicating that system performance limits are being reached, or that there are utility system issues), unless the 
control algorithms require that this is what the control valves should do e.g., for dehumidification.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 61]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 59
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Walk-in Refrigerators/Freezers
1.	
The system envelope should be inspected to ensure that there is no visible degradation of the materials of 
construction, door or window seals, door curtains, or air leakage paths, as indicated by moisture or ice buildup.
2.	
The system alarm history (temperature monitoring system and refrigeration system general alarms) should be 
reviewed for the period since the last maintenance to see if there any negative performance trends are indicated; 
observations should be noted in the maintenance record.
3.	
The system should be checked to ensure that the refrigeration system set point is being maintained e.g., 
compressor suction pressure.
4.	
The maintenance history should be checked to ensure that:
•	
Coils have been cleaned, if needed and applicable
•	
Fan operation has been checked
•	
Operation of the unit cooler control valves and thermal expansion valves has been checked
•	
Defrost settings and operation of the defrost system have been verified, if applicable
Standalone Refrigerators and Freezers
1.	
The system envelope should be inspected to ensure that there is no degradation of the materials of construction, 
door seals, or air leakage paths, as indicated by moisture or ice buildup.
2.	
The system alarm history (temperature monitoring system and refrigeration system general alarms) should be 
reviewed for the period since the last maintenance to see if there any negative performance trends are indicated; 
observations should be noted in the maintenance record.
3.	
The system should be checked to ensure that the refrigeration system set point is being maintained e.g. 
compressor suction pressure.
4.	
The maintenance history should be checked to ensure that:
•	
Coils have been cleaned, if needed and applicable
•	
Fan operation has been checked
•	
Operation of the unit cooler control valves and thermal expansion valves has been checked
•	
Defrost settings and operation of the defrost system have been verified, if applicable
Where a system has multiple monitoring locations e.g., the control sensor, and an independent temperature monitor 
located to monitor the hot/cold locations in the unit, the preventive maintenance is not required to confirm satisfactory 
unit operation. The review of current system performance data against the as Qualified data by an SME can be used 
to confirm consistent system performance.
This review should assess the thermal performance of the unit insulation and the conditioning system, allowing 
a suitably experienced SME to determine if there has been a significant change in performance that may require 
maintenance activities to improve or if the system is still performing acceptably.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 62]
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 63]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 61
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Appendix 1
