Appendix 6
18	 Appendix 6 – Example Testing Strategies
18.1	
Example 1: Mapping Strategy for a Walk-in Conditioned Space
This Appendix presents an example of developing the mapping strategy for a 20 ft × 20 ft × 10 ft (6 m × 6 m × 3 m) 
space for storage of up to ten double stacked pallets of materials at a controlled room temperature.
1. 
The purpose of the facility should be identified. This example facility is to be used for storage of up to ten double 
stacked pallets of materials at a controlled room temperature. There are no process steps (e.g., rolling heated 
material into the space) that could cause variable heat loads or impact the temperature of other materials located 
nearby. Additional mapping probes to detect potential impact on the spaces temperature profile are, therefore, 
not needed
2.	
The size of the facility is given as 20 ft × 20 ft × 10 ft (6 m × 6 m × 3 m). In general, the three dimensional space 
should be divided into at least three planes:
• 
Upper level of space
• 
Middle level of space
• 
Lower level of space
3. 
Using the concepts described for spaces up to 70 cubic ft (2 m3), probes should be located on the upper and 
lower levels at the four corners of the space and a single probe in the center of the box (see Figure 18.1).
Figure 18.1: Mapping Locations for a CRT Space up to 70 cubic feet (2 cubic meters)
4. 
For spaces up to 700 cubic ft (20 m3), add a probe in the center of each face of the spaces walls, ceiling and floor 
(see Figure 18.2).
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 94]
Page 92	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 6	
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
Figure 18.2: Mapping Locations for a CRT Space up to 700 cubic feet (20 cubic meters)
5. 
For spaces greater than 700 cubic ft (20 m³), the configuration given in Figure 18.2 should be used and 
supplementary probes should be added, as appropriate, to demonstrate uniformity of temperature and 
conformance with product requirements. There is no definitive standard or regulatory guidance to define the 
number of thermocouples or temperature recording devices used in mapping a space. A rule of thumb based 
on review of existing facilities is to allow a distance no greater than 30 ft (9 m) between both the horizontal 
and vertical direction of sensors. For this example, the volume is 4000 cubic ft (113 m3), so the configuration in 
Figure 18.2 is appropriate as a starting point. Vertical and horizontal distances are not greater than 30 ft (9 m) so 
additional probes are not suggested beyond the probes identified in Figure 18.2.
6. 
The air supply for the space is a ceiling diffuser with four returns located in each of the corners. There are no 
racks, shelves, or other obstructions to air flow within the space. The pallets have the potential to be stacked to 
a height of 6 ft (1.8 m), so will not create significant obstruction to air flow. Material will not be stored near the 
ceiling along the walls, so there is no concern for “hotspots” in these locations that would not already be detected 
by the probes mounted at the middle plane along each of the walls. No additional probes would be suggested 
beyond the probes identified in Figure 18.2.
7. 
The room is inside a general purpose building that is conditioned throughout the year to 20°C (68°F) so there is 
no concern for external temperature extremes compared to the controlled environment that could penetrate the 
walls/ceilings/floors, nor create temperature control issues when the door is opened to move material or people. 
No additional probes would be suggested (such as near windows, doors, walls, etc.) beyond the probes identified 
in Figure 18.2.
8. 
There are lights in the facility; however, there is no product to be stored near the fixtures that might be impacted 
by heat generated during operation. There are no motors, compressors, computers, or other heat generating 
equipment located in the space that might impact temperatures in the immediate vicinity. There are no materials 
being stored in the facility that have the potential for exothermic/endothermic reactions that might impact 
temperatures in the immediate vicinity. No additional probes would be suggested beyond the probes identified in 
Figure 18.2.
9. 
The HVAC system consists of a dedicated single air unit which is a recirculation system with a supply fan, 
cooling and heating coils. It is located remotely from the space. There is no redundancy which might prescribe 
the need to test conditions for each unit or during switchover. There are no defrost cycles that would need to be 
identified and included in the testing cycle, and with no defrost cycles, or significantly colder/hotter temperatures 
of supply air, there is no need for additional probes to define potential impact on product stored in the immediate 
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 95]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 93
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Appendix 6
path of supply air. Failure of the air system could have an impact on environmental conditions in the space. This 
potential impact should be identified and accounted for in the design of the system. Appropriate testing would 
then be performed to demonstrate capability during Commissioning. For this system, the facility is located inside 
an environment already controlled to conditions within the limits of the facility; therefore, failure of the air system 
would not impact the temperature of the space. If there were a potential, the testing strategy would include 
testing under failure conditions to demonstrate how long the facility can maintain conditions appropriate for 
storage.
18.2	
Example 2: Mapping Strategy for a Refrigerator
Figure 18.3: Mapping Locations for a Refrigerator
A mapping strategy for standard unit refrigerators and walk-in units follows the same development steps as described 
in Example 1 for a walk-in unit. Due to the potential for air flow blockage from the shelves and/or material stored on 
the shelves, each level should be considered a mapping zone with a complement of probes assigned to each level.
The strategy should consider the unit and potential to relocate intermediate shelves, ideally defining the lower and 
upper limits, with the test load designed so that shelving may be moved as required during operation. One concept 
that has been successfully used is to define the limiting parameters for the load on a self-adhesive label attached to 
the unit door e.g., allow 3in (75 mm) clearance on the side front and rear of the unit, lowest shelf position 4 in (100 
mm) from the bottom of the unit, minimum top clearance 4 in (100 mm), maximum room temperature load 20 lb (9 
Kg).
Figure 18.3 shows a typical layout using five probes per shelf. If shelves allow circulation, the intermediate shelf 
probes may be replaced with a probe in the center of the refrigerator. Another option is to place three probes per 
shelf, alternating corners (front and back) on each level Figure 18.4. An assessment of the potential circulation will 
dictate the density option, five per shelf for the poorest circulation (solid shelves densely packed), three per shelf for 
intermediate circulation (wire shelves packed very full), and probes in four corners and middle of refrigerator for good 
circulation (wire shelves with lots of space for air circulation between contents).
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 96]
Page 94	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 6	
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
Figure 18.4: Alternative Mapping Locations for a Refrigerator
Temperatures may be monitored in the load or a suitable buffer to record the load temperature rather than the air 
temperature if there is concern for short temporary fluctuations outside of the acceptable ranges due to defrost 
cycles, door openings, or other predictable occurrences. The air temperature is affected more by repeatedly opening 
and closing the door for smaller systems, due to the temperature differences between the internal space and the 
surrounding environment. The volume of stored material can act as a “heat sink” to maintain the temperature of 
the space. These loads can be either actual product or simulated product with similar thermal properties. If using 
simulated product, what is being used and how it is comparable (e.g., 20 ml of water is being used instead of insulin 
because the thermal properties of water are identical to insulin and will behave in the same manner as insulin 
stored in this facility and the smallest container stored in the facility is 20 ml) should be documented. The internal air 
temperature distribution should be mapped in the empty and full state to demonstrate operating capability throughout 
all states of content. Full state is defined as the maximum amount anticipated being stored in the unit (this should 
follow manufacturer’s recommendations and be aligned with the requirements in the URS) provided the rationale 
and control over operational conditions is documented. Afterwards temperature distribution should be checked under 
conditions of normal use.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 97]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 95
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Appendix 6
18.3	
Example 3: Warehouse Mapping Layout and Rationale
The development of a mapping strategy for a warehouse should follow the steps identified above. For example, start 
with the basic room configuration identified in Figure 18.5. Temperature probes are positioned so that there is not 
more than 30 ft (9 m) vertical separation or 30 ft (9 m) of horizontal separation.
Figure 18.5: Mapping Locations for a Warehouse (basic configuration)
Identify air flow restrictions based on the location of the air supply and location/orientation of full pallet racks, drums, 
tanks etc. Additional temperature probes should then be added in areas of restricted airflow. In the case of full racks 
and/or shelves, the restricted air flow may impact the temperature profile so additional probes should be added based 
on expected air flow pattern.
Figure 18.6 shows how the locations for additional monitoring probes could be added if the area conditioning air 
supply is from one direction as indicated in the drawings.
Figure 18.6: Mapping Locations for a Warehouse (where HVAC is from one direction)
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 98]
Page 96	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 6	
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
Mapping of warehouses requires both empty and full state (again, full is defined as the maximum amount anticipated 
being stored in the facility). In the case of warehouses, the mass of the material is not as significant a factor as the 
volume, in terms of altering air flow patterns. The full state may be met by simulating the rack loads with empty 
storage containers (cartons, boxes, pallet boxes, etc.) to obstruct the air flow patterns, as they would when holding 
actual product. However, if the heating/cooling is provided centrally, the racking nearest the walls may be considered 
as a layer of insulation; therefore, thermal mass would influence performance. This should be considered when 
developing the strategy and defining the test strategy. It may be achieved by loading a representative section of 
racking with a simulated load incorporating thermal mass.
Mapping of controlled room temperature warehouses has the same requirements.
With this mapping strategy outlined, the probe locations should be reviewed again to verify and document the 
locations critical to the facility capability.
18.3.1	 Warehouse Load Testing
When defining how the unit will be tested, the following should be considered:
• 
Is the area used to condition the stored material, or does it arrive within the specified conditions?
• 
What is the worst case condition:
- 
An empty store with the maximum specified load arriving at the most extreme conditions permitted?
- 
A store with the maximum load; this may be considered in terms of the impact of the thermal mass or load 
volume impeding airflow?
Note: it is typically considered that testing to represent the extreme conditions, empty and fully loaded, provides 
adequate assurance of operation in partially loaded conditions. Where a system is divided into zones, the load testing 
may be justified on a zone basis.
• 
What will be the worst case conditions in use:
- 
Doors held open for the maximum specified time in extreme environmental conditions?
The area/System Owner may also want to use this opportunity to test system performance with simulated cooling 
equipment component failures, to provide data that may be useful to defend continued use of the system during 
operation with an equipment failure.
For more examples showing suggestions for mapping temperature sensor layout and supporting rationale for some 
common cold room layouts, see Section 9.
18.3.2	 Summer/Winter Testing
An organization may use a risk assessment to determine if seasonal testing is required. Risk mitigation factors to 
consider include:
• 
A robust software program was used to calculate the HVAC design/predict area performance
• 
The commissioning practices used for the HVAC system confirm that the components perform to meet the design 
specification (e.g., fan volumes with clean and simulated dirty filters, heating and cooling coil capacities)
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 99]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 97
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Appendix 6
• 
The number and location of the monitoring sensors are adequate to provide evidence if the environment exceeds 
the specified conditions (“continuous mapping” in effect)
• 
Impact of external temperature extremes (when conditions are expected to exceed limits of normal operation by 
± 6°C (± 10°F) for greater than 3 hours). Unless the warehouse is located in a temperate geographic location and 
not subject to extreme temperatures, the mapping exercise should be performed both during summer and winter 
in order to assess the worst case scenarios, as extremes of temperature may adversely affect the temperature 
distribution within the warehouse storage area due to insulation capabilities, equipment performance, and other 
factors
• 
If initial mapping is performed under conditions of extreme external temperature, then one supplemental mapping 
should be performed within the first year to test under the opposite season i.e., one with heating and one with 
cooling. If the initial mapping cannot be performed during one of these extreme conditions, this could be allowed 
for in the monitoring strategy e.g., by provision of additional sensors, or identification of the hot/cold spots during 
the heating/cooling seasons. The full state could also be tested in the subsequent seasonal remapping, as:
- 
Seasonal testing is required for installations that could be impacted by seasonal extremes
- 
A warehouse is not typically filled to capacity in the first six months
Alternatively, organizations may perform mapping of warehouses over a full year. The external conditions are 
compared to the specified design conditions, and a judgment made to determine if the results adequately represent 
all seasons (likely seasonal extremes). These results are used to help define locations for the permanent monitoring 
locations and to ensure that locations consider the impact of seasonal variations on the locations likely to experience 
minimum/maximum temperatures. These uses should be taken into consideration during the comparison of the 
results.
For controlled temperature rooms, e.g., cold rooms, it may be considered adequate to map the system once, on the 
basis that the surrounding environment is controlled and the monitoring system provides adequate assurance that 
the internal conditions are being maintained, any impact from the outside temperatures on the performance of the 
heating/cooling system would be visible from the monitoring system, as the temperature profiles in the conditioned 
space would not be affected.
The rationale for the load and seasonal testing should be defined in a document that is reviewed and approved by the 
Quality Unit and the area/System Owner.
A sample document is included in Appendix 2.
It is considered good practice to review the initial monitoring data and compare the results with the defined 
requirements of the URS, to ensure that the requirements have been met.
Where user requirements have not been met, the designer/supplier should be asked to review the data and make 
recommendations for corrective action, to ensure that the system complies with the design specification. Depending 
on the contracts in place these modifications may be at the design authority’s or equipment supplier’s expense, and 
should be managed through engineering change management.
The USP provides guidance in General Chapter <659> Packaging and Storage Requirements” [11].
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 100]
Page 98	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 6	
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
18.4	
Example 4: Test Document/Protocol
A. Define the system to be tested and confirm the calibration of the instrumentation to be used. The response time8 
for the instrumentation IEST-RP-CC006.3 [27] recommends a 63.2% time constant of no more than 15 seconds 
for areas with stricter environmental control specifications. This correlates to 75 seconds to achieve 99% (five 
time constants). This response time should be taken into account when matching temperature sensors with the 
analytical procedure. The system used should be selected keeping in mind the temperature accuracy required 
of the facility probes, qualification requirements for the mapping instrumentation, data collection, output and 
retention capabilities, and compliance with the appropriate electronic record requirements (21 CFR Part 11 [25]/
Eudralex Annex 11 [28]).
B. Define the facility operations (static versus dynamic activities to simulate operational states) and control systems 
(set points, operational parameters)
C. Define acceptance criteria/expected results as appropriate
D. Probe type and locations Note the strategy defined the rationale for locations
E. Define the load test and sequence of loading/unloading
F. 
Define how test issues will be resolved
G. Define pre-test requirements (commissioning, calibration, signage, training, etc.)
H. Define test steps, mapping under various operational states such as defrost cycles, switch between redundant 
systems, door openings, people activity, power loss, etc.
I. 
Record test start and stop times
J. 
Record testers
K. Provide space for analysis of data with recommendations for actions if required
8 Instrument time response is usually quoted as: “T10-90% or T90-10%. (Referring to rise and fall times respectively) when the instrument is subject 
to a step change in the input, i.e., the temperature recording system needs to respond faster that conditions are likely to change in order to get an 
accurate reading – though note that the material stored will have a response time as well – but when testing the goal is to get accurate information to 
get a complete understanding of how the equipment is performing.”
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 101]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 99
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Appendix 7
Appendix 7
19	 Appendix 7 – Templates and Attachments
19.1	
Example Science and Risk-Based Approach for Periodic Review of a Controlled 
Temperature Chamber
19.1.1	
Procedure – Categorize the Controlled Temperature Chamber: Based on Material Stored and 
Temperature Range
Systems are categorized for the purposes of periodic review considering the system operating temperature range, 
and the material stored.
• 
Stored Material Type A: for example, API, drug product, stability sample(s), cool/hot packs used to maintain 
temperature during transportation (if the cool/hot pack temperature is not verified before use)
• 
Stored Material Type B: for example, Work in Progress (WIP), Reference Standards, critical reagents, raw 
materials
• 
Stored Material Type C: for example, Environmental Monitoring (EM) supplies and reagents, media, test 
materials
Table 19.1: Review Category Based on Material Stored and Temperature Range
19.1.2	 Periodic Review Process
The periodic review process must be carried out as follows:
• 
Category 1 Controlled Temperature Chambers: periodic review not to exceed three years from the previous 
review
• 
Category 2 Controlled Temperature Chambers: periodic review not required; system performance verification 
must be conducted through a defined maintenance job plan
• 
Category 3 Controlled Temperature Chambers: system performance verification and periodic review is not 
required
There are two methods that may be used to perform the periodic review of the Controlled Temperature Chamber.
Stored Material 
Type
Precision Unit:
Temperature Range
≤ ± 6°C
Standard Unit:
Temperature Range
> ± 6°C
Conditioned Room: 
Controlled Room 
Temperature*
A
1
2
2
B
2
2
3
C
2
3
3
* as defined in USP
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 102]
Page 100	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 7	
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
19.1.2.1	 Method One: Periodic Review Report – Risk-Based Approach
This method considers risks to the system performance. An example for the Periodic Review Report is shown below.
Template Report for Validation Periodic Review for Controlled Temperature Chamber Summary
The Controlled Temperature Chamber is used for the storage of…
The periodic review considers the following aspects:
• 
Internal layout and loading:
-	
Are there any changes that could impact the system performance?
• 
Insulation
- 
Are there any changes, or is there any degradation of the insulation capability, of the Controlled Temperature 
Chamber shell?
• 
Cooling System
- 
Is the cooling system still operating with performance aligned with the as commissioned/qualified state?
The following is an example of a periodic review for a Controlled Temperature Chamber. The actual review should 
replace the text given in green as necessary:
Example:
The results of this review are contained in the report below.
There is nothing in the review to indicate that the original mapping results will have changed, the data from the 
monitoring system still shows that the system is operating within the operating limits, it is therefore considered fit for 
continued use.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 103]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 101
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Appendix 7
Example Assessment Report with Draft Content9
Reference
Aspect
Review
Conclusion
1
Internal Layout
1.1
Racking/ Storage 
Locations
The racking layout and defined storage 
locations remain as defined in the 
commissioning and qualification file per review 
of the current installation and operations SOP-
xxx with the C&Q report RPT-yyyy
The locations used to store material remain 
unchanged, so the effect on the unit airflow 
and temperature distribution has not changed
1.2
Stored Material
The size and or mass of the stored material 
that was defined in the test strategy or as used 
for the commissioning and qualification has not 
changed
The size and mass of the material used for 
the load testing of the Controlled Temperature 
Chamber remains representative of the 
material currently stored in the Controlled 
Temperature Chamber, hence the performance 
will not have changed
2
Insulation
2.1
Shell
PM number requires an annual thermal scan 
of the system verifying the surface temperature 
remains consistent with the as installed 
readings, and there are no hot or cold spots, or 
visual inspection and a review of the cycle time 
of the refrigeration plant.
The thermal scan is consistent with those 
taken during initial operation confirming that 
there is no degradation of performance, or 
a visual inspection and a review of the cycle 
times show no significant degradation.
2.2
Utility Penetrations
Visually inspect the Controlled Temperature 
Chamber penetrations looking for any leakage 
or condensation.
The Controlled Temperature Chamber was 
inspected – all utility penetrations are in good 
repair with no sign of leakage or condensation.
2.3
Access Door
The door, door seals, and vinyl internal curtain 
were inspected.
The door, door seals, and vinyl curtain are in 
good condition. The vinyl curtain sits on the 
side of the unit with no air gap and just touches 
the floor so there is no friction to prevent it 
closing and no significant air gap.
3
Cooling System
3.1
Operating History
Review alarm history for the refrigeration units 
and determine if the frequency is normal/
acceptable.
The alarm history was reviewed, with a total of 
12 engineering alarms, and no quality alarms; 
all engineering alarms were resolved while 
keeping the unit inside the operational limits.
3.2
Maintenance
Confirm that there is a PM that checks 
duty standby function, and reviews system 
operating settings, and that the refrigeration 
system major components are as installed.
The automatic duty standby changeover 
function is routinely checked, the refrigeration 
system has not been changed and the system 
operating parameters: suction and delivery 
pressure for both systems are within the 
manufacturer’s tolerances, indicating that the 
system is operating normally.
3.3
Monitoring
The data from the independent monitoring 
system shows that the system is operating 
within the operating limits with no indication of 
a degradation in performance.
A review of the system monitoring data 
shows that the system is still operating within 
the operating limits with no indication of a 
degradation in performance.
3.4
Alarm Function
Confirm system and independent alarms 
tested.
Alarms tested: all function correctly at the 
defined set points, with the delay periods 
assigned as noted in the attached sheet.
Note: example text is shown in green italic.
9 The draft content should be revised to suit the specific application.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 104]
Page 102	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 7	
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
• 
Revise the template report to reflect the findings for the Controlled Temperature Chamber under review.
• 
Record the results of the review into the Periodic Review Report, recording the location of the information, and 
attaching copies where appropriate
• 
Define any actions required after review of the information
• 
The report summary must state if the system is considered suitable for ongoing use
• 
If it is concluded that the system is not suitable for ongoing use, a nonconformance shall be utilized to define the 
actions required, and manage their completion
• 
The Periodic Review Report be reviewed and approved by the System Owner or delegate and Quality Unit
19.1.2.2	 Method Two: Periodic Review Report – Remapping
As an alternative to method one, the Controlled Temperature Chamber may be remapped.
Remapping should consider the following aspects:
• 
Loading/unloading of the unit
• 
The impact of the load on the unit temperature distribution
• 
The impact of unit defrost on the unit temperature distribution
The test plan supporting rationale and mapping acceptance criteria should be approved by the System Owner or 
delegate and Quality Unit.
The results of the mapping shall be used to confirm the number and location of the monitoring probes, or provide the 
rationale to support modifications to the monitoring system.
Record the results of the remapping into the Review Report. The report summary shall define if the system is 
considered suitable for ongoing use, and shall be approved by the System Owner or delegate, and Quality Unit.
If it is concluded that the system is not suitable for ongoing use, a nonconformance shall be utilized to define the 
actions required, and manage their completion.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 105]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 103
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Appendix 7
19.2	
Example Job Hazard Analysis Worksheet
JHA Title:
Formaldehyde Disinfection of Enclosure Type Equipment
JHA Number:
Project Name:
Site:
Project Number:
Bldg/Rm#:
General Contractor:
Contractor Services
Prepared By:
John Smith
Contractor(s):
N/A
Date:
2/7/2016
Craft(s):
Field Service Technician
Scheduled Start 
Date:
Reviewed By:
Date:
Briefly Describe 
Task:
Perform formaldehyde vapor disinfection of Enclosure Type Equipment
Required PPE:
Lab coat, safety glasses
Supplemental PPE:
Tyvek suit, full face respirator with formaldehyde cartridges, gloves
Required Permits:
None
Competent 
Persons(s):
John Smith
General Comments:
Contractor Services workers will set up and perform formaldehyde vapor disinfection of Equipment. 
Contractor Services will follow procedures outlined in Contractor Services SOP 82 to complete this 
work.
Only Contractor Services personnel will be allowed in the rooms after 5 pm on evening of generation 
of formaldehyde vapor in the equipment. Disinfection will continue overnight, with neutralization and 
venting occurring the following morning. Process will generally be completed by 10 am the morning 
after formaldehyde generation and disinfection.
Personal Exposure Level monitors will be set up to detect any formaldehyde leakage from 
the equipment during the disinfection process. Any leakage detected will be reported on the 
Decontamination Report. Contractor Services will use short-term monitoring to assure formaldehyde 
levels in the enclosures have fallen below 0.5 ppm before releasing units back to the client.
•	
Workers shall review the Company Review Comment Record and comply.
•	
Workers shall sign the JHA verifying they have reviewed and will comply with the contents.
•	
A copy of the JHA will be kept at the work area available for review.
Work Operation
Potential Accidents or Hazards
Safe Job Actions Needed
1.	 Preliminary Setup
A.	 Workers not understanding job or not trained 
to perform job.
A.1 Scope of work will be communicated to all 
workers scheduled to perform work on the job.
A.2 All Contractor Services workers on site to 
perform job are trained on appropriate SOPs 
related to job.
B.	 Units not ready for disinfection.
B.1 Contractor Services will verify all units 
scheduled for disinfection are cleared of all 
equipment and materials.
B.2 Contractor Services will verify all units are 
disconnected from wall/room outlets.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 106]
Page 104	
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Appendix 7	
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring
JHA Title:
Formaldehyde Disinfection of Enclosure Type Equipment
JHA Number:
Project Name:
Site:
Project Number:
Bldg/Rm#:
Work Operation
Potential Accidents or Hazards
Safe Job Actions Needed
C.	 HVAC system in room not operating and/or no 
power to room lights and receptacles.
C.1 Contractor Services will contact Company 
facilities/JLL upon arrival on site to confirm HVAC 
systems are operating normally.
C.2 Contractor Services will check that lights in 
room are operating normally and wall receptacles 
are powered up.
2.	 Setup
A.	 Breach of unit enclosure
A.1 Inspect entire enclosure for any damage that 
would indicate a breach of containment.
A.2 Seal any suspected areas of breach of 
containment with adhesive tape.
B.	 Disinfection equipment not working correctly
B.1 Perform function tests on all equipment, 
including evaporator pans, extension cords and 
adsorber cell filters.
C.	 Disinfection of enclosures not set up correctly
C.1 Confirm proper amounts of paraformaldehyde 
and ammonium bicarbonate are distributed in the 
appropriate evaporator pans.
C.2 Confirm all openings of enclosure are sealed 
with plastic sheeting and/or adhesive tape.
C.3 Have enclosure under -0.005" WC to -0.01" 
WC negative pressure by connecting enclosures 
to exhaust via ducting to auxiliary fan or exhaust 
system, with adsorber cell filter connected in-
line to filter all formaldehyde vapor leaving the 
enclosure.
3.	 Formaldehyde 
vapor generation
A.	 Personnel exposed to formaldehyde vapor
A.1 Hang signs on all enclosures undergoing 
disinfection and on all doors entering the room to 
prevent non-Contractor Services personnel from 
entering the lab or modifying disinfection setup.
A.2 Contractor Services will continuously monitor 
room during vapor generation in the sealed 
enclosures for any formaldehyde leakage into the 
room.
A.3 If concentration exceeds 0.2 ppm at any 
time, Contractor Services personnel will don all 
PPE and will disconnect paraformaldehyde pan 
and turn on the ammonium bicarbonate pan to 
neutralize the formaldehyde vapor.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 107]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 105
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Appendix 7
JHA Title:
Formaldehyde Disinfection of Enclosure Type Equipment
JHA Number:
Project Name:
Site:
Project Number:
Bldg/Rm#:
Work Operation
Potential Accidents or Hazards
Safe Job Actions Needed
4.	 Exposure/contact 
period
A.	 Lab or personnel exposed to formaldehyde 
vapor
A.1 Signs will be posted on all doors entering 
the room overnight cautioning personnel from 
entering the room or modifying disinfection in any 
way.
A.2 If no formaldehyde leakage is detected during 
generation (see 3 above) Contractor Services 
will leave site in steady state with enclosures 
completely sealed and under negative pressure. 
Contractor Services will be available for contact 
via cell phone # posted around the site.
B.	 Loss of power to HVAC system or loss of 
electrical power
B.1 Enclosures are completely sealed with in-line 
adsorber cell connected to only opening from 
enclosures, preventing any formaldehyde vapor 
from escaping.
5.	 Neutralization and 
ventilation
A.	 Loss of power to HVAC system or loss of 
electrical power
A.1 Contractor Services will be on site during 
neutralization and ventilation process. Contractor 
Services personnel will take steps to minimize 
any exposure to lab of any residual formaldehyde 
by donning all PPE and preventing any non-
Contractor Services personnel from entering the 
lab in the event of power loss.
A.2 If ventilation is already in process, Contractor 
Services will wait on site until restoration of power 
to evacuate ammonium bicarbonate residue in 
enclosures.
6.	 Re-establishment 
of preexisting 
conditions
A.	 Exposure to lab of formaldehyde vapor or 
ammonium bicarbonate
A.1 Contractor Services personnel will clean 
and wipe down all exposed surfaces exposed 
to formaldehyde vapor during the disinfection 
process following procedures outlined in 
Contractor Services SOP 82 to eliminate chemical 
residue.
A.2 Contractor Services will monitor interior of 
enclosures to assure formaldehyde concentration 
is below 0.5 ppm, at which time enclosures can 
be released back to Company.
Note: example text is shown in green italic.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 108]
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2016. All rights reserved.
[PAGE 109]
ISPE Good Practice Guide:	
Page 107
Controlled Temperature Chamber Mapping and Monitoring	
Appendix 8
