ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 27
Commissioning and Qualification	
4	 System Risk Assessment
4.1	
Introduction
The System Risk Assessment is the application of QRM to examine the product quality risk controls for direct impact 
systems. This assessment identifies the critical design controls (CAs/CDEs) and procedural controls that are required 
to mitigate system risks to an acceptable level. It is important for the project team performing the System Risk 
Assessment to include technical SMEs that understand the science behind the process and the risks associated with 
the CQAs.
System Risk Assessments should be developed for direct impact systems (as determined through system 
classification described in Chapter 3). For standard off-the-shelf or simple catalog systems, some organizations may 
consider it unnecessary to perform the System Risk Assessment; a simple protocol or report (e.g., Installation and 
Operational Verification) could be used to provide the documented evidence that the installation and operation meet 
the system requirements.
Figure 4.1 shows the relationship between the activities and documents in the C&Q process for direct impact 
systems. C&Q inspection and testing activities can take place during fabrication and construction as well as during 
the commissioning/testing activities.
Figure 4.1: Relational Diagram for C&Q Activities and Documents – System Risk Assessment
Used with permission from Amgen, Inc., www.amgen.com.
After the System Risk Assessment is completed, the URS should be checked to ensure that the CAs/CDEs have 
been included; if they are not included, then the URS should be revised to add them. Procedural control elements 
should be added to the C&Q scope.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 28	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
Acceptance and release of the system (described in more detail in Chapter 8) involves confirming that the controls 
identified in the System Risk Assessment are in place as follows:
•	
The design controls (CAs/CDEs) have been shown to operate as specified
•	
The procedural controls are in place
4.1.1	
Rationale
The traditional approach to qualification did not directly utilize commissioning documentation; instead, it often relied 
on an additional set of documents, the Installation Qualification (IQ) and Operational Qualification (OQ) protocols. 
These protocols provided the documented evidence that the system was installed and operating according to its 
specification. The scope of the IQ/OQ was determined by various elements such as organization/site established 
guidelines, vendor specifications, user requirements, and regulatory and guidance documents.
This traditional approach to qualification often resulted in IQ/OQ activities covering more scope than was necessary 
and repeating successful tests already performed during engineering start-up and commissioning. Furthermore, 
commissioning activities were commonly not robust enough or well documented since engineering teams anticipated 
that additional or repeat testing would be performed during qualification activities.
This Guide proposes a more streamlined approach to C&Q. Engineering documentation (i.e., commissioning 
inspection and testing documentation) is used to provide the documented evidence that the system has been 
installed and operates to meet the specifications. The CQAs and related CPPs are documented for the system, and 
a System Risk Assessment is developed to define potential risks to the CQAs and identify design (CAs/CDEs) and 
procedural controls used to mitigate these risks. Qualification confirms the system is suitable for the intended purpose 
and that the risk controls (design and procedural controls) are in place and functioning as specified.
4.1.2	
Purpose and Benefits
The System Risk Assessment has multiple purposes and is a means to:
•	
Identify, assess, and record the quality risks to CQAs and associated controls
•	
Identify and document the design and procedural controls that are required to control and manage the identified 
risks
-	
The rationale for these controls can also be documented in the System Risk Assessment
-	
Testing of the design controls (CAs/CDEs) and verification of procedural controls provides the 
documentation used to support system qualification
•	
Provide guidance for the scope of the DQ, i.e., the scope covers the design of the CAs/CDEs
•	
Provide the information that is required for the basis of acceptance and release
•	
Provide a focus for Quality Unit oversight
The System Risk Assessment establishes (if not available in other documents) and documents the CAs/CDEs of 
the system operation and design that can impact product quality. It identifies the design and procedural controls 
that would mitigate those risks to product quality to an acceptable level. By verifying these controls, the system is 
confirmed to match that risk profile.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 29
Commissioning and Qualification	
4.2	
System Risk Assessment Process
As a prerequisite, the CQAs and associated CPPs should be identified and documented in the URS.
This Guide presents the following approach to performing the System Risk Assessment:
•
A small team develops an initial baseline draft that includes development of the process description and
identification of design and procedural controls
•
A broader team reviews this initial baseline draft, making any necessary revisions to ensure the information is
correct and no risks or controls have been omitted, and assigns the system risk profile
As a general guide, the initial session by the small team and the review session by the broader team should not 
exceed more than a few hours each if the preparation work is complete and teams with the correct level of expertise 
are used.
An example System Risk Assessment format is presented in Section 4.4.
4.2.1	
Developing the Baseline Draft
The small team that develops the initial baseline draft should consist of the following:
•
Experienced facilitator to guide the process
•
Quality Unit representative
•
Process/system SME (may be one SME or could additionally include a system vendor representative)
Refer to Chapter 19 (Appendix 5) for an example baseline System Risk Assessment.
4.2.2	
Performing the System Risk Assessment
After the initial baseline is completed, a broader team reviews the document and determines the risk profile. This 
review team generally consists of representatives from a broader group with different experiences to provide a 
balanced perspective; this team could include:
•
Operations (Production)
•
Maintenance
•
Engineering
•
Process development
•
Vendor representatives
Note: The time taken for the review generally increases with the number of people in the team, thus maintaining a 
balance between experience and the number of team members is important.
Prior to determining the risk profile, the team identifies the sources of the risks (potential failure modes) along with 
design aspects and/or procedural controls that would mitigate or eliminate the risk. Risk profiles are assigned per 
definitions shown in Table 4.1.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 30	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
Table 4.1: Risk Level Definitions
Note: The risk level is defined considering the overall process; thus, if the process is changed, the System Risk 
Assessments may need to be reviewed/updated. This aspect should be addressed through change management 
(see Chapter 12).
Determination of the risk profile should also be based on the SME’s experience with the process/system. While 
defining the risk of the failure or hazard occurring, the SME should consider that the controls listed are in place and 
operating as intended.
The design controls (CAs and/or CDEs) defined during the System Risk Assessment are considered part of the 
system requirements and should be included in the URS. After the System Risk Assessment is completed, the URS 
should be updated to include these controls. If a Traceability Matrix is used as a tool to manage the C&Q execution 
process, the CDEs could be added to the Traceability Matrix only and updating the URS would not be needed.
Procedural controls identified during the System Risk Assessment need to be included in the C&Q Plan scope and 
could also be added to the Traceability Matrix.
4.2.3	
Using Completed Assessments as a Starting Point for New System Baseline Drafts
The experience and documentation gained from completing System Risk Assessments can be applied to future 
systems. In addition, many systems used for pharmaceutical manufacturing and packaging are standard systems that 
have been in use for a reasonable period of time, have built-in control strategies, and are developed by experienced 
vendors with established engineering quality systems. Therefore, any new systems that are identical to or similar to 
existing systems can utilize the completed System Risk Assessments as a starting point.
The small team that develops the baseline draft (as described in Section 4.2.1) should assess the new system 
against the completed System Risk Assessment for the existing system that is identical/similar. The SMEs should 
determine if the system under review has different functionality and/or components. If the SMEs determine that these 
differences may introduce additional or different risks, then the baseline draft needs to be updated to include the risks 
and associated risk controls.
The remainder of the System Risk Assessment process would proceed as described in Section 4.2.2. The broader 
team reviews the baseline draft and determines the risk profile for the new system.
The use of completed assessments as a starting point for new system baseline drafts can improve the efficiency and 
consistency of the process.
Risk Level
Definition
Low
Considered acceptable with no actions needed. The likelihood of the risk occurring with the 
defined controls operating is considered low, and the detection is robust.
Medium
Normally considered unacceptable and requires mitigation through design (CAs/CDEs) and/or 
procedural controls. However, the SME reviewers may consider a medium risk as acceptable for 
the specific process/system and decide to accept the risk.
High
Considered unacceptable and requires mitigation through design and/or procedural controls. 
In certain situations, the SME reviewers may determine that these controls are not appropriate, 
e.g., implementation costs outweigh the incurred costs if the risk occurred, operational 
challenges, or other reasons. The SMEs may recommend acceptance of the system with the 
high risk; in this case, the assessment needs to be accepted by high-level management.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 31
Commissioning and Qualification	
4.3	
Timing of System Risk Assessments
4.3.1	
Development of the System Risk Assessment
The System Risk Assessment can be developed after completion of concept design and prior to the start of detailed 
engineering. It can be updated later as required. The System Risk Assessment can be completed when the Issued 
for Construction (IFC) design drawings and specifications are available, whether for new or modified systems. These 
drawings and specifications represent what will be built including any incorporated changes made through the DR/DQ 
process. Therefore, the System Risk Assessment can be confirmed and approved at this stage.
Note: Depending on the level of product and process knowledge, some of the CDEs associated with CAs may 
be known while the balance of the CDEs will be identified during the engineering design lifecycle (and can be 
documented as part of the DQ). All CDEs should be listed in the System Risk Assessment.
The System Risk Assessment defines the system risk profile, i.e., what it will be after the risk controls have been 
verified to be in place and operating as specified. Until the verification is completed, it is considered a provisional risk 
assessment.
For novel systems, starting the System Risk Assessment earlier in the design process can be beneficial since this 
allows for any identified risks to be controlled by design. Most risk control is achieved through system design; a 
procedural control is not considered as robust.
For standard or catalog systems where the potential risks are well understood and design controls are built in 
where possible, the System Risk Assessment could be performed at any time before the final DR of the system. 
Alternatively, an Installation and Operational Verification document could be used. DQ can also confirm that the 
system risk controls are adequate.
The sequence of activities for direct impact systems is shown in Figure 4.2.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 32	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Commissioning and Qualification
Figure 4.2: Sequence of Activities for Direct Impact Systems
4.3.2	
Lifecycle of the System Risk Assessment
Depending on the project size, timing, and complexity, additional product/process or system knowledge may become 
available after completion of the System Risk Assessment. If this additional knowledge impacts the system risk 
profile, the System Risk Assessment needs to be reviewed and updated.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 33
Commissioning and Qualification	
System Risk Assessments are not subject to time-based periodic review; it is more efficient to reassess the risk 
profile in the event of a deviation related to the system performance and determine if an update is required. The 
System Risk Assessment can also be used as a reference document for assessing potential changes to a system.
For any changes to the system, the URS and System Risk Assessment should both be reviewed as part of the 
change management process (refer to Chapter 12). If the proposed change introduces additional risks or impacts 
existing risk controls, the System Risk Assessment (and associated URS) needs to be reviewed and updated.
4.4	
Example System Risk Assessment Format
This Guide presents an example System Risk Assessment format that consists of thirteen columns. Table 4.2 
summarizes the risk assessment process and how the contents of the example System Risk Assessment are 
developed.
Refer to Chapter 19 (Appendix 5) for an example of a baseline System Risk Assessment.
Table 4.2: Contents of Example System Risk Assessment Format
Column 
Number
Column Name
Description
1
Reference Number
Item reference number.
2
Operations Sequence/Process 
Flow
List the entire operational sequence of the system if the system 
operates in a sequential manner. Include cycles such as Clean-
in-Place (CIP) or Sterilize-in-Place (SIP). When the system 
operates continuously (e.g., for a critical utility system), then a 
process flow is appropriate.
3
Process Description
Add a brief description of the process that applies to the 
sequence.
4
CQA*
List the CQA that is relevant for this step of the sequence/
process. If none at this point, enter N/A.
5
CPP
This entry should map to the corresponding CQA in the same 
row. List the CPP whose variability has an impact on the CQA 
and can be monitored or controlled for that row. If none, enter 
N/A. 
6
Impact on CQA
Enter direct or indirect, based on the impact of the established 
CPP on the CQA. For example, direct impact is where the CPP 
directly impacts the CQA. This entry is used to establish the 
criticality of any associated alarms.
7
How CQA can be Impacted
Add a brief description on how the CQA can be impacted at 
this step of the sequence/process, e.g., due to incorrect or out 
of range conditions of the CPP. This entry is used to define the 
possible hazard(s) to the CQA at this point of the sequence/
process; it serves as an aid in the SME determination of risk. 
*Regulatory requirements (e.g., labeling, dating, batch coding) can be addressed in the same manner as CQAs.
Controls will normally be incorporated into the design and verified to work to ensure the regulatory requirement is
met.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

