Page 34	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
Table 4.2: Contents of Example System Risk Assessment Format (continued)
Column 
Number
Column Name
Description
8
Design Controls (CAs/CDEs)
List any elements of the system design or operation that are built 
into the system. The design controls can be comprised of CAs 
and/or CDEs as defined in this Guide. These are the elements of 
the system that can be verified through inspection or testing, and 
are key to the risk-based C&Q approach.
Examples include: an interlock that stops the machine upon 
certain conditions to protect the system product, an alarm 
alerts an operator that a CPP is outside the normal operating 
range, a setpoint that is defined by a recipe and is not operator 
adjustable, etc.
9
Recipe Parameter
List the recipe parameter (if applicable). Recipe parameters 
are usually product specific and established through product 
characterization studies; these are considered to be a risk 
control. It can be associated with an alarm for the machine 
operation. This entry is used to determine if the parameter is a 
fixed setting that would be established during characterization of 
the system. If none, enter N/A.
10
Associated Alarm
Enter yes or no, depending on the step in the sequence/process, 
the system design, and any requirements to establish the alarm. 
An alarm is considered as a risk mitigation element.
11
Procedural Controls
List the procedural controls that are in place or that should 
be established to mitigate risk to system product. Procedural 
controls can be part of SOPs, sampling procedures, or other.
12
Comments
Any comments are entered here.
13
Residual Risk Determination
List Low, Medium, or High. This entry represents an assessment 
by the appropriate SME(s) to set a risk profile based on 
the severity of the risk, the related controls (CAs/CDEs or 
procedural), and the reliability of the detection mechanisms. 
Refer to Table 4.1 for guidance on defining the risk level.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 35
Commissioning and Qualification	
5	 Design Review and Design Qualification
5.1	
Introduction
This chapter provides guidance for performing and documenting Design Reviews (DRs) and Design Qualification 
(DQ). This Guide emphasizes the importance of DRs leading to DQ as a continual process throughout all phases in 
the design of new or modified systems.
DRs provide assurance that the design deliverables are consistent with the URS and the mitigation control strategies 
developed during the System Risk Assessment. When properly performed, DRs reduce the need for costly design-
related change orders.
DQ is performed only for direct impact systems (as determined through system classification described in Chapter 
3). DQ involves more formal documentation, with Quality Unit approval, to show traceability of the CAs and relevant 
CDEs in the design to the CPPs and CQAs.
DR and DQ are not intended to be separate activities, but rather separate documentation in which DQ is focused on 
CAs/CDEs and involves the Quality Unit as an approver. There should be minimal duplication of work; the final report 
from DR is a key input into the DQ process.
5.2	
Design Process
The design process can be divided into several phases to ensure the design deliverables are sufficiently developed, 
the risks are identified and mitigated, and the project (as defined) meets financial objectives. The phases of the 
design process are:
1.
Concept
2.
Basis of Design (BOD)
3.
Detailed Design
The concept and BOD phases define the Scope of Work (SOW) for the project.
In the concept phase, several approaches (scope options) to meeting the URS may be evaluated. These alternatives 
should be evaluated for their impact on the business objective, project cost, and risk to quality. The project 
stakeholders should select the preferred scope option; the project then progresses to the BOD phase.
In the BOD phase, additional engineering work provides a more developed SOW. The BOD design package 
contains Issued for Design (IFD) documents; it is the basis for the detailed design phase which delivers Issued for 
Construction (IFC) documents.
5.2.1	
Importance of Good Engineering Practice
During the design process, it is important to follow GEP to support the integrity of related data and documentation. 
DR activities include evaluating deliverables against engineering standards and business, operations, and quality 
requirements as well as identifying gaps and proposing required corrective actions. Documenting these activities 
using Good Documentation Practice concepts (as described in Chapter 13) supports the overall effort to ensure the 
system is suitable for the intended purpose.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 36	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
5.2.2	
Science and Risk-Based Approach to Design Reviews
A quality risk assessment of the manufacturing process (including the environmental conditions supporting the 
process and/or critical systems) is a significant activity outside of the C&Q scope that can influence the early phase 
of design. Design stage System Risk Assessment typically uses knowledge from process risk assessments and other 
process knowledge to evaluate system design with respect to process control failure modes. These assessments are 
an integral part of the science and risk-based C&Q approach.
Design stage quality risk reviews are an iterative process that is linked to the design development of the process 
system. The review of the System Risk Assessments and how the results affect the proposed design should be 
included in the scope of DRs.
5.3	
Design Review
5.3.1	
Objectives of Design Review
DRs are defined in ASTM E2500-13 [5] as follows:
“Planned and systematic reviews of specifications, design, and design development and continuous 
improvement changes performed as appropriate throughout the life-cycle of the manufacturing system. Design 
reviews evaluate deliverables against standards and requirements, identify problems, and propose required 
corrective actions.”
DRs include both quality critical and non-critical aspects of the system design.
The documented results of the DR should be the basis for any design modifications/additions performed to correct 
any deficiencies in the design under review.
5.3.2	
Role of Subject Matter Experts and Quality Unit
Throughout the design process, a cross-functional project team (refer to Section 6.4 for example approval matrix) 
reviews the design of the system to ensure that the product and process user requirements, GMP, and regulatory 
requirements are included. Thus, it is important that this team includes technical SMEs that have the appropriate 
experience and correct knowledge of the process, process equipment, control strategies, and facilities to ensure that 
the design under review will meet the requirements of the URS, function efficiently, and consistently produce quality 
product.
If the system being reviewed is direct impact, then the team should also include a Quality Unit representative to 
ensure that all quality requirements are met. This can help to facilitate the review and approval of the DQ.
5.3.3	
Design Review Process
Prior to the DR, design documents should be circulated to the DR project team for their review to ensure a 
comprehensive review process. It is the responsibility of the project manager and the design leads to ensure that the 
appropriate participants are part of the DR. Senior management from the Quality Unit, operations, and production are 
responsible for ensuring the proper representatives with the appropriate experience are present during the DR.
The project team should define the method for conducting DR according to the system type, size, and risk. This 
method should be documented and approved in applicable plans (e.g., Project Execution Plan, C&Q Plan).
The effort, formality, and documentation of DRs should follow the ICH Q9 [3] principles of being commensurate with 
the level of risk. DR documentation may take the form of engineering meeting minutes or notes. For highly critical 
novel systems, DRs may be more focused and detailed.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 37
Commissioning and Qualification	
For off-the-shelf equipment, DR should consider the complexity and/or risk to system or facility operation and 
to quality. Vendor documents are typically used to conduct these reviews and, if necessary, a technical vendor 
representative could attend the DR. The focus should be on the CPPs controlled by the equipment and the CAs/
CDEs required for the product.
DRs focus on both engineering design and quality aspects of the design.
The engineering design focus is the technical aspects of the system; the objective is to verify the operability, 
maintainability, and safety aspects of the system. Technical SMEs, system owners, and any other stakeholders need 
to be present. It is optional for the Quality Unit to attend these reviews that focus on the technical aspects; however, 
their presence is beneficial and can simplify the DQ step.
The quality focus of the DRs is on compliance elements and the CAs/CDEs of the system design that affect 
product quality; the objective is to verify that all regulatory requirements are addressed by the design. It is strongly 
recommended the Quality Unit attends these reviews with quality focus, and that these reviews are documented.
5.3.4	
Design Review Outcome
The DR project team should have appropriate methods for recording and distributing the results of the DRs and 
managing any consequent changes. The results should confirm the continuing suitability of the design and confirm 
that the design is suitable for the intended purpose.
The team is responsible for communicating to their management any issues affecting design.
Figure 5.1 provides an overview of the DR process.
Figure 5.1: Design Review Process Flow
Note for Figure 5.1: The Traceability Matrix is a document format which compares the product and process 
requirements for the system with the CAs/CDEs.
Refer to Chapter 20 (Appendix 6) for examples of DR reports.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 38	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Commissioning and Qualification
5.4	
Design Qualification
5.4.1	
Objectives of Design Qualification
DQ provides documented verification that the design of a new or modified direct impact system will result in a system 
that is suitable for the intended purpose. The objectives of DQ are to:
•
Verify the design will meet the quality user requirements as listed in the URS
•
Verify the design will adequately control risks to product quality and patient safety, as identified during the
System Risk Assessment
•
Verify the CAs/CDEs necessary to implement these requirements and risk controls
5.4.2	
Prerequisites
The prerequisites for DQ include:
•
Approved URS
•
Functional requirements (for automated systems)
•
System Risk Assessments with identification of design (CAs/CDEs) and procedural controls that will be used to
mitigate the unacceptable risks
•
Completed DRs, with verification that all open design issues that affect CAs/CDEs, CPPs, and CQAs are closed
and included in the final design
It is the responsibility of the project manager to ensure that all prerequisites have been completed and are made 
available to the participants prior to the DQ for their review. The DQ should be scheduled to allow adequate time for 
preliminary review of the material to be covered.
5.4.3	
Design Qualification Process
DQ is the documented process for the review and approval of the final system design to verify the following:
•
All process and product requirements in the system URS have been incorporated into the design
•
Quality and regulatory requirements in the system URS have been incorporated into the design
•
Any changes to the design approach for the CAs and any associated CDEs have been reviewed, as appropriate
The DR documentation should be reviewed to confirm the Quality Unit was included in the DR, as defined in the 
project plan, and has provided the appropriate input to the design.
The approach for performing DQ should be defined in planning documents. For small projects, there may be one 
DQ performed after all the design is completed. For larger projects, the design may be broken into several areas or 
functions, with the DQ performed when each design is completed.
A formal protocol document to check requirements against the design is not a regulatory requirement. However, the 
following information should be defined: plan for conducting the DQ, scope of the DQ, and Quality Unit approval of 
the DQ. This information could be documented for individual systems or for specified integrated systems.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 39
Commissioning and Qualification	
A Traceability Matrix can be used to document traceability of the CAs and any associated CDEs, and CPPs to the 
CQAs. The CA and CDE acceptance criteria can also be documented in the Traceability Matrix.
5.4.4	
Final Design Qualification Report
The final DQ report should include or refer to the following, as applicable:
•	
Any needed risk reviews to document the incorporation of design control elements to support quality product 
manufacturing
•	
Identification of each CDE (critical aspect of the physical and functional design) that serves to control identified 
potential process failures
•	
Description of each CA and any supporting CDEs in terms that are verifiable through inspections or testing 
(acceptance criteria)
•	
The CDEs that serve to meet a product or process user requirement in terms that are verifiable (mainly through 
performance testing)
A final DQ report should be issued stating the design is suitable for the intended purpose; the report should be 
approved by representatives (from the appropriate level) in Engineering, Manufacturing and the Quality Unit.
Figure 5.2 provides an overview of the DQ process.
Figure 5.2: Design Qualification Process Flow
Refer to Chapter 20 (Appendix 6) for an example of a DQ summary.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

