ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 9
Commissioning and Qualification	
1	
Introduction
1.1	
Background
It is a universal regulatory expectation that pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities, systems, utilities, and equipment 
are designed, constructed and qualified to be suitable for the intended purpose. Regulatory authorities have indicated 
in their guidances and regulations that organizations must build quality into their processes and products.1 This Guide 
intends to offer a compliant, integrated commissioning and qualification process that is based on a science and 
risk-based approach. This process supports Quality by Design [4] and ensures that risks to product quality from the 
systems2 are adequately addressed.
It is recognized that the terminologies for the commissioning and qualification process are varied. The overall 
process has traditionally been called commissioning and qualification; ASTM E2500-13 [5] refers to the process 
as verification. This second edition of the Baseline® Guide focuses on the approach; the terminology used is not 
as important as the approach. For the purposes of this Guide, the term Commissioning and Qualification (C&Q) 
is used to describe the process for establishing that facilities, systems, utilities, and equipment are suitable for 
the intended purpose. The term verification is used to describe an activity performed during the C&Q process to 
establish suitability for the intended purpose.
Commissioning and qualification differ only in that the qualification process has oversight by the Quality Unit, focused 
on the system risk to product quality. The Quality Unit ultimately decides whether systems are suitable for the 
intended purpose, based on the identification, testing, and documentation of the system features deemed critical to 
product quality.
1.2	
Purpose and Objectives
This Guide intends to offer a compliant, integrated C&Q approach to making the qualification process efficient and 
cost-effective. The approach includes a System Risk Assessment process that identifies the Critical Aspects 
(CAs) and/or Critical Design Elements (CDEs). CDEs are system functions and features identified as having the 
potential to control risks to product quality and therefore ensure patient safety. Qualification confirms that the CDEs 
and design risk controls identified through the System Risk Assessment have all been checked, tested, and found to 
be installed and operating as specified. This approach demonstrates that the systems are suitable for the intended 
purpose and can be accepted and released for the next stage (performance qualification or manufacturing operations, 
as appropriate).
The approach described in this Guide involves utilizing properly performed and documented verification or testing 
completed at any project phase to establish that the system is qualified (suitable for the intended purpose). The 
utilization of commissioning tests as well as vendor testing can yield an efficient compliant program. The benefits 
of this approach are maximized with a strong trusting relationship between vendors, service providers, and 
pharmaceutical organizations.
This Guide recognizes industry best practices regarding C&Q and presents concepts that can assist organizations in 
meeting current regulatory expectations for system qualification by:
•
Providing guidance on how to apply the Quality Risk Management (QRM) [3] process to C&Q to establish CDEs
•
Defining the focus of an integrated C&Q effort to be the CAs/CDEs and Critical Process Parameters (CPPs)
which provide the ability to deliver the product Critical Quality Attributes (CQAs)
1	 Further information about the regulatory basis for this Guide is provided in Chapter 15 (Appendix 1).
2	 For the purposes of this Guide, the term systems is used to refer to facilities, systems, utilities, and/or equipment.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 10	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Commissioning and Qualification
•
Defining best practices for User Requirements Specification (URS), Design Review (DR), Design Qualification
(DQ), and acceptance and release of the system
•
Clarifying the change management processes required to support the C&Q process
•
Providing Good Engineering Practice (GEP) documentation standards
•
Describing where testing should be duplicated and where it is acceptable to test once
•
Addressing integration of equipment automation systems
•
Providing examples of appropriate C&Q deliverables
The authors of this Guide believe that there is value in employing the concepts described in the individual chapters 
even if all aspects of the program are not implemented, e.g., identification of CAs/CDEs through System Risk 
Assessments, better definition of the URS, etc.
1.3	
Scope
This Guide applies to systems used by pharmaceutical manufacturers of human and veterinary drugs, including 
biological drug products.
Medical devices have separate regulatory requirements and are outside of the scope of this Guide. For combination 
devices, this Guide can be applied to the manufacturing equipment for the combination device, but not to the device 
itself.
The following areas are not in the scope of the C&Q process as described in this Guide:
•
Product and process development, including identification of any process requirements that influence system
design
•
Computerized systems software development and testing (refer to ISPE GAMP® 5: A Risk-Based Approach to
Compliant GxP Computerized Systems [6])
•
Process validation, including Process Performance Qualification (PPQ) and Continued/Ongoing Process
Verification (refer to ISPE Good Practice Guide: Practical Implementation of the Lifecycle Approach to Process
Validation [7])
•
Cleaning validation
•
Sanitization and sterilization validation
•
Analytical procedures and methods validation
•
Decommissioning activities (refer to ISPE Good Practice Guide: Decommissioning of Pharmaceutical Equipment
and Facilities [8])
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 11
Commissioning and Qualification	
1.4	
Process Overview and Structure of the Guide
An overview of the integrated C&Q approach is shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Science and Risk-Based C&Q Process Map
Note for Figure 1.1: Shaded boxes indicate the major blocks within the process maps that are addressed by 
chapters in this Guide.
The inputs to the integrated C&Q process include product and process CQAs/CPPs (established through research 
and development and/or the technology transfer process) and the application of QRM to define the control strategy.
The steps in the integrated C&Q process are:
•
URS (Chapter 2)
•
System Classification (Chapter 3)
•
System Risk Assessment (Chapter 4)
•
DR/DQ (Chapter 5)
•
C&Q Planning (Chapter 6)
•
C&Q Testing and Documentation (Chapter 7)
•
Acceptance and Release (Chapter 8)
•
Periodic Review (Chapter 9)
Also included in this Guide are the support programs and strategies for implementation:
•
Vendor Assessment for C&Q Documentation Purposes (Chapter 10)
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 12	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Commissioning and Qualification
•
Engineering Quality Process (Chapter 11)
•
Change Management (Chapter 12)
•
Good Documentation Practices for C&Q (Chapter 13)
•
Strategies for Implementation of Science and Risk-Based C&Q Process (Chapter 14)
The process begins with the development of the URS (Chapter 2). This includes defining the product quality related 
user requirements that must be met for a system to be suitable for the intended purpose.
The next step in the process is system classification (Chapter 3). The system is categorized as direct impact or not 
direct impact, depending on its potential impact to product quality. Either the system has direct product quality impact 
or it does not. A system classification tool is provided to facilitate this determination and to document the results. 
Direct impact systems are commissioned and qualified while systems that are not direct impact are commissioned.
The next step in the process is System Risk Assessment (Chapter 4), the application of QRM in which a risk 
assessment of the direct impact system is used to examine the system product quality risk controls and to identify 
CDEs. It is important for the System Risk Assessment to be performed by Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) that 
understand the science of the process. CDEs are identified by examining the CPPs that need to be controlled to 
ensure product quality, as defined by the CQAs. CPPs are not only those that control delivery of drug substance 
or drug product CQAs, but can also be related to CDEs of packaged materials (e.g., ensuring inclusion of product 
inserts or variable data such as lot number and expiration date on labeling). The CAs of the process can be identified 
from the CPPs, and the CDEs of the system can be identified from the CAs. CDEs can also include features such as 
product contact materials of construction. Unacceptable risks are mitigated through the application of risk controls, 
which include the CDEs.
Figure 1.2 provides an example that illustrates the relationship between CQAs, CPPs, CAs, CDEs, and the 
associated testing.
Figure 1.2: Example of Automated Temperature Control and Monitoring of a Process Step
A C&Q Plan (Chapter 6) or strategy can be initiated once sufficient design information exists. The plan/strategy can 
be modified as more information is collected during the project execution lifecycle. Design finalization of the system 
can be performed in parallel with C&Q planning based on the system-specific design requirements that include CDEs, 
safety, capacity, and all other requirements.
While the C&Q Plan is being created, DR (Chapter 5) is conducted iteratively during the design process to ensure 
all user requirements and CDEs are addressed in the design. Aspects of the design impacting product quality are 
confirmed in DQ (also Chapter 5) for direct impact systems. The Quality Unit approves the DQ. Once the DR/DQ is 
completed, the C&Q Plan can be finalized.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 13
Commissioning and Qualification	
C&Q testing and documentation (Chapter 7) is initiated once construction (including fabrication of equipment 
at vendor facilities) has reached a point that the testing is meaningful and all prerequisites are met. Testing and 
verification do not have to wait until construction is completed. This may include pre-delivery or receipt inspection, 
Factory Acceptance Testing (FAT), construction quality document verification, and Site Acceptance Testing (SAT). 
C&Q planning should identify aspects of the FAT and SAT that will be utilized to satisfy qualification requirements. 
C&Q testing can include clean utilities performance testing and room environmental qualification, also known as 
Performance Qualification (PQ), per organization/site policies and procedures.
Completion of testing leads to acceptance and release (Chapter 8), the last phase of C&Q. Completion of this phase 
acknowledges that the system is suitable for the intended purpose and can be released for PPQ or for commercial 
use, depending on the system type. PPQ is outside of the scope of this Guide.
It is important to ensure that systems remain suitable for the intended purpose after acceptance and release, and 
while in use. This is accomplished by various management systems (such as calibration, maintenance, and change 
control systems) and a periodic review program (Chapter 9).
The additional programs necessary to support the C&Q process are described in Chapters 10 through 13 and are 
used throughout the C&Q process.
The vendor assessment for C&Q documentation (Chapter 10) is used to help identify vendor documentation that can 
be used for C&Q purposes. It should be performed prior to finalizing the C&Q Plan.
The overall quality program supporting the C&Q process is the Engineering Quality Process (Chapter 11). This 
addresses the quality practices for the C&Q process and is intended to be part of the overall Pharmaceutical Quality 
System (PQS) [9] and QRM.
It is important to implement a change management program (Chapter 12) to capture changes as they are identified, 
assessed, and implemented.
Good Documentation Practices (Chapter 13) are important in all C&Q process steps and in other support programs to 
demonstrate data integrity.
This revision to the Guide is not intended to drive companies to repeat qualification for their existing systems, but to 
identify an efficient, science and risk-based approach for future C&Q efforts and provide strategies for implementation 
(Chapter 14). Guidance is also provided for modifying existing systems with legacy qualification documentation.
It should be noted that the process, as described in this Guide, is scalable. Depending on the project size, complexity, 
and novelty, the documents and deliverables may be combined. As appropriate, this should be documented in the 
C&Q Plan.
The appendices provide additional details and examples to the C&Q program. The examples have been included in 
the Guide to enhance understanding of the principles. The reader is encouraged to utilize the examples for illustrative 
purposes. These examples are not intended to be the only way to execute the process; the intent is to demonstrate 
the concepts as applied to example systems. Individuals creating documentation for their systems should involve 
those in their organization/site to adapt the examples to meet their needs.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 14	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Commissioning and Qualification
1.5	
Rationale for this Second Edition
This Guide, the second edition of the ISPE Baseline® Guide: Commissioning and Qualification, has been designed to 
present industry best practices for C&Q. It also combines concepts from regulatory guidances (e.g., from EMA [10], 
FDA [11], ICH [12) and the following ISPE documents that are superseded with this revision:
•
ISPE Baseline® Guide: Volume 5 – Commissioning and Qualification (First Edition)
•
ISPE Guide: Science and Risk-Based Approach for the Delivery of Facilities, Systems, and Equipment
•
ISPE Good Practice Guide: Applied Risk Management for Commissioning and Qualification
Certain aspects of the C&Q approach described in the previous edition of this Guide are retired and replaced with 
QRM and GEP. These include:
•
Component Criticality Assessment
Since CDEs are identified as an output of the System Risk Assessment, assessment of the criticality of each
system component is unnecessary.
•
Enhanced Commissioning
This Guide describes how the level of testing can be aligned with criticality and intended purpose of the system.
•
Enhanced Design Review
This Guide describes an approach for performing effective DRs using the System Risk Assessment to achieve DQ.
•
Enhanced Documentation
Good Documentation Practices are defined in the Guide.
•
Indirect Impact
The term is not used. The Guide describes C&Q for systems based on whether a system has direct product
impact or not.
•
V-Model
The integrated C&Q approach provides a lifecycle C&Q approach and is represented by a different process map
(see Figure 1.1). The V-model appropriately represented the links between the design process and testing, but
did not incorporate a risk assessment process based on product quality.
1.6	
Key Concepts
1.6.1	
Efficient Approach without Redundant Testing
The foundation of this Guide is based on the expectation that engineers and system vendors ensure systems are 
installed and operate to the meet the design specifications and user requirements. This is commonly referred to 
as commissioning. Best industry practice is to utilize such an approach when installing any new system. However, 
the level of testing and documentation for commissioning is variable within the industry. This Guide establishes the 
rationale and a methodology for aligning testing and documentation expectations with the intended purpose of the 
system.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 15
Commissioning and Qualification	
When a system has direct impact on product quality (direct impact system), the CDEs of the system can be verified 
by the approach described in this Guide. This approach ensures that identified CPPs are maintained; CPPs 
ensure that CQAs are attained. Testing of system CDEs is utilized to support qualification of the system. Thus, the 
documentation of the testing performed in commissioning needs to be acceptable to be presented in a regulatory 
audit or inspection. The acceptance of that documentation is based on adherence with Good Documentation 
Practices fundamentals (as described in Chapter 10).
1.6.2	
Terminology for Product Impacting Attributes
A common source of debate is regarding the terminology for CPPs and CQAs. For systems that are directly used 
to manufacture pharmaceutical products, these terminologies are easily identified and supported. However, there is 
also a recognition that critical utilities, such as Water for Injection (WFI) systems, may not have product CQAs but 
do have compendial requirements and CPPs. There is a recognition that the output of upstream processes (e.g., 
fermentation) and utilities (e.g., WFI system) need to meet specific quality attributes as defined by process definition 
or in compendial requirements. These parameters can directly influence the system’s ability to deliver product 
meeting those attributes.
These parameters can be termed critical parameters but not in the context of final product quality attributes. The 
authors of this Guide continue to use the terminology of CPPs and CQAs for all systems, including WFI and upstream 
equipment. It is important for individual organizations/sites to define what is critical for their products, processes, and 
systems (e.g., CQAs, CPPs, Critical Parameters, Key Operating Parameters, System Process Parameters, etc.). The 
criticality designation should drive the activities related to design, installation, and operation throughout the system 
lifecycle.
1.6.3	
Quality Unit Oversight
Another common source of debate within the C&Q effort is which group should approve what document. The Quality 
Unit is expected to have oversight of the entire validation lifecycle including qualification. Because the Quality Unit is 
not expected to have expertise in all aspects of pharmaceutical manufacturing systems, identified SMEs (including 
system vendors) should be responsible for determining how best to design and test systems to ensure they are 
suitable for the intended purpose. It is important that the SMEs have sufficient knowledge of the processes and 
systems to ensure the systems are properly designed, tested, and operate as designed. The Quality Unit needs to be 
engaged in the process, be considered part of the C&Q team, approve the appropriate testing plans and documents 
for systems that directly affect product quality, and approve the final acceptance of the qualified state and release 
to support pharmaceutical manufacturing operations. The authors see this as a Quality Assurance (QA) role, not a 
documentation quality control role. An example approval matrix is provided in Chapter 6.
1.7	
Key Terms
This section introduces key terms as they are used in the context of this Guide. Refer to Chapter 31 (Appendix 17) for 
an expanded listing of definitions.
Acceptance Criteria
As defined in WHO Annex 5 [13]:
“Measurable terms under which a test result may be considered acceptable”
Commissioning
A well-planned, documented, and managed engineering approach to the start-up and turnover of facilities, systems, 
utilities, and equipment to the end-user that results in a safe and functional environment that meets established 
design requirements and stakeholder expectations.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 16	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
Commissioning and Qualification
Critical Aspects (CAs)
As defined in ASTM E2500-13 [5]:
“Functions, features, abilities, and performance or characteristics necessary for the manufacturing process and 
systems to ensure consistent product quality and patient safety.”
Critical Design Elements (CDEs)
Design functions or features of an engineered system that are necessary to consistently manufacture products 
with the desired quality attributes. Examples of automation design functions include alarms and data management. 
Examples of engineering design features include components, instruments, and materials of construction. CDEs are 
identiﬁed and documented based on technical understanding of the product CQAs, process CPPs, and equipment 
design/automation. CDEs are verified through C&Q.
Critical Process Parameter (CPP)
As defined in ICH Q8 [4]:
“A process parameter whose variability has an impact on a critical quality attribute and therefore should be 
monitored or controlled to ensure the process produces the desired quality.”
Critical Quality Attribute (CQA)
As defined in ICH Q8 [4]:
“A physical, chemical, biological or microbiological property or characteristic that should be within an appropriate 
limit, range, or distribution to ensure the desired product quality.”
Design Qualification (DQ)
A documented process that verifies the proposed design of the facilities, systems, utilities, and equipment is suitable 
for the intended purpose.
Design Review (DR)
As defined in ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765 [14]:
“Formal, documented, comprehensive, and systematic examination of a design to determine if the design meets 
the applicable requirements, to identify problems, and to propose solutions.”
Deviation
In the context of this Guide, a departure from specification, or a critical discrepancy that cannot be corrected, that 
affects a CA/CDE. Deviations require Quality Unit approval prior to closure.
Direct Impact System
A system that directly impacts product CQAs, or directly impacts the quality of the product delivered by a critical utility 
system. All other systems are considered to be not direct impact.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 17
Commissioning and Qualification	
Discrepancy
As defined in FDA 2006 Quality Systems Guidance [15]:
“Datum or result outside of the expected range; an unfulfilled requirement; may be called non-conformity, defect, 
deviation, out-of-specification, out-of-limit, out-of-trend.”
Expected Results
The result that the test case should produce based on the requirements.
Installation Qualification (IQ)
A documented process that verifies that the facilities, systems, utilities, and equipment, as installed or modified, 
comply with the approved design and the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Installation Verification (IV)
The activity of reviewing, inspecting, testing, checking, auditing, or otherwise establishing and documenting whether 
items, processes, services, or documents conform to specified requirements.
Legacy Systems
For the purposes of this Guide, the term used to describe systems previously qualified using methodologies other 
than those presented in this Guide.
Operational Qualification (OQ)
A documented process that verifies that the facilities, systems, utilities, and equipment, as installed or modified, 
perform as intended throughout the anticipated operating ranges.
Operational Verification (OV)
The activity of reviewing, testing, checking, or otherwise establishing and documenting that a system operates 
according to written and pre-approved specifications throughout all specified operating ranges.
Performance Qualification (PQ)
A documented process that verifies that the facilities, systems, utilities, and equipment, as connected together, can 
perform effectively and reproducibly, based on the approved process method and product specification.
Qualification
For the purpose of this Guide, a process to demonstrate and document that the critical manufacturing facilities, 
systems, utilities, and equipment are suitable for the intended purpose.
Quality Risk Management (QRM)
As defined in ICH Q9 [3]:
“A systematic process for the assessment, control, communication and review of risks to the quality of the drug 
(medicinal) product across the product lifecycle.”
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 18	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
Suitable for the Intended Purpose
The system requirements are defined, the design is appropriate for control of the manufacturing process, and the 
system is fabricated and installed as designed, and performs as intended throughout the anticipated operating 
ranges.
Systems
For the purposes of this Guide, the term used to refer to facilities, systems, utilities, and/or equipment.
Vendor (also known as a Supplier)
For the purposes of this Guide, the term used to describe the organization providing the system or providing the 
contract services to execute the C&Q program for the organization that owns the system.
Verification
An activity that is performed within the C&Q process to document that the manufacturing facilities, systems, utilities, 
and equipment are suitable for the intended purpose.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.


