Page 56	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
7.3.2.2	 Factory Acceptance Test: Installation Tests
The FAT is inspection/testing of the system at the vendor (system manufacturer) site. The objective of the FAT is 
to provide testing and documentation at the earliest possible time, to verify that the vendor has fulfilled contractual 
responsibilities and the system meets the requirements. This allows for quicker and more efficient remedy of any 
failings and avoids the delays to schedule that would result from discovering problems later, on-site.
After completing the FAT, the owner representative agrees with the vendor whether the system is ready to be shipped 
or on pre-conditions for shipping. Agreements are documented and approved by the vendor and owner.
Where a system needs to be disassembled for shipping, the process should be documented. Details should include 
how the system will be disassembled, any marking or labeling of components, and how it will be reassembled and 
tested on-site. This information provides the rationale for testing that can be accepted from the FAT as well as testing 
that will be repeated as part of the SAT.
7.3.2.3	 Receipt Inspection
Receipt Inspection (RI) provides documentation that delivered components, materials, or systems conform to the 
requirements, e.g., manufacturer, model, serial number as applicable with the required supporting documentation. 
This is typically done immediately upon delivery of the component to the owner site.
RI also provides documentation that all components have been received in good condition and are tagged correctly, 
where applicable.
Any items that do not pass RI are separated for issue resolution. Items that pass RI are stored under suitable 
conditions for installation.
7.3.2.4	 Site Acceptance Test: Installation Tests
The SAT is the testing of the system at the owner organization site. The objective of the SAT is to provide testing and 
documentation of the installed system, to verify that the vendor has fulfilled contractual responsibilities and that the 
system meets the requirements prior to contractually accepting the system.
The SAT test plan includes a review of the FAT punch list (items carried over from the FAT that did not meet the 
acceptance criteria/expected results) and the plan to resolve open items. The SAT also includes reconfirming FAT test 
results where required due to system disassembly and reassembly.
After completing SAT testing, the owner representative agrees with the vendor whether the system is ready to be 
turned over to the owner or on pre-conditions for system turnover. Agreements are documented and approved by the 
vendor and owner. Acceptance of a system with open discrepancies can be made with the approval of the Testing 
Coordinator and System Owner.
7.3.2.5	 Installation Verification
Installation verification includes verifying quality requirements related to installation (CDEs as defined through the 
System Risk Assessment). Example activities include:
•	
Verification that the product, ingredient and/or cleaning material contacting parts meet the specifications 
(materials of construction and finishes, as applicable)
•	
Installation of critical instruments
•	
Calibration of critical instruments (calibration could also be verified at the start of the functional testing, prior to 
the commencement of testing)
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 57
Commissioning and Qualification	
7.3.3	
System Start-Up
System start-up is a GEP approach to ensure that the system is energized and started up in a safe manner. The 
system start-up includes all mechanical, electrical, automation, and HSE related system functionalities. This is also 
where adjustments to the system, settings to regulate the system, or any balancing needed are made. A prerequisite 
to system start-up is that the system is mechanically complete without open critical punch list items for safety. System 
start-up may be conducted both at the vendor facility and after installed on-site.
The vendor operation or start-up manual should be reviewed prior to energizing the system. For systems that include 
vendor-provided control systems, training should be completed prior to energizing the system. Training of system 
operators, engineers, and maintenance personnel should be conducted in association with system vendors and 
properly documented.
System start-up is a four-step process, consisting of:
1.	
Verification that the system is complete with all valve switches in the correct position.
	
For stick-built systems and modular systems, ensure that the integrated system (including automation) has been 
reviewed before it is energized.
2.	
Pre-start-up safety review.
3.	
Supervised energizing of the system utilities.
4.	
Pre-functional check of the system, with focus on safety functions.
Note that Steps 1 and 2 above need to be completed before Step 3. Step 3 needs to be completed prior to Step 4.
Refer to Chapter 21 (Appendix 7) for the following examples:
•	
System Pre-Start-Up Checklist
•	
Energizing the System
•	
Pre-Functional Testing Checklist
Any issues identified during system start-up activities should be verified to not impact future testing and addressed 
during the following testing steps.
7.3.4	
Operational/Functional Testing
Operational/functional testing verifies that the system functionality matches what has been approved in the 
specifications (including those identified as CAs) and is suitably documented in a test plan/record for the full desired 
range of system operations in the target environment.
The sequence of functionalities being tested should follow a planned approach. Functional tests should be executed 
after completion of all installation tests that can impact the functional tests. Testing begins after system start-up and 
calibrations defined in the respective plan have been completed.
Testing may be conducted within a single report/test plan or separated into FAT, SAT, commissioning, and 
qualification phases. Installation and operational testing may be combined in a single document.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 58	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
The scope of functional testing includes verifying system functionality. Functional testing may include mechanical, 
electrical, automation, and HSE related aspects. Documents, drawings, and operational procedures may be drafted 
and redlined, and discrepancy lists may be established. Initial operational tests of mechanical systems and general 
operation of the system components is performed.
Typically, the final step of functional testing is a full operational testing. This can be a full load test of the system 
to encompass worst case conditions. This test may need to be deferred if it is not possible to provide the relevant 
conditions. Final tuning of control loops may need to be delayed until system balancing has been performed (e.g., air 
or water balancing) or until enough system loads are available to establish various load levels, including full load.
Operational testing should demonstrate the ability of the system to perform its specified functions throughout the 
expected operational range (which may be different than the specified range for equipment design/build purposes), 
encompassing worst case conditions. Where systems are interconnected (e.g., packaging line), operational 
verification should confirm satisfactory operation of the integrated line.
Functional testing includes the following activities, for example:
•	
Testing integrated automation controls and equipment for the whole system developed from the knowledge of 
processes, systems and equipment for both normal and alarm/failure modes
•	
Testing analog control loops at a range of values representing the intended system use – the range of testing 
should encompass the anticipated range of normal operation, including upper and lower operating limits (i.e., 
worst case conditions) without inducing process failure
•	
Confirming the system can handle predictable simultaneous use scenarios for utility systems
•	
Determining and recording manual component settings (e.g., valve positions, limit switch/screw positions, control 
switch settings)
7.3.4.1	 Factory Acceptance Test and Site Acceptance Test: Operational Tests
After installation testing and system start-up, the FAT and SAT test documents may include execution of operational 
testing.
7.3.4.2	 Qualification Operational Tests
Operational tests that demonstrate the ability of the system to meet the CAs/CDE functionalities are considered part 
of the qualification of the system and require Quality Unit oversight. Complex or novel systems may require formal 
system integrated operational testing to document PQ/PPQ operational criteria/control strategy.
7.3.5	
Performance Qualification Testing
Performance Qualification (PQ) testing is the documented verification that manufacturing systems (e.g., when they 
are connected to other manufacturing systems) perform effectively and reproducibly, based on the approved process 
or analytical method and product specification, applying either original product or representative placebo. Cycle 
development and/or engineering tests are often necessary prior to performing PQ testing.
Completion of installation and operational testing (as applicable) to ensure the systems are operating correctly is 
required before performing cycle development; PQ testing can then be conducted. Operational SOPs should be used 
during PQ.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 59
Commissioning and Qualification	
Examples of systems where PQ is usually required before acceptance and release include:
•	
Autoclaves
•	
Filling machines
•	
Pharmaceutical water and steam systems
7.4	
Discrepancy Management
This section describes how to handle C&Q test results that do not meet the expected results or acceptance criteria, 
also referred to in this Guide as discrepancies. Organizations may have different terminology for these occurrences. 
Discrepancies related to CAs/CDEs are critical and require Quality Unit approval prior to closure.
Expected results are engineering expectations; failure to meet these should be reported to the design authority/
SME who can accept them with a suitable justification or initiate engineering changes to obtain a suitable result (see 
Chapter 12). The design authority has the legal obligation to ensure the system meets codes so that approval is 
essential. An example of an expected result is the system operating pressure of a chilled water system.
Acceptance criteria are those testing/inspection results that must be met for a system to meet the requirements, 
which includes quality requirements. Examples of acceptance criteria include:
•	
Flow rate in a chilled water system:
	
Low flow rates indicate the system cooling capacity could be inhibited
•	
Loop return pressure in a WFI system:
	
This is a quality requirement (CA) because a negative pressure means a potential risk of contaminating the loop 
if a valve is opened
Table 7.3 provides suggested actions depending on the type of discrepancy.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 60	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
Table 7.3: Discrepancy Types and Suggested Actions
Refer to Chapter 23 (Appendix 9) for an example discrepancy form.
Issue
Description
Suggested Action
Obvious typographical error
Protocol generation error
•	 Add notation to test documentation with 
supporting documentation as needed, 
following Good Documentation Practices 
(see Chapter 13).
Expected result not met
Design authority/SME 
accepts the result or initiates 
engineering change to obtain 
suitable result
•	 Add rationale to test record sheet with 
approval by the design authority/SME.
•	 The design authority has the legal 
obligation to ensure the system meets 
codes.
Expected result or acceptance 
criteria not met with known 
root cause
Discrepancy
•	 Mark test record sheet to reflect the issue 
and required adjustments with any required 
repeat test.
•	 If engineering change is needed to make 
the adjustment, add cross reference in test 
record sheet.
•	 The rationale/reference is signed off by an 
SME and tests repeated.
Acceptance criteria not met 
with no known root cause
Critical discrepancy with 
Quality Unit involvement
•	 Mark test record sheet to reflect the issue.
•	 Use discrepancy form to document 
the investigation results and steps for 
adjustments. Complete and record the 
adjustments. The form (or other reference 
containing the rationale) is signed off by an 
SME and Quality Unit representative.
•	 Retest with a new test record sheet.
Acceptance criteria that 
cannot be met
Critical discrepancy with 
Quality Unit involvement
•	 Mark test record sheet to reflect the issue.
•	 Use discrepancy form to document the 
investigation results, justification, and any 
additional risk controls implemented. The 
form is signed off by an SME and Quality 
Unit representative.
Notes:
•	 The Quality Unit has oversight of testing of direct impact systems and needs to approve any engineering 
change requests for direct impact systems.
•	 Critical discrepancies relate to CAs/CDEs.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 61
Commissioning and Qualification	
8	 Acceptance and Release
8.1	
Introduction
This chapter provides guidance on the acceptance and release phase which is where all testing is formally 
reviewed and accepted. The conclusion of the acceptance and release phase is that the system can be released for 
manufacturing operations, the next stage of qualification (e.g., for a WFI system), or for use in the manufacture of 
PPQ or commercial batches.
Acceptance and release represents the initiation of the “qualified state” and the beginning of QA-managed Quality 
Change Control (see Chapter 12), continuous performance monitoring, and periodic review. The project team 
transitions system ownership to operations/engineering.
The acceptance and release phase should occur as a cooperative review between the appropriate SMEs, including a 
representative from the department that will accept care, custody, and control of the system. The SMEs should review 
the results from an overall technical perspective.
If the system includes CAs/CDEs (direct impact), then the Quality Unit needs to be part of the acceptance and 
release review and approval, focusing on CAs/CDEs. Acceptance of a system with open discrepancies should 
be a Quality Unit decision. Typically, all discrepancies have to be addressed; however, non-product impacting 
discrepancies may remain open with an appropriate approved action plan.
The acceptance and release phase is not intended to be a catchall for closeout of all system or project 
documentation. For a commissioned system, the engineering SME will make a determination as to the requirements 
prior to release. For a qualified system, the Quality Unit and an engineering/process SME should determine the 
minimum requirements.
8.2	
Prerequisites for the Acceptance and Release Phase
The installation, operational, and performance (as required) testing activities that should be completed prior to the 
acceptance and release phase include:
•	
Testing results should be reviewed
•	
Unexpected results should be investigated
•	
Discrepancies to the testing plan should be addressed
•	
Engineering changes should be closed
•	
Discrepancies should be addressed through Engineering Change Management and/or adjusted and retested
8.3	
Requirements to Complete the Acceptance and Release Phase
In order to complete the acceptance and release phase, the following items are required to be addressed: completion 
of test documentation, closure of discrepancies and changes, and implementation of quality system elements. This 
section of the chapter describes these items and establishes minimum requirements to include in reports. Options for 
organizing and documenting these items are presented in the next section (Section 8.4).
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 62	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
8.3.1	
Completion of Testing Documentation
All of the planned testing needs to be successfully executed and the documentation completed. Typically, a team of 
SMEs including the Quality Unit representative (for testing related to CAs/CDEs) reviews the documentation prior to 
release. At least one SME review should be documented within the executed tests.
For the purposes of acceptance and release, the documentation for completion of testing should be approved by the 
team of SMEs and include the following information at a minimum:
•	
Testing description (component verification, calibration verification, etc.)
•	
Testing expected results and if met or not met
•	
Testing acceptance criteria and if met or not met
•	
Reference to test protocol and execution data (e.g., vendor documents, commissioning)
•	
Summary and conclusion
The content and complexity of the summary report may vary with the method of demonstrating that the acceptance 
criteria were met. Examples include:
•	
A report that lists the items noted above with an indication of Pass or Fail. In this case, the supporting executed 
test data should be assembled into package(s) and presented with the report.
•	
A more detailed report for each of the items noted above and that includes data to demonstrate that the 
acceptance criteria were met. In this case, the report may be presented alone without requiring the executed 
tests.
8.3.2	
Closure of Discrepancies
Discrepancies from the protocol acceptance criteria should be categorized by potential impact.
Discrepancies that do not impact product quality may remain open. The report should contain an indication of 
any open discrepancies along with potential manufacturing planning implications. These discrepancies should be 
assigned to a responsible individual with defined responsibility for resolution within a specific timeline.
Discrepancies that could impact product quality need to be closed.
All discrepancies impacting product quality should be recorded, addressed, retested where necessary, and 
successfully closed prior to completing the acceptance and release phase.
All discrepancies should be listed with status (closed or open) within the summary report.
8.3.3	
Closure of Engineering Changes
All changes should be handled in accordance with change management (as described in Chapter 12). The system 
changes that have occurred during the testing phase should be closed as part of the acceptance and release phase, 
unless there is agreement with the Quality Unit for these open changes to be carried forward. These changes should 
be assigned to a responsible individual with defined responsibility for resolution within a specific timeline.
All engineering changes should be listed with status (closed or open) within the summary report.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 63
Commissioning and Qualification	
8.3.4	
Implementation of Quality System Elements
For systems that contain CAs/CDEs, the implementation of quality systems is required prior to releasing a system for 
manufacturing operations; this ensures that the system can operate and be maintained consistently and remains in a 
qualified state. These aspects are referred to as quality system elements and may include (as applicable), but are not 
limited to:
•	
Availability of SOPs for operation of the system
•	
Calibration/maintenance system and associated procedures
•	
Mechanism for tracking system use and maintenance (e.g., logbook)
•	
Vendor documentation (e.g., maintenance requirements, spare parts)
•	
Operator training within the training quality system
•	
Completion of any other organization requirements to add the system into the operating facility
A statement that all required quality system elements are in place should be included in the summary report for 
systems with CAs/CDEs. If a system is released with outstanding items (this requires Quality Unit approval), a quality 
system should be in place to track these items to closure with an appropriate level of Quality Unit oversight.
8.4	
Summary Report Organization
The acceptance and release process is completed through a summary report. The contents and complexity of the 
report may vary, but it needs to include SME review and approval of the following items:
•	
Closure of testing documentation
•	
Discrepancies
•	
Engineering changes
•	
Implementation of quality system elements (as required)
•	
Documented formal release of the system
The summary report can be accomplished in several different ways depending on the scale and complexity of the 
project. A separate document for the summary report is not always necessary. This section describes example 
options for the summary report.
8.4.1	
Example Option #1: Commissioning Summary Report – Systems with No Critical Aspects/
Critical Design Elements
For systems with no CAs/CDEs (not direct impact), the acceptance and release can be included within the 
Commissioning Summary Report, as shown in Figure 8.1, and which includes:
•	
Completion of testing documentation
•	
Closure of punch list items and discrepancies
•	
Closure of engineering changes
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 64	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
•	
Confirmation of documentation in place to ensure the system can operate and be maintained properly
•	
Clear statement of formal release of the system
Figure 8.1: Example Option #1: Documents with Use of Commissioning Summary Report
8.4.2	 Example Option #2: Qualification Summary Report – Systems with Critical Aspects/Critical 
Design Elements
For systems with CAs/CDEs, where all of the requirements (as described in Section 8.3) are ready at about the same 
time, the acceptance and release can be included within a single C&Q Summary Report, as shown in Figure 8.2, and 
which includes:
•	
Completion of testing documentation
•	
Closure of discrepancies
•	
Closure of engineering changes
•	
Quality System Elements implementation (or reference to change control record)
•	
Clear statement of formal release of the system (or reference to change control record)
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 65
Commissioning and Qualification	
Figure 8.2: Example Option #2: Documents with Use of Qualification Summary Report
8.4.3	
Example Option #3: Formal Release of System with Use of Change Control – Existing Facility
When new systems or changes to existing systems are implemented through QA-managed Quality Change Control 
(as described in Chapter 12), some or all of the requirements (as described in Section 8.3) may be contained within 
the change control.
For existing facilities, it is common to verify the implementation of quality system elements and document the formal 
release of the system in the change control rather than in the Qualification Summary Report. In this case, the 
Qualification Summary Report should include a reference to the change control record. The use of the change control 
allows for closure of the testing phase in a timely manner.
Figure 8.3: Example Option #3: Documents with Use of Change Control
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

Page 66	
ISPE Baseline® Guide:
	
Commissioning and Qualification
8.4.4	 Example Option #4: Acceptance and Release Report – Large Projects with Interconnected 
Systems
For large projects with interconnected systems, multiple reports may be used to complete the acceptance and 
release phase. In this case, the completion of testing for each system may be documented with separate summary 
reports. An overall acceptance and release report would reference the completed summary reports for each of the 
interconnected systems (rather than listing the individual test descriptions, acceptance criteria, and results); this 
report would document completion of all quality system elements and include the formal release statement. The 
benefit to this process is that it allows the testing to be closed out prior to finalizing procedures which often include 
information from performance testing or testing of multiple linked systems.
With the use of a separate acceptance and release report, it is possible to release a grouping of systems. One 
strategy, as shown in Figure 8.4, may be to release per processing area (e.g., cell culture) after all testing is 
completed and closed out with separate summary reports. A separate acceptance and release report would be 
used to capture the completion of testing documentation and quality system elements implementation for the entire 
processing area or grouping of systems.
Note: There are several factors to consider when using this approach. The grouping strategy may complicate future 
changes. The grouping would also require presenting information from all systems during regulatory audits even 
when only a single system is requested. The advantages are that qualification would more closely reflect the grouping 
created by the process risk assessment as well as the batch record structure and eliminate potential gaps with the 
integration of systems.
Figure 8.4: Example Option #4: Documents with Use of Acceptance and Release Report
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

ISPE Baseline® Guide:	
Page 67
Commissioning and Qualification	
8.5	
Acceptance and Release Completion
Approval and release is completed when the Quality Unit approves and signs the summary report, which could be 
the Qualification Summary Report, change control closure, or Acceptance and Release Summary Report. This final 
approval releases the system for use. Refer to Section 6.4 for an example document approval matrix.
Quality Unit acceptance and release represents the initiation of the “qualified state” and the beginning of QA-
managed Quality Change Control (described in Chapter 12), continuous performance monitoring, and periodic review.
8.6	
Traceability Matrix
A Traceability Matrix may be used as a tool to identify CAs/CDEs, acceptance criteria, and includes reference to 
the testing document (planned or completed). Best practice is to create the matrix early in the project or as soon as 
the CAs/CDEs are identified. The Traceability Matrix can be used throughout the project as an engineering tool to 
manage DR, testing activities, results, and documentation that ensures all CAs/CDEs have been met. It provides 
traceability for each URS requirement by design and through testing.
As such, the Traceability Matrix is not required to be approved. Approvals are completed for the test protocols and 
the Qualification Summary Report or Acceptance and Release Report to demonstrate completion of all testing. The 
Traceability Matrix is not a required standalone deliverable.
For smaller projects, a Traceability Matrix may not be needed. It is considered a useful project management tool 
when testing is planned to be completed in several different documents or stages conducted by different companies 
and there may not be any other format to organizing the documents. It is recommended to keep the amount of 
information managed in this document to a minimum to avoid an unmanageable document size when printed and to 
simplify tracking of changes.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2019. All rights reserved.

