8.3 Appendix C. Additional Information on Empty Glass Inspection
Capability Studies
Study Test Kits
The glass container inspection study required the test kits to be of sufficient quality so as not to bias
the study results. This was achieved through the following steps.
36 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Use defined
magnification and Use red circle to Particle contained
Filter Sample
reticle to locate Fiber Like? No inspect inside circle (not Yes Do not count
Mounted
particulate on touching red border?
filter
Yes
Use red box to
inspect
No
Count and categorize
Fiber contained
into two groups; Fibers
inside box (not
No and Particles. Repeat Report test results
touching red
for all other particles
border)?
present on filter
Yes
Do not count
Figure B1 Flowchart showing the use of the specified reticle to determine status of any observed particles on the filter
37 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Table C1 Summary of Nominal Particle Size by Material
Particle/Fiber Size (µm)
Type Material Color Photo
38 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85
selcitraP
001 002 003 005 007 008
000,1
Glass Transparent
X X X
Rubber Orange – Cartridges
Black – Syringes X X X X
Gray – Vials (shown)
Metal Silver/Gray
X X X
srebiF
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Cellulose White
X X X X
Plastic White
X X X X
Hair Brown
X X
Figure C1 Shape factor vs size for the particles and fibers seeded into test vials

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure C2 Graphic comparison of test kit composition (kits A, B, and C)
The containers were washed and seeded with a particle of known size and type. Each particle was
digitally photographed and measured before being glued with a highly transparent, UV-cured glue.
Each container was then sealed to prevent further particle contamination. Three equivalent kits were
produced and used for this study to ensure that the results were not influenced by the composition
of a specific kit. A critical analysis of the composition of each kit was performed before use. Table C1
shows the intended particle types and size ranges while Figure C1 shows the actual results. Figure C2
provides a graphic comparison of the composition of the kits (A, B, and C) that were prepared and
used in the study showing both SF and size of the particles and fibers seeded into test containers. The
circled outliers were removed from the study kits to assure conformance with the intended kit design.
Data Collection
Study Data. A total of eleven companies participated in the study: five from the pharmaceutical in-
dustry and six manufactures of the primary packaging materials. Each company used five inspectors
for the study; each inspector performed the inspection six times, producing a total of 59,400 data
points. The data were reviewed and confirmed as valid prior to being used in the statistical analysis.
Inspection Rate. Sufficient time must be allowed for a thorough inspection of each container. The
EP (26), USP (6), and JP (28) each specify a reference time of inspection per container of ten 10 sec;
five sec each against black and white backgrounds. Before executing the study, an estimate was made
for inspection of the complete test of 60 containers using the minimum inspection time defined by the
compendia. The estimated target time to complete the inspection of the kit, allowing for the necessary
container handling and inspection was determined to be 10-20 min.
On completion of the study, an analysis was performed to establish inspection time boundaries based on
actual time used and parameters for determining invalid and missing data. The lower limit was set at 9 min
while the upper limit was calculated as the median plus 1.66 standard deviations, resulting in an upper limit
of 31min. Results obtained outside of this range were not considered valid and were not used in the analysis.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 39

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure C3 shows that about 86% of the test runs were considered valid for the analysis based on in-
spection time. Data were also excluded if a container was broken or unavailable for inspection. This
resulted in 49,360 of the 59,400 data points being used for subsequent analysis.
Main influences on probability of detection
Operator Experience. The inspectors participating in this study had differing levels of glass inspection
experience. For pharmaceutical manufacturers, the inspectors typically inspect filled containers, whereas
those at the suppliers primarily focus on empty containers. Overall, however, the results from both groups
of inspectors were found to be comparable. See Figure C4 for particle inspection results and Figure C5 for
results for fibers. Larger circles indicate a greater number of observations with the same value.
Figure C3 Distribution of time required to complete inspection of test kit
Figure C4 Particle inspection results with inspectors having prior experience with empty containers (Yes) and those
without such experience (No). Circle diameter is proportional to the number of data points falling at a specific x-y location.
40 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure C5 Fiber inspection results with inspectors having both prior experience (Yes) with empty containers and those
without such experience (No). Circle diameter is proportional to the number of data points falling at a specific x-y location.
Particle/Fiber type. The material composition of the particle had a significant influence on the PoD
observed. Glass, metal, and grey rubber particles (100 to 200 µm) were found to have a lower PoD
than orange or black rubber particles of similar size as shown in Figure C6.
Figure C6 Probability of detection for particles of differing type and size. Circle diameter is proportional to the number
of data points falling at a specific x-y location.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 41

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
This becomes more pronounced with fibers, where cellulose fibers have a statistically lower PoD than
that for brown hair or white plastic as shown in Figure C7. Optical contrast is necessary for reliable
detection and greatly impacts the resulting PoD.
Container Size/Type. Figure C8 for particles and Figure C9 for fibers show the influence of con-
tainer size and type on inspection results. The vials used in the study were 30 ml and had a surface area
approximately three times larger than either the 1 mL syringes or 3 mL cartridges used. This resulted
in a decrease in the inspection time per unit surface area when examining containers of larger size and
suggests a reason for lower detection rates in the vials used for this study.
Figure C7 Probability of detection for fibers of differing type and size. Circle diameter is proportional to the number of
data points falling at a specific x-y location.
Figure C8 Probability of detection for particles in various container types and sizes. Circle diameter is proportional to
the number of data points falling at a specific x-y location.
42 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure C9 Probability of detection for fibers in various container types and sizes. Circle diameter is proportional to the
number of data points falling at a specific x-y location.
Main Effects. Using the Boruta method (33) the data were analyzed for the significance that each
variable has on the resulting PoD. This method is based on a machine learning technique called Ran-
dom Forest. Random Forest computes the importance of predictor variables vs a response variable. It
repeats this process and generates a distribution of importance for each predictor variable. It then sorts
the predictor variables based on their importance and statistically compares them to random (shadow)
variables to categorize them as:
• Rejected: variable has significantly less predictive importance than random variables.
• Confirmed: variable has significantly more predictive importance.
• Tentative: variable cannot be categorized as either rejected or confirmed when computation stops.
Figure C10 Boruta Plot of inspection study results demonstrating factors significant to reliable inspection performance.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 43

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
As a result, important variables are those that can play a significant role in predicting the response vari-
able. This is similar to significant predictors in Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) but fails to satisfy usual
assumptions of parametric models.
Conclusion
Based on statistical analysis of the valid data from the empty container inspection study, the main
variables influencing the PoD were determined to be particle size, inspector, container, and particulate
type. Further, particle size is a significant factor as well, with lower PoD observed for smaller particles.
Material providing poorer contrast against the backgrounds produced lower PoD values. This was
more significant when examining fibers where cellulose had a statistically lower PoD than brown hair
and plastic. These results are consistent with previous visual inspection studies with filled containers.
Finally, the container size influenced the PoD, with larger containers (with a greater surface area) effec-
tively reducing the time per unit surface area available to inspect the product and resulting in reduced
detection rates for smaller particles.
8.4 Appendix D. Method: Visual Inspection of Empty Glass Containers
Introduction. The purpose of this method is to provide a procedure to identify and quantify the
number of visible particles present on empty glass containers used for injectable pharmaceutical prod-
ucts. The procedure describes the inspection conditions and how the containers should be presented
to the inspector.
Scope. This method is applicable to all empty glass containers. Inspection times may need to be in-
creased for larger (>100mL) containers.
Equipment and materials.
1. Inspection cabinet with matte black and white backgrounds with diffuse lighting of 2,000-
3,750 lux at the point of inspection.
Glass container inspection procedure.
1. Remove a container from the uninspected tray.
2. Hold the sample approximately 10 cm directly below the lamp at a distance approximately 30
cm from the inspector’s eyes.
3. Inspect the sample for 5-10 sec against the black background. Rotate and invert the container to
ensure all areas are examined adjusting your grip on the container as needed.
4. Inspect the sample for 5-10 sec against the white background. Rotate and invert the container to
ensure all areas are examined adjusting your grip on the container as needed.
5. Place each piece examined into the either the reject tray or passing tray as required.
6. Complete any necessary records documenting the inspection of each piece before moving to the
next inspection.
The time spent per container may be controlled using a pacing device. Recording the time spent in-
specting each batch and then calculating the nominal inspection rate is a reliable method to confirm
that the rate of inspection was maintained within the defined limits.
Information recorded during or after inspection may include details such as the type and location of
any particles observed, and any other defects observed. On completion of the inspection, the data
should be evaluated against the established acceptance criteria to determine the disposition of the
batch. During inspection, the operator should avoid direct viewing of the light source and take regular
eye breaks to avoid eye strain which may adversely influence the results of the inspection.
44 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser.
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
• Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an
Authorized User
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
• Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication
• Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other
than an Authorized User
• Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
• Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic
Publication
• Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA
Electronic Publication
• Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication
or its content
• Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose
• Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any
text or graphics
• Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication
• Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material
To License or purchase Reprints
• Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a fee.
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact:
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900,
ext. 133. Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
• Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.
To order reprints, please contact:
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150,
Bethesda, MD 20814.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 45

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Enhanced Test Methods for Visible Particle Detection and Enumeration on Elastomeric
Closures and Glass Containers
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials.
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Biotechnology Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality
Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and deter-
mines whether to publish or not publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org.
Sanctioning Advisory Board: SAB PDA Officers and Directors
Phil DeSantis, DeSantis Consulting Associates (Chair) Officers
Greg Bassett, Amgen (Vice Chair)
Chair: Jette Christensen, Novo Nordisk
Masahiro Akimoto, OTSUKA
Chair-Elect: Sue Schniepp, Regulatory Compliance
John Ayres, MD, Consultant
Associates Inc.
Ed Balkovic, PhD, MicroBio Technical Support
Treasurer: Melissa Seymour, Biogen, Inc.
Marcia Baroni, Emergent BioSolutions Inc
Secretary: Emma Ramnarine, Genentech/Roche
Rebecca Brewer, Quality Executive Partners
Imm. Past Chair: Rebecca Devine, PhD, Regulatory
Tom Damratoski, Bristol Myers Squibb
Consultant
Rhonda Ezell, Vitruvias Therapeutics
President: Richard Johnson
Guenther Gapp, Gapp Quality GmbH
Mauro Giusti, MS, Eli Lilly Directors
Marc Glogovsky, MS, Valsource, LLC
Barbara M. Allen, PhD, Eli Lilly and Company
Gabriele Gori, MS, GlaxoSmithKline
Michael Blackton, Adaptimmune, LLC
Dennis Guilfoyle, PhD, Johnson & Johnson
Bettine Boltres, PhD, West Pharmaceutical Services
Ghada Haddad, PhD, Merck
Kenneth Hinds, PhD, Johnson & Johnson Tia Bush, Amgen, Inc.
Ken-ichi Izutsu, PhD, National Institute of Health Javier Camposano, Celltrion
Sciences Ghada Haddad, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Gitte Letting, Novo Nordisk Joyce Hansen, Johnson & Johnson
Ivy Louis, VIENNI TRAINING & CONSULTING, LLP
Stephan Krause, PhD, AstraZeneca Biologics
Stefan Merkle, PhD, Janssen
Mary Oates, Emergent Bioscience
Mike Sadowski, Baxter
Mathias Romacker, Pfizer (ret.)
Matthew Schmidt, MS, Merck
Siegfried Schmitt, PhD, Parexel International Corp. Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Kristin Valente, PhD, Merck Osamu Shirokizawa, LifeScientia
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Jahanvi Miller, MBA, Assistant Director, Scientific Affairs
Glenn Wright, VP, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing and Press Relations
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org