5.0 Phase II: Manufacturing Investigation
Once laboratory error has been eliminated or found inconclusive through the Phase I investigative
process, the investigation focuses on the manufacturing facility, personnel, processes, and materials. A
manufacturing investigation includes, but is not limited to, several principal elements:
• The cross-functional investigation team must represent all departments responsible for handling
the deviated sample whether it is a pharmaceutical excipient, in-process intermediate, drug sub-
stance, or drug product. This component is essential to conducting an effective investigation. The
QCU or another suitable individual may lead the team, which should include representatives from
manufacturing, plant engineering, process validation, maintenance, and quality control. In a mi-
crobiological-related investigation, the contribution of a microbiologist on the team will be critical.
• The QCU should have overall responsibility for managing or approving the outcome of the manu-
facturing investigation and for notifying upper management of the investigation findings and
batch disposition.
• Each investigation should be thoroughly documented and include a time for completion, as speci-
fied by company policies and procedures. Microbiological-related investigations are complex and
may not be able to be completed within the specified time period; in these cases, an SOP-governed
mechanism should be in place for extending the completion date. This extension must be justified
and supported by the QCU.
While additional assessments can be performed if required by company policy or procedure, every
manufacturing investigation should include the following actions:
• Determine all batches in scope. Does the initial scope of the investigation need to be expand-
ed based on laboratory findings? Batches under investigation should not be released.
• Determine the definitive or probable cause (root cause analysis). The investigation must
be comprehensive, especially if the probable cause may not be identified. When conducting the
root cause analysis, all aspects must be considered, and a thoroughly objective approach must be
taken to evaluate the cause of the deviation. Identifying the probable cause is critical. It determines
the type and degree of CAPAs implemented, which affects the likelihood of the deviation recurring.
• Determine if this is a recurrence of a previous deviation or a first-time incident. Is there
a pattern of microbial contamination? Were previous CAPAs effective?
• Determine the potential impact. What impact might this incident have on other batches
manufactured in the facility? This impact assessment may include pharmaceutical ingredients,
manufacturing equipment, or other processing lines in the same facility, other sites within the
company that are manufacturing the same or related products, and distributed product.
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 25

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• Determine the level of risk. What risk might be posed to a person taking the product? What
effect could there be on the stability, safety, and efficacy of the product over the shelf life of the
product?
• Identify CAPAs required and develop a plan for implementation. Create a list of all the
possible solutions that would prevent the deviation from recurring and select the most effective
changes for implementation.
• Clearly identify the deviation. State what the deviation is and how it exceeded the limits. Be
as specific, simple, and concise as possible.
• Decide what, if any, manufacturing should cease during the investigation. Depending
on the nature of the deviation (e.g., high microbial counts, damage to facility, microorganisms
identified), the team should consider recommending that manufacturing in the affected area
should cease until remediation (e.g., extra cleaning and sanitization, more environmental sam-
pling) has been completed and before the investigation is closed. All actions taken to demonstrate
containment of the deviation should be documented.
• Maintain clear communications. Interview personnel involved and revise the investigation as
needed. Provide routine updates to management and ensure that members of the team are well
informed and kept up to date on the progress of the investigation.
• Inspect the area where the deviation occurred. Locate the deviation on a plan of the facility
and look at surrounding areas that might contribute to the microbial contamination. Consider
personnel and material flows, and nonroutine events, as well as temperature, humidity, and space
pressurization excursions.
• Look for trends. Review prior related investigations to assess. Is there an adverse trend—same
location, common personnel involvement, recurring microorganisms, root cause? If an adverse
trend is identified, act promptly to remediate the problem.
• Evaluate data. A thorough review of production or batch records should be conducted to deter-
mine if falsification or incorrect recording of data from either intentional or unintentional human
error during the time of recording results occurred (35).
While SOPs are crucial to effectively manage an investigation, other tools can provide valuable assis-
tance in identifying possible causes of the deviation, such as brainstorming, fishbone diagram, FMEA/
HAACP, cause-and-effect analysis, and the 5-why technique.
5.1 Root Cause Analysis
When writing a manufacturing investigation, use of root cause analysis tools are recommended (36).
One common approach is the use of a fishbone diagram (Figure 5.1-1); it can be used to ensure that
all inputs that may have contributed to the deviation are adequately considered and assessed as a po-
tential root cause.
Thinking through the entire scope of factors that may have influenced the deviation is very important,
as is recording each potential root cause identified in the investigation, even it is determined not likely
to have been a contributing factor. For example, if pharmaceutical ingredients and packaging compo-
nents were assessed and were determined to not have caused the deviation, the investigation should
reflect that information. This demonstrates that the investigator performed due diligence in examining
the potential impact of these materials as a source of contamination and subsequently ruled them out
as a potential root cause.
The categories of contributing factors to be considered in a root cause analysis may vary based on the
process involved. They can also be modified depending on the situation, for example, the dosage form,
facility design, or nature of the deviation itself, location within the facility, sample type, classified area
level, or involvement of personnel. The investigating team is responsible for ensuring that all contrib-
uting factors have been assessed so that no potential root cause of the deviation is overlooked.
26 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.1-1 Fishbone Diagram Examining Microbial Contamination of a Drug Product
In addition to the information the fishbone diagram provides, Tables 5.1-1, 5.1-2, and 5.1-3 pres-
ent further questions which can be used as applicable to the product type manufactured to aid in the
investigation.
Table 5.1-1 Factors to Consider in Root Cause Analysis
Area of Consideration Questions for Consideration
Have all relevant certificates of analysis been reviewed, with special emphasis on microbial testing?
Have there been any recent notifications from the vendor regarding changes to their raw materials or
processes?
Raw Materials Have any of the vendor’s suppliers or subsuppliers changed? Has your company been notified
appropriately?
If your firm comprises multiple sites that share vendors, have other sites had any complaints or issues?
Did the last audit of the supplier/vendor have no microbial quality issues?
Have the personnel responsible for manufacturing the product been trained appropriately?
Was the relevant staff (e.g., cleaning staff, engineers, maintenance workers) involved in the manufacturing
process around the time of the event interviewed? Were their responses documented?
Have personnel recently transferred to a new function? Did an error occur due to complexity of the
function?
Are all personnel trained on proper aseptic techniques?
Personnel and Training
Are all personnel trained on proper cleanroom behaviors?
Are personnel following procedures for operating in a classified area?
Were any personnel observed to be ill or infected at the time of sampling?
Was the occupancy count or time spent in the room exceeded prior to or during sampling?
Were the personnel involved different from the personnel who routinely perform a particular function?
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 27

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
(Table 5.1-1 Continued)
Area of Consideration Questions for Consideration
How long have the personnel been performing this function? Are new employees involved? If so, are they
all experienced?
Have recently transferred or temporary operators been in the manufacturing area?
Are the critical tasks performed infrequently? When was the last time the personnel involved performed
the tasks?
Are contractors (e.g., an outside cleaning or maintenance service) employed?
How are contractors trained and qualified?
Is operator performance evaluated on an ongoing basis (i.e., performance monitoring)?
Is a particular operator or group of operators associated with a disproportionate number of deviations?
Did any events occur around the time of the deviation that could have impacted operator performance
(e.g., a distraction or interruption of activities, including upcoming holiday breaks; union activity; personal
conflict; reorganization)?
Personnel and Training Gowning
Is the personal protective equipment (PPE) appropriate for the manufacturing area?
Are accessories like makeup and jewelry removed prior to entering classified areas?
Is the gowning procedure clear and easy to follow?
Were PPE appropriately stored?
Did the operators don their gowning materials correctly?
Are soiled or damaged gowns replaced routinely?
Is the PPE properly stocked and organized in a way that permits ease of cleaning while not obstructing
airflow?
Are the operators’ gloves sanitized periodically?
If the area in question has video recording of personnel activities, were any deviations noted?
Were personnel monitoring results acceptable for each operator?
Were any changes made in the area during the period in question?
Are the walls, floors, and ceilings made of smooth and nonporous materials?
Are all the surfaces visibly clean, free of dust, and not deteriorating?
Are all windows flush mounted and properly sealed?
Are all electrical outlets well covered to enable cleaning?
Is there freestanding water or excess water in the manufacturing area?
Are all floor drains (where applicable) clean and free of residual water and sanitized periodically?
Were the temperature, differential pressure, and humidity requirements met?
Were parts and equipment inspected for signs of wear and tear?
Facility
Has landscaping recently been done outside the entrances to the building, particularly the application of mulch?
Was there ongoing construction in the facility? Was the construction properly isolated?
Are the procedures for extraneous (i.e., contractor’s) equipment sanitization sufficiently robust?
Air Supply
Was the HVAC system in proper working order?
Are the HEPA filters within their intended re-certification period?
Are the HEPA filters properly installed and clean?
Was any process equipment or materials obstructing proper air flow?
Are the space pressurization requirements maintained?
28 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
(Table 5.1-1 Continued)
Area of Consideration Questions for Consideration
Material and Personnel Flow
Is there adequate separation of “clean” and “dirty” areas? How are transitional spaces constructed and
managed?
How is personnel and equipment access controlled (e.g., any evidence of sharing of access badges through
security checks)?
Are gowning and degowning areas separate or combined? Is this appropriate for the processes being
performed?
Is the flow of personnel and equipment unidirectional?
How are materials being sanitized when passed from one area to another (e.g., spray mist, wipe-down,
immersion, autoclave)?
Is the material transfer room well organized for proper flow of items?
Was the material transfer room stocked with cleaning supplies?
Where needed, was a transfer cart available and free of rust, dirt, etc.?
When appropriate, were the materials double- or triple-bagged?
Is there sufficient space in the material transfer room for personnel and for the necessary cleaning
activities to take place?
Where is the equipment assembled?
Is the area of assembly properly controlled for this process?
How are waste materials handled? Are they segregated from equipment, packaging components, and
Facility
product ingredients?
Environment
Environmental Monitoring Program [This section applies to utilities, such as pharmaceutical water
systems, clean steam, and compressed gasses, as well as the facility and process equipment.]
Is the EM program appropriate for the facility and operations performed? Is the program appropriately
qualified?
Is the EM program risk-based? When was it last assessed?
Was EM performed correctly?
Are the samplers appropriately trained? Do they have a basic understanding of microbiology?
Trending [This section also applies to water systems, environmental and personnel monitoring, in-process
testing, and finished product testing.]
Have you seen an increase in overall counts of specific genus, species, or organism types, especially a
resistant type (e.g., Bacillus)?
What isolates were recovered during sanitization validation?
Was the organism identified to the correct level, i.e., characterized, speciated, or strain-typed? By which
method? Is the method appropriate for the deviation?
What is the probable source of the microorganism identified? Is it of human, environmental, water, or
other origin? Is it part of the baseline microflora? If not, how did it enter the facility and/or product?
Are your visitor/contractor training and gowning procedures sufficiently robust?
Was the area appropriately cleaned and the cleaning documented on and around the date in question?
Was the decontamination cycle of the manufacturing isolator system completed without error?
Was the cleaning/sanitizing done on a periodic basis and as defined by SOP?
Cleaning and Sanitization
Were the correct (validated) cleaning/sanitizing agents used and in the correct concentration(s)?
Were the correct cleaning/sanitizing tools used for the process?
Was the cleaning/sanitizing equipment intact and appropriate for use?
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 29

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
(Table 5.1-1 Continued)
Area of Consideration Questions for Consideration
Were the operators trained on how to prepare and apply the cleaning/sanitizing agent?
Were the operators gowned appropriately during the cleaning/sanitizing process?
Are there known difficult-to-clean surfaces in the area(s) associated with the deviation?
Have there been any recent changes to the rooms and/or to the process that would render a surface
difficult to clean (e.g., physical changes, new product that leaves a residue)?
Sanitization and Disinfection Efficacy
Was the manufacturing facility cleaned properly and with the approved agents?
Was the appropriate contact time maintained for disinfectants?
Cleaning and Sanitization Were the cleaning and disinfectant agents used within expiry? Have expiry dates been properly
established for opened or site-prepared agents?
Are disinfectant agents sterilized prior to use in ISO 5 and ISO 7 areas?
Are the cleaning procedures and disinfectant agents validated? Have disinfectant efficacy studies been reviewed?
Are these validations repeated periodically? Are newly isolated microorganisms/surfaces ever added?
Can the microorganisms implicated in the deviation be killed by the validated disinfectant and sporicidal agents?
If pre-wetted wipes are used for disinfecting, are the packages resealable? Do they reseal well? Have they been
validated? Has an appropriate post-opening expiry date been applied (especially for IPA, which is a volatile)?
Are nonfixed components and equipment routinely moved for appropriate cleaning?
Process Equipment and Instruments
Has a thorough review of the following been performed?
Original validation/qualification (IQ/OQ/PQ) and any updates or amendments to the original
documentation?
Calibration and preventive maintenance records, including any repairs or adjustments made during batch
manufacture?
Daily use and/or cleaning logs, as applicable, including all setup procedures and activities?
Procedures for sanitization of nonsterilizable materials? Thorough evaluation of large or intricate pieces of
equipment?
Have the sterile boundaries been evaluated and assessed for impact, including those that supply sterile
gasses or can affect product integrity?
Manufacturing Process and Procedures
Has a thorough review of all manufacturing processes and procedures used related to the deviation been
Manufacturing Processing
conducted?
Did the review include verification that the instructions for procedures and/or equipment use are written
clearly and adequately for the intended use and full documentation of the critical steps in the batch
records?
Have all relevant method validation and transfer documentation, including any addendums or updated
studies, been reviewed?
Batch Records
Have all steps been completed accurately and documented appropriately?
Were all pharmaceutical ingredients added in the correct amounts, in the right sequence and time?
Were all unit processing steps executed correctly?
Were critical process parameters, in-process test results, and second-person reviews performed per procedure?
Were nonroutine events documented (e.g., references to processing problems/difficulties, equipment
change-outs, loss of environmental control)?
30 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 5.1-2 Root Cause Evaluation and Follow-Up
Root Cause Analysis
Considerations
Portion
Were all equipment use/cleaning/preventive maintenance/calibration logbooks and records examined to
Documentation
ensure that proper procedures were followed and that all these activities were performed at proper intervals?
Based on the microorganism implicated and its profile, what is the risk to the patient? To the quality,
efficacy, and safety of the product during its shelf life? Is the sterility assurance of the product impacted?
What is the route of product administration (oral, injectable, topical, implant, etc.)? Is the patient risk high,
moderate, or low?
Does the product have a specific target patient population (pediatric, immune-compromised, post-
operative, elderly)?
Personnel monitoring: When and where does this occur?
Is the microorganism likely to survive and grow in the product?
Impact Assessment
Have such product attributes as preservative effectiveness, water activity, pH, and nutrient sources been
considered?
If the product contains antibiotic substances, has the antibiotic-resistance profile of the microorganisms
isolated been reviewed?
Is the microorganism likely to produce a toxin? Even if the organism is found not to cause a health risk to
the patient, can it cause a bad flavor, break down the viscosity, or discolor the product?
Can the organism break down the active ingredient or a component of the product and potentially affect
the potency or shelf life? Could there be other post-market impacts?
What is(are) the cause(s) of the deviation? What is the level of certainty as to the conclusion?
Root Cause: High degree of certainty?
Investigation Outcomes Most Probable Cause: Most likely cause?
Possible Cause: Likely, but not definitely, proven cause?
Unknown cause: Inconclusive data
Table 5.1-3 CAPA Determination
Based on the investigation findings, has a CAPA plan been outlined to eliminate the root cause and prevent
any likelihood of its reoccurrence?
When determining CAPAs, have the solutions been evaluated and a consensus reached with the process
owners to ensure buy-in? Are the due dates for CAPAs reasonable with as short as practically possible
timelines, unless adequate justification is provided for long-term actions, e.g., capital expenditure and
facility modification? Have responsible owners been assigned for each action and completion date?
Have all commitments been tracked, and actions taken confirmed to ensure CAPA completion, preferably
CAPA Plan
in an electronic investigation database? Have reasons for delayed implementation of a CAPA been
documented? Have justification and authorization been documented for implementation extensions?
How is proficiency verified by laboratory management observation and personnel monitoring?
Are the alert levels and action limits in place appropriate for the area classification and/or the
manufacturing process being performed?
Has the effectiveness of the completed CAPAs been checked to ensure that the actions taken were
successful and the deviation has not recurred?
