4.0 Phase I: Conducting the Microbiology Laboratory Investigation
The first phase of a microbial data deviation (deviation) investigation is an initial assessment of the results
reported by the microbiology laboratory. The purpose of the laboratory investigation is to establish the
validity of test results, thereby confirming that a deviation has occurred. If a laboratory error has occurred,
which would invalidate the test, the QCU would approve retesting and/or resampling of the pharmaceuti-
cal ingredient or drug product/drug substance. Some compendial microbiology testing chapters have lim-
ited information to address how to handle sample deviations and investigations (13-14). This technical re-
port will discuss additional factors for microbiological evaluation of sterility, bacterial endotoxin, and other
microbiological testing conditions for invalidating test results or allowing an initial test to be repeated.
Pharmaceutical QC microbiology laboratories vary in size and complexity. These factors may impact
the level of experience with dealing with deviations in terms of the training, experience, and academic
background of the analysts and laboratory management.
Contrary to the belief that microbial failure investigations are usually inconclusive, experience has demon-
strated that the causes of the microbial contamination are determinable through robust investigations con-
ducted by teams that include an experienced microbiologist. In the absence of a definitive cause, the most
probable cause(s) can be determined based on the available information and follow-up observations, ad-
ditional testing, and batch-record review. To avoid a confirmation bias, the team must be willing to reject
their original hypothesis about the probable cause in light of the evidence subsequently collected. If possible,
as many questions should be asked as to why the probable cause is not correct as are asked about why it is
correct. Hindsight, where the successes of past microbial failure investigations often are exaggerated and may
incorrectly influence the direction of the current investigation, is another bias that must be recognized and
avoided. However, a history of conducting investigations will enhance the success with current investigations.
When no obvious laboratory errors are noted, the laboratory management must initiate a laboratory
investigation promptly and must complete it as soon as is practically possible in accordance with
regulatory expectations and company policies and procedures. Accurately recording the sequence of
activities may prove helpful in determining root cause during an investigation. Some tests, such as
microbial identification, may require more time and may delay completion of the laboratory investiga-
tion. Figure 4.0-1 presents a generalized fishbone diagram to be used as guidance for how to evaluate
the inputs of microbial testing during root cause analysis.
Figure 4.0-1 Fishbone Diagram Showing Inputs of Microbial Testing during Root Cause Analysis
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 7

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 4.0-1 lists sample questions that may be asked during the laboratory investigation. This sug-
gested list of questions and conditions for consideration should not be considered all-inclusive.
Table 4.0-1 Sample Questions for Laboratory Investigations
Laboratory Process or
Questions for Consideration
Component
Were the samples collected using proper aseptic technique?
Were the samples taken in a sampling cabinet (where applicable) so not to contaminate the test material?
Were sterile sampling devices used (e.g., sterile scoops, sampling thieves)?
Was the sampler gowned appropriately to protect the sample from contamination?
Were personnel properly trained to take samples?
Were personnel wearing appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE)?
Were sample containers intact (not damaged or opened) and sterile prior to testing?
Was the sampling area properly sanitized, using qualified sanitizing agents?
Sampling and/or Shipment Did errors occur during routing, delivery, and storage of the test samples to the laboratory (e.g., dropped,
to the Microbiology opened, spilled, and/or improperly stored)?
Laboratory Were all procedures followed and confirmed (e.g., container-closure integrity testing, label review and
verification, attribute inspection) during sample collection?
Did the chain of custody and the time lapse between sampling and testing adhere to procedural
requirements?
Were the samples transported in a secure manner that did not contribute to microbial contamination (e.g.,
single-use protective barriers, properly sanitized reusable tote)?
Were the associated documentation and sampling forms properly completed with all relevant information
necessary for testing?
Were the samples transferred into the laboratory promptly and stored under proper conditions prior to use
in testing?
Was the test method performed in accordance with the current standard operating procedure?
Is the test method correct and appropriate for the sample being tested?
Was method suitability testing performed on the applicable sample type?
Were the samples tested in a controlled environment using proper aseptic technique?
Is the analyst properly qualified, experienced in running the test, and current with their training?
Is the procedure and/or test method clear, or could it be subject to interpretation?
Was the analyst properly gowned, wearing appropriate PPE for the test (e.g., face mask, sterile sleeves,
sterile gloves, etc.)?
Were the appropriate materials, media, diluents, and components used for the test?
Were the testing consumables accepted into inventory via a defined incoming-materials process and within
Testing Procedures
the appropriate expiration date?
Did the materials, media, and diluents pass quality control testing, where required?
Was the lot information for the materials, media, and diluents properly documented?
Were any changes made to how reusable glassware were cleaned and sterilized (e.g., new employee, new
detergent, new washer, new autoclave)?
Was there a trainee or new analyst working with the lead analyst?
Were the required incubation time and temperature used, if applicable?
Was water of the appropriate quality and volume used for media and solution preparation?
Was the testing area properly sanitized, using qualified sanitizing agents? Were all agents within their
expiration date?
8 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
(Table 4.0-1 Continued)
Laboratory Process or
Questions for Consideration
Component
Was the sanitization of the testing and support areas performed properly and as frequently as required by
the current laboratory procedures?
Were the environmental and/or personnel monitoring samples collected as part of the testing session
Testing Procedures
appropriate and acceptable?
Were all system controls (manipulative) properly executed and acceptable?
Were all negative controls for media and diluents properly executed and acceptable?
Has the microbiology laboratory experienced any unusual events that could compromise the laboratory
testing areas (e.g., construction, open doors, standing water, temperature excursions, spills, HVAC failure)?
Were the equipment, instruments, and pipette aids used in the test properly maintained and calibrated?
Were related, reusable, testing equipment (e.g., micropipettes, pipet-aids), glassware, and materials
properly cleaned and/or sterilized prior to use, according to procedure?
Were all the pieces of equipment and supplies brought into the testing area properly handled?
Were the gowning components properly cleaned and/or sterilized, and was the packaging fully integral?
Equipment/Supplies
Did any maintenance of equipment, planned or unplanned, occur that could have had a potential impact
on the test or result?
Was a water bath or sonicator required for testing and, if so, was it properly cleaned, sanitized, and filled
with the appropriate quality of water?
Was the container or packaging used in holding microbiological culture media integral (i.e., devoid of
cracks or missing components)?
Were all the analysts trained on the proper use the equipment?
Was any anomalous or suspect information, aside from that being investigated, recorded in the raw test
data?
Did any microbiological media, aside from that being investigated, exhibit microbial counts and/or
turbidity? Were all containers and plates from the deviation test session reexamined?
Were all calculations used to convert raw data into final test results scientifically sound, appropriate, and
correct?
Data Collection, Recording, Was a review of historical data conducted for any reagents and media involved in a past deviation?
and Calculation Did all media and equipment used for the test meet quality control specifications (for growth promotion,
sterility, pH, appearance, incubation, sterilization, etc.)?
Was a review of all EM data conducted for the area where the sample was tested, as well as for the adjacent
areas (e.g., transfer rooms, incubators, etc.)?
Was the test method performed as prescribed by the qualified method?
Has laboratory management reviewed all the raw testing data to determine if any correctable laboratory
errors have occurred (e.g., clerical, mathematical, transcriptional errors)?
Was a Gram stain performed (i.e., review slides under a microscope to confirm the Gram reaction and
cellular morphology and identify all of the microorganisms recovered during the analysis)?
Is the microbial identification appropriate for the isolate (e.g., genotypic, phenotypic, proteotypic)?
Were the microbial identification platform(s) appropriately qualified according to either the manufacturer’s
Microbial Identification in instructions or a recognized procedure, such as that described in USP <1113> Microbial Characterization,
Support of the Investigation Identification, and Strain Typing? (16)
Were any commercially available cultures and/or facility isolates used as controls? Were they appropriately
maintained, according to procedure?
Based on the criticality of the test (e.g., sterility test), was the identification of the microorganism(s)
implicated in the investigation confirmed via strain-typing or molecular fingerprinting?
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 9

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
If a laboratory error (Phase I investigation) cannot be found that invalidates the results, the original
test results are presumed to be correct. The next step, then, is to conduct a Phase II investigation,
including review of manufacturing batch records and other facility documents available to find the
possible cause of the deviation or trend that may have occurred during manufacturing. Specific points
to consider might include:
• If an analyst thinks a mistake has been made in any part of the testing, including sample prepara-
tion, the assay should be terminated, and the justification documented.
• Analysts should be instructed to neither destroy nor discard the sample, sample-preparation dilution
tubes, or reagents, when possible, until the final results are known, confirmed, and released. Compar-
ing them with the product specification may be an important part of the laboratory investigation.
• Caution should be used in conducting investigational assays. They are not considered retests,
but a response to the deviation and should not be used to release material. A laboratory SOP
should precisely describe the procedure(s) that must be followed if a deviation is observed. Such a
document eliminates unplanned decisions regarding the appropriateness of investigational testing,
retesting, or resampling. When appropriate, retesting can be conducted according to established
compendial directives.
• Investigational testing provides the laboratory an opportunity to assess the hypotheses regarding
possible reagent or analytical failures in testing; it frequently aims to identify and change a variable
(e.g., analyst) from the first failed test. Investigational testing should be well-defined and justified,
preapproved, and well-documented. Values generated from the investigational test may provide a
clue as to the actual or potential product contamination or a mishandling of a positive control or
a tube mix-up. The purpose of performing investigational tests is not to reverse the original devia-
tion, but to gain information regarding a potential failure, so a more effective effort can be made
to pinpoint the root cause and implement any necessary CAPAs.
Fully documenting each step in the lab investigation is critical. Laboratory management should de-
termine not only the reliability of the individual test result obtained, but also the significance of the
deviation. If the deviation is verified to be correct, they must determine what that represents about the
laboratory quality assurance program and what impact the final report may have on other product lots.
Laboratory management should continue to monitor for developing trends.
General points to consider during the investigation phase include:
• Having all QC challenge microorganisms genotypically and phenotypically profiled may be ad-
vantageous so a library is available to compare product isolates in the event of cross-contamination
during testing.
• If growth is detected on the negative control media, these isolates should be identified for inves-
tigative purposes.
• The two-fold variance described in USP <61> and <1111> as the maximum acceptable count ap-
plies only to approved specifications in cfu/g or mL, expressed as a power of 10 (15, 17).
• Nonsterile products tested at one or two product dilutions for bioburden (e.g., 1:10, 1:100) may
need to be retested at higher product dilutions to obtain a countable number of colonies, if the
highest product dilution tested yields a result too numerous to count.
• Due to the variability of microbiological results, the investigation should not be limited to the
specific batch but extended to multiple batches, excipients, or APIs over a selected period of time.
• Include historical trend data for the assay, controls, and any additional factors that may support
the investigation hypothesis and/or investigational results.
10 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4.1 Microbial Identification
Identifying the microorganism(s) implicated in product failure is a critical step in a laboratory investi-
gation and, subsequently, in the manufacturing investigation. Knowledge of the source of the micro-
organism may lead to a possible route to determine which microorganism contaminated the product.
Microbiological identification systems are based on different analytical methodologies, with their in-
herent limitations, and the databases related to the system. Identification is accomplished by matching
characteristics (genotypic, phenotypic, or proteotypic) to an established standard (reference) microor-
ganism, such as a strain-type in the database. If a microorganism is not included in the library or da-
tabase of the system, it will not be identified. Therefore, pharmaceutical manufacturers should review
the breadth of the database of the identification system they plan to use and its applicability to their
use requirements.
As stated in USP <1113> Microbial Characterization, Identification and Strain Typing, the hierarchy of
microbial identification errors of impact, in descending order, is (1) misidentification to genera, (2)
misidentification to species, and (3) no identification (16). Incorrect identifications could lead to a
faulty investigation, inappropriate CAPAs, and ill-advised product disposition. For example, a mis-
identification may result in a nonsterile drug product being released when it contains an objectionable
microorganism. If the in-house identification system cannot identify the isolate or if there is doubt
regarding the identification, it should be sent to a contract testing laboratory for confirmation; other-
wise, a misidentified microorganism will always be carried in the records.
The need for microbial identification is specifically cited in USP <62> Microbiological Examination of
Nonsterile Products: Tests for Specified Microorganisms. This chapter presents a requirement for confir-
matory identification tests for organisms that grow on selective or diagnostic media and demonstrate
defined morphological characteristics (18). As a related aspect, USP <71> Sterility Tests allows for
invalidation of the test if, after identification of the microorganism(s) isolated from the test, the con-
tamination may be unequivocally ascribed to faults with respect to the material and/or the technique
used in conducting the sterility test procedure (discussed further in Section 4.2.1) (13).
Taking a polyphasic identification approach is recommended, that is, one that assembles and assimi-
lates many levels of information from molecular, physiological, morphological, serological, or ecologi-
cal sources to classify a microorganism. Some vendors of identification instruments encourage micro-
biologists to forgo the preliminary characterization steps, such as colony description, Gram reaction,
cellular morphology description, and/or diagnostic screening. Forgoing these steps is not recommend-
ed as it often necessary to assess the microorganism identification against all available information to
determine if the identification makes sense. For example, Salmonella typhi is unlikely to be isolated
from a cleanroom, but this pathogen could be present in an animal-derived ingredient.
Another consideration is that many phenotypic identification systems require the preliminary charac-
terization of the isolate for the selection of the appropriate identification kit. An incorrect Gram stain
may result in a misidentification and flawed investigation. Criticality of this routine test should not
be overlooked.
Table 4.1-1 outlines general points to consider when encountering a microorganism associated with
a product failure.
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 11

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 4.1-1 General Points to Consider in Microbial Identification
Identification Aspect Considerations
Is the instrumentation used for the identification adequately maintained and within calibration? Did the
reagents pass their quality control checks?
Was the probability of the match to the database sufficiently high or are supplemental tests required?
Instrumentation and Data Would a small change in the results lead to a completely different identification? Does the isolate need
further subculture for full phenotypic expression?
Is the isolate difficult to differentiate from other related species with the identification technology
employed, e.g., members of the genus Bacillus?
Was there a past history of isolation of this species in your manufacturing facility, utilities, pharmaceutical
ingredients, or drug products?
Do the microbial characteristics and physiological requirements make it likely that the microorganism
Microorganism could persist in the manufacturing facility, utilities, pharmaceutical ingredients, and/or drug products?
Characteristics Is the microorganism likely to be isolated from people or from a facility in the geographic or climatic zone
the facility is located?
Is the microorganism associated with a rare disease? Have fastidious growth requirements made it an
unlikely identification?
4.2 Phase I: Specific Points to Consider
4.2.1 Sterility Testing Investigations
If a laboratory sterility test result used for release testing of a pharmaceutical or biological drug product
or a medical device indicates microbial growth in the microbiological growth medium (i.e., turbidity,
pellicle formation, precipitation, or flocculent growth) during the incubation period and is subsequently
confirmed via subculture and/or Gram reaction, it raises the question: Was the observed growth a result
of a sampling error, laboratory error, or a true product contamination? This scenario with a finished
product is commonly referred to as an ‘out of specification’ (OOS) test result.’ Due to the unique nature
of viable microorganisms, unlike chemical analytes, microbiologists also describe these aberrant results
as a ‘microbiological data deviation’ (MDD) The response to this presumptive failure to meet USP <71>
requirements is to investigate the source of the microbial contamination in order to confirm the validity
of the test results. The purpose of the investigation is to confirm that the test results were obtained while
utilizing good laboratory practices, including proper aseptic technique, appropriate equipment and re-
agents, and sterile assay media/components within an appropriate Grade A/ISO 5 environment.
Deviations in equipment, procedures, or personnel performance that require corrective action should
be discovered during the investigation. If the positive sterility test is determined to be valid, an inves-
tigation will be conducted to determine the root cause of the manufacturing practice that caused the
tested product lot to become contaminated. If no definitive root cause is determined, then the manu-
facturing corrective actions might be based on the probable causes identified and the measures defined
to prevent recurrence of such an event. The decision on the disposition of the batch needs to consider
that, as no analytical cause was identified, the batch might be nonsterile. If a laboratory investigation
concludes that errors or events caused the test contamination to come from the laboratory environ-
ment or met other compendial invalidation criteria, the sterility test result would be invalidated, and
the sterility test would be repeated with the same number of units and quantity of product.
USP <71> requires that the sterility test media be visually examined for evidence of microbial growth
at intervals during the incubation and at its conclusion. This evidence may present itself as turbid-
ity throughout the media, a pellicle growing on the surface of the soybean-casein digest medium
(SCDM), growth at the interface between the aerobic and anaerobic portions of the fluid thioglycol-
late medium (FTM), as floccular growth within the media, or as precipitation at the bottom of the
media. The mode of growth should be documented within the sterility test report.
12 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Although not specifically recommended in USP <71>, microscopic examination of suspected micro-
bial growth and subculturing the contents of test media container/enclosed membrane canisters are
common industry practice. The sampling of the media must be done aseptically to avoid additional
microbial contamination. Incubation of the original container must complete the full 14-day period
described in USP <71> in order to ensure discovery of slower growing microorganisms. Aliquot re-
moval from the canisters (or sterility test vessel used for direct inoculation) can be challenging when
using a sterile Pasteur pipette (or sterile syringe) as it is difficult to assure the same subsequent culture
growth conditions that may be needed in the event of an investigation. For example, the proximity
of the growth within the media may be diagnostic as to the type of microorganism(s) that had been
recovered. Secondly, it is not advisable to disperse the macroscopic growth within the media, especially
for FTM because the aeration of the media may be fatal for the presence of strict anaerobes.
Subculturing to isolate the suspected microbial contaminant may include:
• Transferring up to 10 mL of the test media into fresh SCDM and FTM and incubating the media
for at least 14 days at 20-25 °C and 30-35 °C, respectively. The subculture time of incubation
should mimic the time period that was necessary for the original time of incubation in order to
optimize microbial recovery required by the targeted species (for example, some environmental
fungi require the lower temperature range and are inhibited by the higher temperature range).
• Streaking out from the test media onto soybean-casein digest agar (SCDA) and Sabouraud dex-
trose agar (SDA) and incubating aerobically at 30-35 °C for SCDA and 20-25 °C for SDA, until
microbial growth is obtained and/or,
• Alternative enrichment medium (i.e., Columbia blood agar) may also be used for subculturing
from the primary SCDM and FTM to support slow growing fastidious microorganism.
The medium and mode of growth within the medium will provide insight as to whether the microor-
ganism is a strict anaerobe, facultative anaerobe, or strict aerobe and what subculturing method would
be most appropriate. Any isolates should be identified at least to species and, if available, strain-typed
to aid the follow-up investigations with isolates recovered from the manufacturing or material biobur-
den. If subculturing fails to recover the microorganism, then a direct Gram stain on an aliquot of the
suspect microbial growth should be performed. If no microbial presence is detected with the direct
Gram stain, the turbidity may be a result of product-media precipitation or an artifact of the media
after prolonged incubation (for example, the low percent of agar in the FTM can precipitate out of
solution and causes medium turbidity).
Careful review and documentation of the microbial appearance within the SCDM and the FTM test
tubes or canisters before any inadvertent jostling or shaking This is especially true when the product
may potentially make the test media turbid or cause a precipitation (e.g., suspensions or liposome-
based drug products). These observations should be recorded in the sterility test report or, if available,
photomicrographs can be taken with a camera mounted on the microscope.
In the absence of the isolation of a microorganism on subculture of the test media and/or no micro-
scopic evidence of the presence of microorganisms, the deviation sterility test failure is not confirmed
and, therefore, the product passes the test.
USP <71>, which has been harmonized with the European Pharmacopoeia and Japanese Pharmaco-
poeia, is frequently used as the method of choice for finished product release and is cited in many
regulatory applications (19, 20). The section entitled “Observation and Interpretation of Results”
describes the four acceptable conditions that may be used to invalidate the initial test result and allow
for retesting:
1. The data of the microbiological monitoring of the sterility testing facility show a fault (Table 4.2.1-1)
2. A review of the testing procedure used during the test in question reveals a fault (Table 4.2.1-2)
3. Microbial growth is found in the negative controls (Section 4.2.1.1)
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 13

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4. After determination of the identity of the microorganisms isolated from the test, the growth of
this species (or these species) may be ascribed unequivocally to faults with respect to the material
and/or the technique used in conducting the sterility test procedure (Section 4.2.1.2)
If evidence of microbial growth is found, the product to be examined does not comply with the test
for sterility unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the test was invalid for causes unrelated to the
product to be examined. If the test is declared to be invalid, it is repeated with the same number of
units as in the original test. If no evidence of microbial growth is found in the repeat test, the product
examined complies with the test for sterility. If microbial growth is found in the repeat test, the prod-
uct examined does not comply with the test for sterility (14).
During the laboratory phase of the investigation, the review process should be formalized in a standard
operating procedure or other type of Work instruction document. To be consistent with the USP cri-
teria, the investigative review questions in this section have been grouped in the same order.
Table 4.2.1-1 Data of the Sterility Testing Facility Show a Fault
Identification
Considerations
Aspect
Has the sterility testing isolator system, glovebox, or laminar flow hood been certified to meet the required
certification standards?
Has any of the test equipment (e.g., filtration apparatus, filter) been associated with other recent sterility issues?
Has the isolator chamber, glovebox, or laminar flow hood been properly decontaminated by chemical
disinfection, e.g., vapor phase hydrogen peroxide? Has the decontamination process been successfully validated?
Testing Facilities Are there any leaks in the gloves? (Review the glove integrity test and EM data including fingertip glove samples)
Has the sterility testing suite been disinfected according to laboratory SOPs? Were there any recent changes to
the disinfection solutions used before the appearance of the suspect test results?
Has the cleanroom HEPA filtration certification been performed as scheduled? Does it meet requirements for air
cleanliness, air velocity, space pressurization, temperature, and humidity?
Were the room conditions acceptable (e.g., temperature, differential pressure, humidity)?
How vulnerable is the sterility test method (e.g., direct inoculation, enclosed membrane filtration methods) to
contamination? Are there risk mitigation practices in place?
Is the sterility test method conducted in an isolator, glovebox, or laminar flow hood?
Has the disinfecting solution been prepared according to labeling requirements?
Testing Method Do the post-sanitation microbiological monitoring results meet acceptable criteria?
Has the microorganism isolated from the product test results appeared in routine EM (air, surface, and personnel
monitoring) in the sterility test facility?
Were the external surfaces of the test sample disinfected with a sporicidal agent prior to bringing the sample
into the aseptic testing environment?
4.2.1.1 Microbial Growth Found in Negative Controls
If the appearance of microbial growth is found in the negative or manipulation control (i.e., sys-
tem control), they should be carefully reviewed for the presence of contamination. Not all microbial
contamination causes uniform media turbidity (e.g., surface film layer on top of the media for strict
aerobes or small budding fungal growth attached to membrane filter or walls of glass containers). Any
purchased media, diluent, and test equipment should be checked for manufacturing recalls. Alterna-
tively, in-house-prepared media records should be reviewed for contamination trends.
14 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 88

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 4.2.1-2 Testing Procedure Used Reveals a Fault
Fault Aspect Considerations
Did all sterility test media used pass QC checks (pH, appearance, integrity of container) and relevant growth
promotion and sterility checks?
Were the expiry and storage conditions of the sterility test media confirmed?
Does the product have a history of sterility failure issues?
Were the Certificates of Analysis for the commercially available media and equipment used for the analyses
(canisters, preformulated media, diluents) accurate and acceptable?
Were the product and media containers and any other supplies properly disinfected before being placed into the
laminar flow hood or isolator?
Testing Materials Does any of the suspected glassware contain product contamination (e.g., appearance of residual material
within the glassware from a prior sample or other contamination source)?
Was the container-closure integrity of the product confirmed?
Do the original test plates used for isolation show possible preexisting contamination (i.e., growth in non-
streaked locations on the agar surface or subsurface growth)?
Were cleaning and sterilization requirements for reusable glassware and equipment properly implemented?
Do the QC records show proper sterilization of all equipment and media used during the sterility test method
(e.g., manifold, rinse fluid, culture media, forceps, scissors)?
Were the samples used for any other type of nondestructive QC testing prior to their arrival at the sterility test area?
Were any unusual occurrences or accidents during the sterility test reported by the analyst(s)?
Are the training records and qualifications of the analysts performing the test up to date?
Was an appropriate method suitability test performed for the product in question?
Testing Method
Was the same microbial identification method for environmental isolates from sterility testing used as for the
isolate(s) in the sterility-positive unit(s)?
Note: Different microbial identification technologies and/or databases may generate different results.
Was the area used for subculturing onto isolation media after the growth observation in the sterility-test medium
adequate to prevent adventitious contamination that would compromise the integrity of the identity of the sterility
test isolate?
Was the laboratory area workspace cluttered? Were there unsanitized surfaces that may have caused plate
contamination?
Testing Environment Was there any growth on the exposed plates used within the working hood (or isolator) during the time of
sample analysis or any growth from personnel samples?
Was sufficient EM performed to allow detection of low levels of microbial contamination that may be present?
Are the media and incubation conditions for the samples adequate to detect contamination?
Note: The EM plate results only have significance if microbes are recovered; no recovery does not assure asepsis
of the sterility-test work environment.
4.2.1.2 Decision Based on Microorganism Identification
EM data recorded during the sterility test should be reviewed to determine if the test isolate matches
a microorganism recovered from any environmental or personnel monitoring plates. In the event of
a species match, it may be necessary to perform strain-typing, for example, partial ribosomal RNA
sequencing or riboprinting, in order to attribute the microorganism associated with the failure to the
EM isolate from the sterility-testing suite.
If the test failure microorganism is the same genus or species as an organism used by the laboratory
for growth promotion or suitability testing, (i.e., QC challenge organisms), conducting a genotypic
profile on both isolates would be advisable. When making this comparison, USP <1113> may be
consulted.
Technical Report No. 88 © 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 15

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4.2.1.3 CAPAs to Address Invalidation of a Sterility Test
The firm is responsible for developing suitable, case-specific CAPAs if a legitimate cause to invalidate
the sterility test has been documented (as introduced in Section 4.2.1). Potential corrective action
steps that could be implemented or strengthened for remediation of a problem associated within each
of the four conditions outlined in USP <71> include:
1. Data of the microbiological monitoring of the sterility testing facility show a fault
• Establish a documented QA/QC program to ensure the sterility and growth promotion capa-
bilities of media, diluents, materials, and equipment used
• Employ a sporicidal agent for the sanitization/disinfection of the area concerned, and con-
tinue to use the sporicidal agent periodically
• Retrain personnel in the GMP of aseptic technique and the performance of the operations
• Establish or strengthen a scheduled preventive maintenance and certification program for
cleanroom equipment, and increase the microbial monitoring of the personnel and critical
areas to assure the environmental controls
• Validate and monitor (using data from each sterilization cycle) the autoclave processes used to
sterilize cleanroom equipment
2. A review of the testing procedure used during the test in question reveals a fault
• Establish appropriate SOPs for media preparation, storage, inventory control, and destruc-
tion of expired media
• Employ a requirement for two operators to conduct sterility testing to minimize fatigue while
optimizing aseptic handling and for action verification
• Establish a separate designated area for all subculturing activity, and prepare an SOP for clean-
ing and monitoring this laboratory area
3. Microbial growth is found in the negative controls
• When a negative control is found positive, require a second person, e.g., peer or laboratory
manager, to observe the contamination
• Check the container-closure integrity of the test container as it may have been damaged dur-
ing manufacturing, storage, or transportation to the microbiology laboratory
• Review component sterilization, material transfer, environmental controls, and aseptic tech-
nique used during testing.
4. After determination of the identity of the microorganisms isolated from the test,
the growth of this species (or these species) may be ascribed unequivocally to faults
with respect to the material and or the technique used in conducting the sterility
test procedure.
• When comparing the isolates from the test failure to personnel and EM, past sterility, and
media-fill failures, use the same or equivalent identification technologies to confirm the iden-
tification of the isolates from the failed test.
