=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-May-2018
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-9F132A95-F43F-47EE-B6DE-A9A2BB9224B5_3_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7417_03_01
DOI Ref:
4grb4
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈1229.8〉 DRY HEAT STERILIZATION
Dry heat sterilization is a process utilized for heat-stable items (glass, stainless steel, nonaqueous liquids, powders, etc.) that are unsuited
for steam sterilization because of either an absence of water (nonaqueous liquids and powders) or requirements for absolute dryness
following processing (product contact par ts for nonaqueous products). Because dry heat relies on air for the transfer of heat to and from the
load items, the process takes longer than a steam process for a comparable size item or load. Lengthy heating and cooling periods require
that the load items be unaffected by heat over a long period of time and also require the use of the overkill method for cycle development
and validation.
Dry heat sterilization is typically performed in the range of 160°–190° where the objective is sterilization rather than depyrogenation.
(Depyrogenation will be covered separately in Dry Heat Depyrogenation 〈1228.1〉). In dry heat sterilization, hot air is in direct contact with the
load items (whether wrapped or unwrapped) and transfers some of its thermal energy. Unlike steam sterilization, in dry heat sterilization
there is no phase change of the heating medium, and thus heat transfer is less e­cient. The items can be stainless steel, glass, ceramic, or
other heat-stable materials and may be wrapped or covered with aluminum foil to protect them during pre- and postprocess handling. Dry
heat sterilization is commonly used for heat-stable materials (e.g., petrolatum or powders).
The limited heat transfer capacity of air requires that items in the oven be placed in locations that were con«rmed to be acceptable during
the validation effor t. Manufacturers should exercise caution with varying load sizes because in some instances (resulting from system
design and control probe positioning) minimum load sizes may present a worst case.
STERILIZATION CYCLE CONTROL
Process equipment for dry heat sterilization is controlled by calibrated temperature sensors. During the exposure por tions of the cycle,
attainment of a minimum dwell time at a prede«ned temperature is used to document process lethality. Cycle e­cacy for dry heat
sterilization customarily is measured using F
, which typically is de«ned as the amount of time the load receives the equivalent of exposure
at 170°. The F
 approach is used to compare sterilization processes that operate at varying temperature conditions to a single standard. The
process lethality at temperatures other than 170° can be calculated to determine lethality equivalent to that provided at 170°. Sterilizer
control systems must deliver conditions within a prede«ned time–temperature or F
 range. Simple mathematics can be used to calculate the
total lethality over the course of the process. For the speci«c reference temperature of 170° and a z-value (for de«nitions see Steam
Sterilization by Direct Contact 〈1229.1〉) of 20°, the F
 calculation can be determined by the following equation:
F
 = accumulated lethality
t
 = end time
t
 = star t time
T = temperature
Accumulation of the lethality (F
) for the sterilization process across the entire cycle (heat-up and cool-down segments included) includes
the contribution of those segments and allows the cycle to be de«ned by a targeted lethality rather than by a time at a de«ned minimum
temperature.
VALIDATION OF DRY HEAT STERILIZATION
Because dry air has limited heat capacity and dry heat conditions are more variable than those encountered with other thermal sterilization
methods, analysts routinely validate their dry heat sterilization procedures using the overkill method as de«ned in Sterilization of Compendial
Ar ticles 〈1229〉.
Overkill sterilization can be de«ned as a method in which the destruction of a high concentration of a resistant microorganism suppor ts
the destruction of reasonably anticipated bioburden that could be present during routine processing. That objective can be demonstrated by
attaining any of the following: a de«ned minimum lethality; a de«ned set of method conditions; or con«rmation of minimum log reduction of
a resistant biological indicator.
The validation requirements for the overkill method are less onerous than those of the other sterilization approaches. Because the load
items can withstand substantial amounts of heat without adverse consequence, the greater lethality provided by the overkill method clearly
is justi«able.
H
H
H
H
=
ⅆt =
Δt
FH
∫t2
t1 10(
)
T−170
20
∑t2
t1 10(
)
T−170
20
H
2
1
H
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:45 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.8〉 Dry Heat Sterilization


=== PAGE 2 ===
Equipment Quali«cation
Equipment quali«cation is a prede«ned program that focuses on the sterilizing equipment to con«rm that it has been properly installed and
operates as intended before evaluation of the sterilization process. In some companies, equipment quali«cation is separated into installation
quali«cation and operational quali«cation or is lumped together under a joint terminology of installation/operational quali«cation. The major
use of quali«cation of the sterilizing equipment is to provide a baseline for preventive maintenance and change control, ensuring
reproducibility of operation over time and assurance that the sterilization process is constantly and accurately performed.
Empty Chamber Temperature Distribution
The equipment should be evaluated for empty chamber temperature distribution. The oven or tunnel should be evaluated to determine the
range of temperatures within the system, and the cycle parameters should be determined to ensure adequate lethality across the expected
load. The acceptance criteria for empty chambers can vary with the equipment capabilities and customary use, but it is typically less uniform
than observed in steam sterilizers. Biological indicators are not required during the evaluation of empty chamber temperature distribution.
Component Mapping
Load items that are complex and feature enclosed volumes and product contact surfaces should be subjected to component mapping to
determine internal cold spots. This is par ticularly impor tant in powder sterilization. For each load item, manufacturers should establish the
ability of heat to penetrate the items or containers and to bring them to the required temperature. These studies can be performed in a
laboratory setting and need not be repeated when the same item is sterilized in other equipment. Thermocouples should be placed into
direct contact with the item(s) being evaluated. During component mapping load items should be prepared and oriented in a manner that is
consistent with how they will be processed.
Load Mapping
Fixed loading patterns for dry heat sterilization in batch ovens are preferable because the limited heat capacity of the air allows substantial
temperature differences across the load. It may be possible to validate maximum and minimum loads as determined by either the number of
items or their mass within the oven. Loading in a continuous tunnel process is typically well de«ned by the limitations of the conveying
system. Load and component mapping ensures that all load items attain the required temperature. Information from the load mapping is
used to adjust cycle timing to ensure appropriate lethality. System control must consider the relationship between load position and size
relative to temperature control locations.
Biological Indicators
The biological indicator (BI) for dry heat sterilization is Bacillus atrophaeus (ATCC 9372), a thermophilic spore-former with high resistance
to dry heat. The spore challenge is placed on a substrate positioned within the load or on a load item. If spores are used as intended by the BI
manufacturer, the population and resistance information provided by the vendor can be used. End users should determine the population and
resistance of their biological indicator used when inoculating their own items.
Heat Penetration and Microbiological Challenge
The core of the validation activity is the con«rmation of acceptable heat penetration using temperature measurements and microbial
challenges. Thermocouples and BIs are placed within the load items at the locations determined during the component and load mapping to
present the worst case. Thermocouples should be placed into direct contact with the item(s) being monitored. Proof of cycle e­cacy is
provided by replicate studies in which the BIs are killed and the physical measurements correspond to the expected values of time–
temperature or F
. If the microbial and physical measurements do not correlate, manufacturers should conduct an investigation and should
take corrective action to rectify the discrepancy. This study customarily is performed slightly subminimal to the lower speci«cation limits for
time, temperature, and/or cumulative lethality.
ROUTINE PROCESS CONTROL
As with all sterilization processes, after the dry heat sterilization process has been validated, it must be subject to formalized controls that
keep it in a validated state over time. General chapter Sterilization of Compendial Ar ticles 〈1229〉 details the general practices that are
appropriate for all sterilization systems. This is accomplished by a number of related practices that are essential for the continued use of the
process over an extended period of time. The essential practices to maintain validated status include calibration, physical measurements,
physical integrators and indicators, ongoing process control, change control, preventive maintenance, and periodic reassessment and
training.
REFERENCE
1. USP General Chapters—Microbiology Exper t Committee. An outline of planned changes to USPSterility Assurance 〈1211〉. Pharm
Forum. 2012; 38(2).
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
H
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:45 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.8〉 Dry Heat Sterilization


=== PAGE 3 ===
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<1229.8> DRY HEAT STERILIZATION
Huiping Tu
Director, Biologics
GCM2022
General Chapters - Microbiology
2022
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. PF 39(3)
Current DocID: GUID-9F132A95-F43F-47EE-B6DE-A9A2BB9224B5_3_en-US
Previous DocID: GUID-9F132A95-F43F-47EE-B6DE-A9A2BB9224B5_1_en-US
Previous DocID: GUID-9F132A95-F43F-47EE-B6DE-A9A2BB9224B5_2_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7417_03_01
DOI ref: 4grb4
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:45 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.8〉 Dry Heat Sterilization
