6
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
3.0  Data Integrity Trends at International Drug Manufacturers
3.1	
Historical Perspective
In 1963, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued its current good manufacturing 
practices (GMP) regulations for processing, packing, or holding drugs and its major revision in 1978 
under 21 CFR Part 211 (10-11). Since that time, the FDA has acted upon data integrity violations 
detected during its GMP inspections of pharmaceutical manufacturers. Unique skill sets are required 
to detect data integrity problems and collect evidence to establish GMP violations. These skill sets 
can be acquired through focused training on prevailing good documentation practices, including 
the technology, or lack thereof, used for documenting GMP activities and the associated data and 
human behavior.
The assessment of data integrity procedures, processes, systems, and controls using a consistent, 
structured approach and forensic techniques was not always a primary focus during FDA inspec-
tions. Periodically, the detection of egregious and unethical events causes FDA to redouble its 
efforts and refocus its attention on lapses in data integrity. For example, during the late 1980s and 
early 1990s, FDA uncovered data integrity violations at a large number of U.S.-based generic drug 
manufacturers (and some innovator companies) in what was later dubbed the “generic drug scandal.” 
The FDA discovered widespread falsification of production and control records and found that many 
abbreviated new drug applications contained falsified data and other serious data integrity violations. 
Several individuals from the industry and the FDA were criminally prosecuted, and the scandal 
prompted FDA to establish in 1990 a pre-approval inspection program (12) that remains in effect 
today. That program requires successful FDA pre-approval inspections as a condition of approval for 
drugs and biologics; subsequently, other major health authorities established similar pre-approval 
inspection programs. Then, in 1997, the FDA promulgated a regulation related to computer system 
electronic records and signatures for digital data in 21 CFR Part 11 (13). 
These developments impacted industry practices, too. Data integrity became a focus of companies, 
industry conferences, and industry best practice documents such as the International Society for 
Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE) good automated manufacturing practice (GAMP) guides and 
PDA technical reports. Data integrity awareness and expertise increased among pharmaceutical 
professionals, and the incidence of data integrity problems reported by FDA during its GMP inspec-
tions of domestic and international pharmaceutical manufacturers declined. Egregious data integrity 
violations, however, still resulted in sanctions. 
Starting in the late 1990s, the advent of the internet and growth in information technology fueled 
increased globalization of pharmaceutical supply chains. This rapid expansion roused regulators’ 
concerns about data integrity. In 2007, FDA reported that it had found objectionable data integrity 
issues at 3 of the 10 companies it had recently inspected on this topic (14). In the years immedi-
ately following, FDA again refocused its attention on data integrity practices. Since then, FDA has 
included data integrity citations in more than 200 warning letters sent to companies in more than 20 
countries. 
Since 2012, inspections by the FDA, European Medicines Agency (EMA), Medicines and Health-
care products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), World Health Organization (WHO), and other health 
authorities have revealed a notable increase in the incidence of data integrity issues at international 
manufacturers of APIs and finished pharmaceuticals worldwide. The prevalence and significance of 
the data integrity lapses discovered in recent years has led regulators to make data integrity a primary 
focus during inspections, and regulators are detecting data integrity lapses with increasing frequency. 
Pharmaceutical regulators continue to find conditions and practices that compromise data integrity, 
among them human errors, inadequate management oversight, insufficient employee training, sys-
tem failures, inappropriate qualification or configuration of systems, poor procedures or not follow-
ing procedures, and intentional acts of falsification.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

7
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.1.1	 U.S. FDA Warning Letters
A review of approximately 393 FDA warning letters (WLs) issued by the FDA from February 2012 
through mid-August 2019, revealed a total of 212 that referenced data integrity-related citations, 
amounting to more than half (53%) of the WLs (Figure 3.1.1-1). Of the 212 WLs that included 
citations related to data integrity issues, 96 (45%) were related to production operations (Figure 
3.1.1-2), and 116 (55%) pertained to laboratory and quality operations. Approximately 36% of 
the WLs for data integrity citations were for API manufacturing facilities (35 of 96), about 60% 
involved finished drug product manufacturing sites (58 of 96), and about 3% included sites that 
produced both APIs and finished pharmaceuticals (3 of 96).
FDA has cited in recent warning letters questionable data integrity practices in manufacturing opera-
tions. For example, a warning letter issued in July 2019 cited that batch records included handwrit-
ten values routinely within process parameters while the values recorded by the programmable logic 
controller (PLC) of the compression machine were frequently outside of the established process 
parameters (15). A second example issued in December 2019 cited multiple discrepancies between 
the human machine interface (HMI) data and the entries made by operators into batch records (16).
n	 India (37)
n	 China (21)
n	 United States (13)
n	 Canada (5)
n	 Japan (3)
n	 Mexico (3)
n	 Spain (2)
n	 Hong Kong (2)
n	 Italy (2)
n	 Taiwan (2)
n	 United Arab Emirates (1)
n	 Austria (1)
n	 Denmark (1)
n	 Germany (1)
n	 Hungary (1)
n	 Korea (1)
WLs with Production Related Data Integrity Citations by Country of Inspected Location
(22 Feb 2012 – 15 Aug 2019)
Figure 3.1.1-1	
FDA Warning Letters–DI Issues Related to Production Activities by Country of Inspected Location
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

8
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
3.1.2	 EU Non-Compliance Reports (NCR)
A review of approximately 163 EU non-compliance reports (NCRs) for the period between January 
2012 and August 2018 found that 82 of the 163 NCRs (50%) include citations of data integrity-
related observations (Figure 3.1.2-1). Review of the 82 NCRs that include data integrity citations 
found that approximately 46% involved some sort of falsification issues in the production system, 
22% included falsification issues in the laboratory system, and 32% of the NCRs included falsifica-
tion-related practices related to both the production and laboratory systems.
Figure 3.1.1-2	 Incidence of Warning Letters Citing Production Activities by Product Type (API vs Finished 
Pharmaceuticals)
WLs with Production Related Data Integrity Citations by 
Product Type [API or Finished Dosage Form (FDF)]
(22 Feb 2012 – 15 Aug 2019)
n	 API (35)
n	 FDF (58)
n	 Both (3)
Figure 3.1.2-1	 EU Non-Compliance Reports–DI Citations by Country of Inspected Location
n	 Bangladesh (1%)
n	 Brazil (1%)
n	 China (23%)
n	 Denmark (3%)
n	 France (1%)
n	 India (49%)
n	 Italy (4%)
n	 Japan (1%)
n	 Korea, Republic of (3%)
n	 Monaco (1%)
n	 Romania (1%)
n	 Saudi Arabia (1%)
n	 Spain (4%)
n	 United Kingdom (6%)
n	 United States (1%)
EU Non-compliance reports with Data Integrity Citations by Country of Inspected Location
(Jan 2012 – Aug 2018)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

9
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.1.3	 Production-Related Data Integrity Trends by Category
The review of data integrity citations in FDA WLs and EU NCRs between 2012 and 2019 found 
the citations that affect the manufacturing process tend to fall into four broad themes: poor docu-
mentation practices, insufficient data review, ineffective oversight, and ineffective system control. 
The data in Table 3.1.3-1 is based on observations by FDA and EU inspectors during their inspections 
of quality management systems for production operations between February 2012 and August 2019. 
Table 3.1.3-1	
Examples of Data Integrity Issues in Production Operations cited by FDA and EU, 2012–2019
Examples of Data Integrity Issues Cited in Production Operations
Category
Falsification/Fabrication of Records (e.g., visual inspection data, cleaning validation 
records, batch records, annual product reviews, glove integrity testing) 
False Entries
False or Misleading Statements (Made to FDA investigators about the practice of 
blending failing and passing API batches)
False Statements
Delaying, Denying, Limiting or Refusing Inspection (Failure to allow access 
to facilities, records, documents, or responsible individuals that interferes with 
investigator’s ability to complete an inspection, such as hiding manufacturing-related 
records or dumping unlabeled vials when contents were questioned by FDA) 
Delay/Deny/Limit/ 
Refuse Inspection
Computer Access Controls (Unprotected spreadsheets for performing calculations and 
statistical evaluations of production data; shared login credentials that did not permit 
identification of a specific person using the shared login to link specific actions to a specific 
operator; password shared by multiple individuals to gain access to each individual piece 
of equipment and access level; inadequate controls to assure that changes in master 
production and control records or other records are instituted only by authorized personnel)
Computer Access 
Controls
Lack of Contemporaneous Data Entries (Pre-dated and backdated batch records; 
batch records signed by persons who had not performed the activities; uncontrolled 
spreadsheets used to record in-process quality data that were then transcribed and 
backdated in the production record; cleaning records that did not match video recordings; 
batch production data entered on “mock sheets” for later transcription to official records 
that were backdated)
Contemporaneous 
Data Entries
Unexplained Data Discrepancies (Production equipment labeled as clean but found to be 
dirty; batch records missing critical information and signatures; erroneous calculations and 
use of incorrect amounts of starting materials during production; inaccurate quantities for 
quality defects; AHU/HVAC filter-cleaning records with discrepant entries)
Data 
Discrepancies
Batch Data Traceability (Programmable logic controllers (PLCs) and manufacturing 
equipment with shared login credentials that did not permit identification of a specific 
person using the shared login)
Data Traceability
Data Deleted, Destroyed, or Missing/Unavailable (e.g., batch production records, 
cleaning records, sanitization records, annual product reviews, change controls, 
filter integrity testing, media fill data, sterilizer data, in-process weight checks, yield 
calculations, undocumented deviations)
Data Deleted/ 
Destroyed/ 
Unavailable
Audit Trails Unavailable/Disabled (Lack of audit trail to document who accessed each 
of the PLC and man-machine interface equipment (equipment operating parameters); 
disabled electronic audit trail function for nonviable particle-monitoring system)
Audit Trails
Inaccurate/Incomplete Data or Records (Inaccurate entries in batch records; incorrect 
quantities of active ingredients/raw materials; inaccurate media-fill records; inaccurate 
CAPA and APR entries)
Inaccurate/ 
Incomplete 
Records
Illegible Data Entries (Batch records with data changes in pencil)
Legibility
Unofficial Records (Use of unofficial records/rough notes/loose paper)	
Unofficial Records 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

10
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
3.2	
Regulatory Guidance
Data integrity throughout the product lifecycle has always been of concern to global regulatory 
authorities. During the past 40+ years, multiple worldwide GxP regulations, such as the FDA’s 1978 
Good Laboratory Practice for Nonclinical Laboratory Studies (17), have included requirements indi-
cating that data need to be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, and accurate (ALCOA). 
Recently, the resurgence of detected data integrity problems has prompted regulators to release a 
series of guidance documents that emphasize the importance of data integrity. The FDA, MHRA, 
WHO, Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention and Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention Co-
operation Scheme (PIC/S), China National Medical Products Administration (NMPA), Australian 
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), and Russian State Institute of Drugs and Good Practices 
(SID&GP) have all released documents that provide the current thinking of regulators related to 
data integrity concepts and expectations including the following: 
• 
MHRA: GxP Data Integrity Guidance and Definitions (March 2018) (3) 
• 
FDA: Data Integrity and Compliance with Drug CGMP Questions and Answers Guidance for 
Industry, (December 2018) (2)
• 
WHO: Guidance on Good Data and Record Management Practices, WHO Technical Report Series, 
No. 996, Annex 5 (2016) (4)
• 
WHO: Good Chromatography Practices, Draft for Comments (July 2019) (18)
• 
PIC/S: Draft PIC/S Guidance: Good Practices for Data Management and Integrity in Regulated 
GMP/GDP Environments (November 2018) (5)
• 
NMPA: Draft Drug Data Management Standard (Oct 2016) (19)
• 
TGA: Data Management and Data Integrity (DMDI) webpage (April 2017) (20)
• 
SID&GP: Guidelines: Data Integrity and Validation of Computerized Systems (August 2018) (21)
3.3	
Industry Best Practices
Several associations, including PDA, ISPE, and the Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients Committee 
(APIC), also have issued best practice documents related to data integrity:
• 
PDA: Elements of a Code of Conduct for Data Integrity (February 2016) (22)
• 
PDA: Technical Report No. 80: Data Integrity Management System for Pharmaceutical Laboratories 
(August 2018) (1)
• 
ISPE: Records and Data Integrity Guide (March 2017) (23)
• 
ISPE: Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity – Key Concepts, GAMP Records and Data Integrity 
(October 2018) (24)
• 
ISPE: Good Practice Guide: Data Integrity – Manufacturing Records (April 2019) 
• 
APIC: Practical Risk-Based Guide for Managing Data Integrity (March 2019) (25)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

11
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.0 
Quality Risk Management Applied to Data Integrity
The principles of QRM apply to the data lifecycle, which includes the capture, recording, transcrip-
tion, archiving, and other aspects of data management. This section uses examples to describe how 
certain elements could pose a risk to the integrity of pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical data. 
Risk should be controlled regardless of whether the data are managed using a manual system or an 
automated electronic system. Any potential breach related to data integrity—particularly the loss, 
omission, deletion, or alteration of data—must be investigated, addressed, and accounted for in the 
quality system and, as necessary, reflected in the risk management documentation. Given that data 
may be managed and/or transferred between different formats or systems, efforts should be made to 
mitigate the risk to the integrity of the data during these transfers. Therefore, judicious application 
of these concepts and targeted application of data integrity principles is warranted as the industry 
transitions from paper to hybrid (manual and electronic) and, eventually, to fully electronic systems. 
Data integrity risk also should be addressed during the transfer of data between electronic systems.
The PDA Technical Report No. 54 series describes QRM more broadly, including how to conduct 
an appropriate risk assessment and formulate a mitigation strategy to reduce the risks identified. For 
more information on QRM generally and other important elements, such as risk communication, 
please see the TR 54 series and ICH Quality Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Management (8,26).
4.1	
Considerations in Assessing Risk
Risk assessments should be conducted proactively at the time any new data management system is 
implemented and should be captured by the overarching change control. At this stage in the process, 
risk assessments can serve as preventive measures to ensure that data integrity is maintained through-
out the system lifecycle. When performed on existing data management systems, the assessments 
should identify potential data vulnerabilities based on the existing level of controls and the criticality 
of the data for its intended use. 
Organizations also should consider performing a risk assessment after a deviation or incident to 
identify potential gaps in the data management system. Assessment of data integrity risks also should 
be done in conjunction with the change management process of a data management system to avoid 
creating new or additional risks. This will enable informed decision-making regarding the extent 
of the issue and the potential impact. Key objectives of this assessment are to determine if the root 
cause is related to a gap in data management and, if so, to identify the extent of the gap and the 
impact to the data. 
Data integrity controls should be considered from both the behavioral and technical perspectives. 
From a behavioral perspective, the overall quality culture, including communications and training, is 
intimately related to the effectiveness of the data integrity program. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

