21
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.0 Data Integrity Controls
Many events during manufacturing may compromise the integrity of the data. Any number of fac-
tors may cause these events, including human error, insufficient training, system failure, inappropri-
ate qualification or configuration of systems, poor procedures, or people not following procedures, as 
well as intentional acts of falsification.
PDA recognizes that quality culture is critically important in the prevention and detection of data 
integrity breaches; however, this technical report is designed to identify risk and potential mitigation 
of a data integrity breach regardless of where on the spectrum of data integrity (system error, indi-
vidual error, individual or institutional malfeasance) that breach occurs. Of course, intentional fraud 
and intentional manipulation of data are unacceptable under any circumstances, regardless of data 
criticality, vulnerability, or existing level of controls. 
In supporting and communicating expectations around a culture of quality for data integrity, PDA 
recommends that entities use the PDA publication, Elements of a Code of Conduct for Data Integrity 
in the Pharmaceutical Industry (22, 21), which outlines key elements necessary to help ensure the 
reliability and integrity of data throughout all aspects of a product’s lifecycle. It can be used, in whole 
or in part, as a control approach to guide a company’s internal practices, to create or modify an 
Figure 4.5.1-1	 Case 1: Granulation Operation (Paper-Based Manual Process without Automated Alerts)
Figure 4.5.1-2	 Case 2: Granulation Operation (PLC-Controlled Process with Automated Alerts)
Quality Unit
Production 
Operator 1
Production 
Operator 2
Approve Validated 
Process 
(CPP / CQA)
Confirm 
Components
Peer Review
Total time
within VAL 
range?
Perform 
Deviation 
Investigation
Confirm process 
parameters in MBR
(paper based)
Yes
BPR – Batch Production Record
MBR – Master Batch Record
After the fact
Real-time
No
Enter Start & End 
Times 
(start granulation)
Initiate Deviation
Review BPR for 
total granulation 
time
No
Yes
Full BPR 
Review
Product 
Impact?
Pass
Fail
Reject 
Batch
Release 
Batch
Quality Unit
Production 
Operator 1
Approve Validated 
Process 
(CPP / CQA)
Confirm 
Components
printout shows 
out of VAL range
alert
Perform 
Deviation 
Investigation
No
Yes
No
Yes
Full BPR 
Review
Perform 
Granulation
Initiate Deviation
Product 
Impact?
Confirm process 
parameters in MBR
(PLC recipe)
PLC printout of total 
granulation time
BPR – Batch Production Record
MBR – Master Batch Record
After the fact
Real-time
Pass
Fail
Reject 
Batch
Release 
Batch
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

22
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
existing data integrity code of conduct, or to develop agreements with outsourcing partners or other 
suppliers. The elements identified throughout that document are intended to reinforce a culture of 
quality and trust within the pharmaceutical industry (22).
An important part of preventing data integrity breaches is identifying, establishing, and maintaining 
proper controls, whether the data elements are electronic, paper-based, or a combination of the two. 
Ensuring data integrity means protecting the original data from accidental or intentional modifica-
tion, falsification, and deletion. Requirements specifying that data need to be ALCOA+ throughout 
the data lifecycle have been included in regulations around the world for several decades. The WHO, 
FDA, MHRA, and PIC/S have all released documents to reeducate the industry on current data integ-
rity concepts and expectations. These are the “what”—what is required to ensure the integrity of data.
Data integrity controls can be embedded in working procedures and practices or included as part 
of computer system validation and equipment qualification or usage. These controls may be used to 
minimize the potential that a data integrity issue will occur and to increase the probability of detect-
ing an issue that does occur. The data integrity controls are the “how”—how to ensure that these 
requirements are implemented in practice.
Regulations convey the core elements that must be in place to ensure data integrity and a robust 
QMS, including some of the following examples: 
• 
Standard operating procedures (SOPs) are in place for completion and retention of records.
• 
People are suitably trained for their intended job purpose.
• 
Systems are validated or qualified for their intended purpose.
• 
People have access to the records required to perform their activities.
• 
If electronic signatures will be used, they should be attributable to an individual, unable to be 
altered, permanently linked to the document, and have a time and date stamp.
• 
Data integrity risks should be identified as part of the QRM process and dealt with accordingly.
• 
A management review process allows data integrity issues to be elevated to the highest levels of 
the organization.
• 
The data governance policy is endorsed at the highest levels of the organization, empowering a 
strong data integrity culture at all levels of the organization.
• 
An anonymous reporting program, supported by company policy, encourages personnel to bring 
breaches in data integrity to the attention of management.
• 
Routine data verification and periodic surveillance checks should be performed.
• 
Self-inspections should include verification of the effectiveness of the data integrity controls.
• 
A strong change management system is required.
5.1	
Potential Differentiation of Controls
While there are many requirements to ensure a robust QMS, Section 5.0 only focuses on data 
integrity controls where it is acceptable to differentiate the level of controls that may be applied. This 
means that the levels of controls applied (e.g., frequency of review, number of items to check, who 
performs the review) may differ depending on the criticality of the data, system, or activity. Consis-
tent with ICH Q9, which promotes a risk-based approach, highly critical data, systems, or activities 
require more controls, while less critical data or activities require fewer controls. 
This portion of the technical report focuses on only a small part of all data integrity controls required 
by regulations. Most data integrity controls required by health authority regulations apply in the 
same manner for any GMP data, that is, the controls do not differ based on the criticality of the 
processes performed by the organization. Such controls are not discussed further in this technical 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

23
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
report. The following examples illustrate why the same level of controls may be applied, regardless of 
the criticality of the activity. 
• 
GMP regulations require that entries in records should be indelible, made in the appropriate spaces, 
identify the person making the entry and, if different, identify the person who performed the task(s). 
Corrections, if required, should be dated and signed, leaving the original entry still readable, with a 
comment added to explain the correction. Envision two different scenarios in which a person makes 
a correction because of a typographical error: One person has recorded a critical parameter during 
aseptic filling, while another has documented a training, a less critical activity. In both circumstanc-
es, the individuals involved should make the necessary correction, explain why the correction was 
made, and sign with the time the correction was made, leaving the original entry still legible. 
• 
GMP regulations also require that, in electronic systems, a user’s privileges should be limited to allow 
the employee to perform the work, without any additional unnecessary privileges. Access to change 
the date or time of the system, for example, should be limited to a very small group of people, ideal-
ly independent administrators. Regardless of whether the system is highly critical (e.g., granulation) 
or less critical (e.g., secondary packaging systems that do not store data relating to quality attributes 
or parameters such as expiry dates), the same controls should be in place to restrict access.
Any given system may have some controls for which it is possible to differentiate the level of controls 
applied, and some controls that will be the same regardless of the criticality of the activity. 
5.2	
Methodology Used to Determine Differentiated Controls
To determine the controls required for data, records, or systems, existing regulations and guidelines 
for data integrity were reviewed (2-5,22,27). The recommended controls were categorized against 
the type of document control system being employed: paper-based, electronic-based, and a hybrid. 
Some of the controls identified apply to paper-only systems and some apply to electronic-only sys-
tems. Hybrid systems incorporated many of the controls for paper- and electronic-based systems.
Figure 5.2-1	
Methodology Used to Determine Differentiated Controls
Data Integrity requirements 
for which controls can be 
differentiated based on criticality
Data Integrity requirements for 
which controls are the same for all 
criticalities
7 Categories identified where 
controls can be differentiated 
No differentiation possible, basic 
controls that should be part of a 
robust QMS
Data Integrity 
Requirements
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

24
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
The data integrity requirements specifically relating to controls required for paper, electronic, and 
hybrid systems were further identified and analyzed. Only requirements where it is acceptable to 
differentiate the level of control applied, proportional to the criticality, were selected (Figure 5.2-1). 
Where the level of control cannot not be differentiated, the controls are considered core elements in 
ensuring a robust QMS and out of scope for this technical report. 
The authors identified seven categories of controls for which it is acceptable to differentiate the level 
of control applied, as shown in Table 5.2-1. Each category was assessed to determine whether the 
data, record, or system was being controlled and then was further scrutinized to determine which 
controls within that category may be differentiated. For example, based on criticality, the technical 
report team considered whether it is acceptable to differentiate between the frequency of control 
(daily vs. monthly), who performs the control (manufacturing vs. quality unit), or what needs to be 
controlled (more-detailed vs. less-detailed review). 
Where differentiation is acceptable, details of how the controls differ based on criticality are dis-
cussed in detail in Section 5.3. The level of controls required may be applied at the data, record, 
or system level, depending on which of the seven categories are being discussed. Any requirements 
within a category that remain consistent across the criticality levels are considered basic elements in 
ensuring a robust QMS and are out of scope for this technical report.
Table 5.2-1	 Categories Where Different Levels of Data Integrity Controls are Acceptable based on Criticality
Type of 
System
Category of Control
Short Description of Category
Paper
1
Storage of and access to 
completed/archived paper records
Controls associated with storage of and access to 
completed / archived paper records, and who has 
access to these documents
2
Generation and reconciliation of 
documents
Guidance on controls associated with generation and 
reconciliation of documents to prevent potential misuse.
Hybrid
3
Manual activities when recording 
or transferring data between paper 
and electronic formats
Data accuracy associated with manually recording data 
without a controlled second format, transcription of 
manually recorded data into an electronic system, and 
controls around True Copy (paper to electronic)
Electronic
4
Access controls for electronic 
systems
Different levels of controls to ensure the right level of 
access to electronic records and systems is applied.
5
Audit trail review
Discusses taking a risk-based approach to identify which 
items to review as part of the manufacturing batch data 
and setting parameter / configuration settings audit trail 
reviews, and how frequently to perform the review.
6
Backup of electronic data
Discussing the controls to ensure electronic raw data is 
backed up to ensure a copy of the data remains available 
so it can easily be retrieved in its original format.
7 Use of electronic data
Data integrity controls associated with using electronic 
raw data to generate system reports / records and the 
controls associated with the transfer / migration of the 
raw data to another location
Sections 5.3.1–5.3.7 have been developed with manufacturing operations in mind; however, many 
of the concepts discussed can also be applied to other functional areas (e.g., analytical laboratories).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

25
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.3	
Areas of Differentiated Data Integrity Controls
While all data potentially impacts the quality of the product, the impact to the manufacturing 
processes governing product quality and patient safety varies depending on the type of data, record, 
or system being used to govern the process. For the seven categories identified where different levels 
of data integrity controls are acceptable, a criticality rating of High, Medium, or Low was used. (See 
Section 4.2.1 for definitions of criticality.) 
Sections 5.3.1–5.3.7 detail how differentiated controls may be applied for different levels of criticality. 
Most of the controls discussed are prevention controls, but a few detection controls are included as well. 
Some of the differentiated data integrity controls should be applied at the system level, others relate to 
records, and some are relevant to data points. Each table provides the necessary details concerning detec-
tion vs. prevention and the level where the control should be applied (data point, record, or system). 
Those sections provide examples of critical activities designated as High, Medium, and Low for il-
lustrative purposes and are not prescriptive; the examples are intended to stimulate thinking. Each 
entity should assess its own data and apply the concepts in this technical report to determine the 
controls necessary for their operations. In addition, suggestions are provided throughout, illustrative 
only, regarding the frequencies at which certain activities should take place. Organizations should 
determine the frequencies that are most applicable to their operations using a risk-based approach to 
ensure that the periodicity of activities is commensurate with the risks identified.
Sections 4.3 and 4.4 discuss that, in the data vulnerability model, the risks associated with data 
management, human factors, and GMP process must be identified, and the controls in place must 
be assessed to confirm they are sufficient for the risks identified. Sections 5.3.1–5.3.7 primarily 
discuss data management controls. 
The controls discussed below would result in data being placed in one of the green boxes (H/H; 
M/M; L/L) of the 9-Box grid (Table 4.3-1). That is, the controls would be adequate for the critical-
ity of the data and the identified risk factors. If fewer controls are in place than those recommended 
in Sections 5.3.1–5.3.7, the level of data management controls is not adequate for that level of data 
criticality. On the other hand, if more controls than required are in place, the data vulnerability in 
these specific areas is very low.
The controls discussed in Sections 5.3.1–5.3.7 are only one part of the controls that need to be 
considered to assess the overall data vulnerability. Organizations also must consider the data manage-
ment controls, human factor controls, and GMP process controls that apply without any possible 
differentiation in level of control. Whether the levels of control required are differentiated or not, all 
controls must be described in SOPs. 
5.3.1	 Storage of and Access to Completed and Archived Paper Records
Table 5.3.1-1 identifies several prevention controls related to the storage of and access to completed 
or archived paper records. These controls are applied at the record or system level and are meant to 
prevent a potential data integrity issue from occurring. 
All documents should be stored in a medium that will not degrade the readability of the records 
upon storage. Documents of High and Medium criticality, including batch records and validation 
protocols, should be stored in a climate-controlled environment with a card key or restricted access 
and a logbook recording the removal and return of records. An annual review of who has access to 
the room is recommended. 
For documents with Low criticality, such as completed user-access authorization forms where evi-
dence of training exists in another system, storage in an office retention location, such as a local file 
cabinet with limited access to the file cabinet keys, would suffice. Who has access to the keys should 
be reviewed on a bi-annual basis.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

26
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
Table 5.3.1-1	
Data Integrity Control Grid for Storage of and Access to Completed and Archived Paper Records
Storage of and Access 
to Completed & Archived 
Paper Records
High Data Criticality
Medium Data Criticality
Low Data Criticality
Prevention Control
Where Stored
Climate-controlled room
Climate-controlled room
Office retention location
How Removed & 
Returned
Access control to room 
and logbook recording of 
removal and return of the 
record
Access control to room 
and logbook recording of 
removal and return of the 
record
Logbook recording of 
documents checked-in/
checked-out
Access Control
Card Key access or 
limited key access with 
entry documented in 
logbook
Card Key access or 
limited key access with 
entry documented in 
logbook
Limited key access
Periodic User Access 
Review
Annually
Annually
Every 2 years
5.3.2	 Generation and Reconciliation of Documents
Table 5.3.2-1 identifies several prevention controls related to the issuance and reconciliation of 
paper records. The controls described are applied at the record or system level. 
Highly critical records, such as batch records, should be issued by a designated unit and have a 
unique identifier. The printing of these records should be controlled, i.e., a specified number of 
people authorized by the quality unit to print, with full traceability of the number of copies printed, 
when they were printed, and by whom. Full reconciliation of the record, including extra sheets or 
additional pages, is required after use. Destruction procedures for unexecuted (blank) forms should 
be in place and may be performed by the issuing unit. 
For Medium-critical documents, like the form used for calibration, a unique identifier for the record 
is not required. Controlled printing should ensure that the templates are printed by a limited num-
ber of people authorized by the quality unit. While an unlimited number of copies of the template 
is allowed, a process should be in place to avoid misuse, including use of expired or outdated forms. 
Full reconciliation of records and pages based on the quantity issued is warranted. Destruction 
procedures for unexecuted (blank) forms should be in place and may be performed by the operating 
unit or issuing unit. 
Low-critical documents, for example, the blank forms used for recording training activities, may be 
printed by the end-user without a unique identifier, and no reconciliation activities are required after 
use. The number of copies that can be printed is not limited, and any unexecuted (blank) forms may 
be discarded by the user without the quality unit being directly present in the process. 
Even though the quality unit does not need to be present for the destruction of unexecuted (blank) 
forms, it must maintain oversight to ensure that procedures are followed (e.g., through approval of 
relevant SOPs and/or audit).
Acceptable quality unit oversight may constitute all or part of the following: 
• 
Quality unit is responsible for approving the procedure,
• 
Processes are reviewed in practice as part of the self-inspection program, and/or
• 
Processes are reviewed in practice as part of the routine quality unit walkthrough of manufacturing.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

27
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.3.2-1	
Data Integrity Control Grid for Issuance and Reconciliation of Paper Records 
Generation and  
Reconciliation of Documents
High Data Criticality
Medium Data 
Criticality
Low Data Criticality
Prevention Control
Controlled issuance – How
Unique identification for each 
record (including additional 
pages/sheets needed to 
complete the activity)
No unique 
identification needed
No unique 
identification needed
Controlled issuance – Who
Designated unit; individuals 
authorized by quality unit
Limited number of 
individuals authorized 
by quality unit 
Anyone
Reconciliation
Full reconciliation of records 
and pages based on unique 
identifier
Full reconciliation of 
records and pages 
based on quantity 
issued
No reconciliation
Controlled Print
Required
Required
Not required
Bulk printing allowed? 
No
Yes, with process 
in place to avoid 
misuse
Yes
Destruction of blank forms
Performed by the issuing 
unit, quality unit oversight 
required
Performed by the 
operating or issuing 
unit, quality unit 
oversight required
Performed by the 
individual, quality 
unit oversight 
required
5.3.3	 Manual Activities when Recording or Transferring Data between Paper and 
Electronic Formats
Hybrid data or records are used in many manufacturing operations. An example of this is a system 
that captures and stores electronic raw data and generates a printed report that is used during the 
documentation review and approval process. When this happens, the data in the electronic system and 
the printed report (e.g., times, temperatures, critical parameters, pass/fail results) must be the same. 
In some situations where hybrid systems are employed, it is acceptable to differentiate the levels of 
controls required based on the criticality of the activity. For manual activities, when recording or 
transferring data between paper and electronic formats, three scenarios were identified:
5.3.3.1	
Data Accuracy when Manually Recording Data without a Controlled Second 
Format 
5.3.3.2	
Transcription of Manually Recorded Data into an Electronic System
5.3.3.3	
True Copy (Paper to Electronic)
The controls are applied at the data level for the first and second scenarios, and at the record level 
for the true copy scenario. All controls are designed to prevent a potential data integrity issue from 
occurring. 
5.3.3.1	 Data Accuracy when Manually Recording Data without a Controlled Second Format 
Table 5.3.3.1-1 applies when a manual recording (recording on paper or direct manual recording 
into an electronic system, like a manufacturing execution system (MES)) is made without a con-
trolled second format available. This means that a reading, measurement, or result is observed from a 
display or another source, and no audit trail, printout, photo, or other media is available to corrobo-
rate the data recorded. These recommendations are intended for use while an organization is mov-
ing toward technological improvements that allow for a controlled second format such as electronic 
audit trail, printout, photo, or other media.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

28
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
For all situations, the recording of the data by the first person must be performed contemporane-
ously. For Highly critical data, the recording of the data should also employ real-time verification by 
a peer (“four-eye approach”). A downstream quality unit verification is also required. For example, 
when charging a raw material to the equipment, if the weight is not captured electronically and 
no printer is attached to the balance, one person must record the data and a second person must 
confirm at the time of charging that the correct quantity was added to the equipment and that the 
quantity was documented accurately. The quality unit then must review the recorded information 
within a timeframe defined by written procedures. 
For Medium-critical data points, for example a reading of temperature and humidity data for a 
compression operation, downstream verification by a peer is recommended to ensure that the 
requirements are met. 
Low-critical data points, for example the start time of a secondary packaging operation for 
products not time- or temperature-sensitive, only require a general check by a peer to en-
sure adherence to good documentation practices. A second-person check for accuracy is not 
required. 
Table 5.3.3.1-1	 Data Integrity Control Grid for Data Accuracy when Manually Recording without a Controlled 
Second Format
Data Accuracy when 
Manually Recording Data 
without a Controlled Second 
Format
High Data Criticality
Medium Data 
Criticality
Low Data Criticality
Prevention Control
Second check for data 
recording – What 
action?
Four-eyes and 
downstream quality 
unit review to ensure 
requirements are met
Downstream verification 
that raw data meets 
requirements
General check of 
adherence to good 
documentation 
practices, but no check 
for accuracy required
Second check for data 
recording – Who?
Real time by peer. 
Downstream quality unit 
review
Peer review
Peer review
Second check for data 
recording – When?
Real-time by peer. 
Quality unit review 
before batch release
Before the next critical 
process step or before 
batch release, as 
appropriate
Before batch release 
or within timeframe 
specified in procedures
5.3.3.2	 Transcription of Manually Recorded Data into an Electronic System
Table 5.3.3.2-1 applies to transcription of data manually recorded in paper format into an electronic 
system. This may occur, for instance, when data must be entered manually into an MES from a 
printout because equipment is unable to connect to the MES. 
For High-criticality data, like a CPP, second-person verification against the initial recorded data must 
be performed by a supervisor or the quality unit, as described by quality oversight procedures. The 
second-person review should ensure that the data entered manually into the electronic system cor-
responds to the original raw data. As original raw data is available (print out/manual recording), the 
second-person review need not be performed at the time of the activity but must be completed prior 
to batch disposition.
For Medium-criticality data, like a reading of environmental data for a compression operation, the 
second-person verification may be performed by a peer. For Low-critical data, like the time of start-
ing manufacturing, no second verification is needed. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

29
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.3.3.2-1	 Data Integrity Control Grid for Data Accuracy when Transcribing Manually Recorded Data into an 
Electronic System
Transcription of Manually Recorded 
Data into an Electronic System
High Data  
Criticality
Medium Data 
Criticality
Low Data  
Criticality
Prevention Control
Second review required for data 
transcription – Who?
Supervisor or Quality 
Unit
Peer
None
5.3.3.3	 True Copy (Paper to Electronic)
Table 5.3.3.3-1 illustrates the controls needed for creation of a true copy, going from a paper record 
to an electronic record. True copies must be maintained using the same controls that applied to the 
original paper record.
For High-criticality records, such as paper batch records that may be needed for downstream use by 
a sister site or another department, a trained user can make the true copy, but a second person from 
the quality unit must perform a documented review. The review must ensure the scan is legible, ac-
curate, and complete (all pages, all entries) and confirm that all entries on the true copy provide all 
information and data that are contained on the original record. For example, if data is color-coded 
or highlighted, the true copy must reflect the same color-coding or highlighting, with the intent of 
capturing the context and meaning. In addition, the original record may be discarded with quality 
unit oversight, unless the original document has a seal, watermark, or similar identifying mark that 
cannot be accurately reproduced electronically, in which case it cannot be discarded. The quality unit 
should determine the level of oversight required for destruction, which may range from quality unit 
presence during destruction to periodic confirmation of compliance with procedures. 
For Medium-criticality records, like a validation protocol, a trained user can make the true copy. A 
documented second-person review is required, though the second person need not be from the qual-
ity unit. The original record may be discarded by the operating unit unless the original document has 
a seal, watermark, or identifying mark. While the quality unit does not need to be directly involved 
in the destruction process, it must retain a suitable level of oversight to ensure the procedures are 
followed.
For Low-criticality records, such as completed user access authorization forms where evidence of 
training exists in another system, the person making the true copy must document that they re-
viewed the scan for legibility, accuracy, and completeness. The original may be discarded by the 
individual, with quality unit oversight to ensure that procedures are followed.
As with all controls relating to data integrity, processes relating to true copies, regardless of critical-
ity, must be documented in SOPs. A record must be maintained to reflect when each document was 
destroyed and who destroyed it.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

