11
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.0 
Quality Risk Management Applied to Data Integrity
The principles of QRM apply to the data lifecycle, which includes the capture, recording, transcrip-
tion, archiving, and other aspects of data management. This section uses examples to describe how 
certain elements could pose a risk to the integrity of pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical data. 
Risk should be controlled regardless of whether the data are managed using a manual system or an 
automated electronic system. Any potential breach related to data integrity—particularly the loss, 
omission, deletion, or alteration of data—must be investigated, addressed, and accounted for in the 
quality system and, as necessary, reflected in the risk management documentation. Given that data 
may be managed and/or transferred between different formats or systems, efforts should be made to 
mitigate the risk to the integrity of the data during these transfers. Therefore, judicious application 
of these concepts and targeted application of data integrity principles is warranted as the industry 
transitions from paper to hybrid (manual and electronic) and, eventually, to fully electronic systems. 
Data integrity risk also should be addressed during the transfer of data between electronic systems.
The PDA Technical Report No. 54 series describes QRM more broadly, including how to conduct 
an appropriate risk assessment and formulate a mitigation strategy to reduce the risks identified. For 
more information on QRM generally and other important elements, such as risk communication, 
please see the TR 54 series and ICH Quality Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Management (8,26).
4.1	
Considerations in Assessing Risk
Risk assessments should be conducted proactively at the time any new data management system is 
implemented and should be captured by the overarching change control. At this stage in the process, 
risk assessments can serve as preventive measures to ensure that data integrity is maintained through-
out the system lifecycle. When performed on existing data management systems, the assessments 
should identify potential data vulnerabilities based on the existing level of controls and the criticality 
of the data for its intended use. 
Organizations also should consider performing a risk assessment after a deviation or incident to 
identify potential gaps in the data management system. Assessment of data integrity risks also should 
be done in conjunction with the change management process of a data management system to avoid 
creating new or additional risks. This will enable informed decision-making regarding the extent 
of the issue and the potential impact. Key objectives of this assessment are to determine if the root 
cause is related to a gap in data management and, if so, to identify the extent of the gap and the 
impact to the data. 
Data integrity controls should be considered from both the behavioral and technical perspectives. 
From a behavioral perspective, the overall quality culture, including communications and training, is 
intimately related to the effectiveness of the data integrity program. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

12
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
4.1.1	 Considering Human Factors in Assessing Risk
In considering the human behavioral influence when examining the elements that pose risk to data 
integrity, two categories need to be examined: unintentional and intentional acts (see Table 4.1.1-1):
Table 4.1.1-1	
Human Factors Matrix
Unintentional Act
Intentional Act
Thinking Errors
Procedure Gap
Error caused by gaps in rules stating 
what tasks should be performed and by 
whom, e.g., lack of or inadequate stan-
dard operating procedures (SOPs)
Knowledge Gap
Error caused by knowledge gaps in how 
to perform a task, e.g., lack of or inad-
equate training
Fraud
Violations caused by malicious intent to 
perform a fraudulent act, e.g., falsifying 
data for personal gain or avoid personal 
pain
Action Errors
Attention Failure
Error caused by taking the wrong action, 
e.g., unfocused state of mind or a fre-
quently performed action goes wrong 
or multitasking or aggressive deadlines
Memory Failure
Error caused by taking no action, e.g., 
failure to perform a routine task due to 
forgetting its place in the sequence
Misconduct
Violations caused by knowingly ignoring 
procedures or controls due to misplaced 
priority, e.g., ignoring established controls 
to compensate for aggressive target or 
time pressure
One category is the unintentional act. Risk may be unintentionally introduced in a variety of ways. 
The unintentional act may take the form of an “action error” caused by a slip in attention or lapse 
of memory, or a “thinking error” caused by gaps in governing procedures (knowing what or who) or 
knowledge (knowing how). For instance, numbers might be reversed in an entry or entered in the 
wrong spot due to a slip in attention. A bar code might have been applied incorrectly to materials 
that are brought into the processing room, and the operation started before operators realize that the 
materials were for a different batch. Another example could be that one operator sets up the equip-
ment believing it will be used for one product, but a different product is brought in and processed. 
Appropriate procedures should be in place to require a documented investigation in the event of 
any mishandling or misuse of the data generated through such unintentional acts. The investigation 
should identify the root cause, determine the impact and criticality of the deviation, and assign ap-
propriate CAPAs. Where human error is suspected or identified as the cause, this should be justified, 
having taken care to ensure that process, procedural, or system-based errors or problems have not 
been overlooked, if present.
The other category is the intentional act. Risk may be introduced intentionally through misconduct, 
by failing to follow established procedures and controls due to misplaced priorities or through mali-
cious acts. For example, to personally benefit or to avoid personal consequences associated with hav-
ing made the mistake, an employee may cover up a mistake by creating false entries showing that the 
desired activity or result occurred. In one misconduct scenario, the operator was not paying attention 
to the mixing or blending operation and allowed it to run for longer than the validated time, but 
entered a value within the required range. Another example could be an overworked operator who is 
struggling to keep up with the manufacturing schedule and, in an effort to catch up, reprints the last 
acceptable in-process test result with the batch number of the new sample. Determining the reason 
for an intentional or malicious act may not always be possible. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

13
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
When a data integrity incident is identified, the most important information to learn is the what 
(event and systems affected), when (timelines), who (persons involved), why (gaps that contributed 
to the events occurring), how (specifics, step-by-step explanation of occurrence), where (systems af-
fected) and impact (product quality and patient safety). These elements are essential to determine the 
need for market action and, ultimately, lead to implementing corrective actions, which will assist in 
mitigating a recurrence of the data integrity issues. 
In the case of unintentional risks to data integrity, it will suffice to follow the process described for 
risk assessment in this section. Provided the “right” people are in the room—whether operators, 
technicians, mechanics, programmers, and/or supervisors—the risk assessment is likely to identify 
the areas in which an accident in data capture and recording is possible. The purpose of the risk as-
sessment is to determine the probability of that accidental error occurring.
When the risk to data integrity is the result of an intentional action, a comprehensive investigation 
is needed. Intentional manipulation of data is hard to detect and may require the use of forensic 
detection techniques. The risk assessment process may uncover some of the circumstances in which 
deliberate acts have occurred, but solid assurances that no repercussions will occur for contributing 
such information during a risk assessment requires a great deal of trust. 
4.1.2	 Risk Control Strategies
The potential impact on data must be determined and documented and, following the risk assess-
ment, mitigations must be determined to reduce risk. For risks that have been identified as having a 
high probability of occurrence and a high impact on product quality or patient safety, a balanced risk 
control strategy will need to be implemented. Understanding the manufacturing process and data 
lifecycle processes is crucial to developing successful risk control strategies. 
Although automation is not the solution to every problem, it can be a useful tool as part of a risk 
control strategy. Intelligent barcodes can be used to confirm product and component identity and 
can prevent a process from proceeding until the error is rechecked and corrected. The time-honored 
use of a second person checking or a supervisor reviewing is also important, provided that it is time-
ly. Frequently, the supervisory review takes place too long after an event to confirm that it occurred 
as recorded. Moving further into the digital age, electronic automation will replace such reviews 
when implemented and qualified appropriately.
4.2	
Data Integrity Risk Management Model
All data, whether recorded electronically or on paper, requires a risk management approach to deter-
mine what controls are important to assure data integrity. 
In order to estimate the level of exposure to potential data integrity issues, the following elements 
must be considered, as illustrated in Figure 4.2-1: 
• 
Data criticality 
• 
Current (existing) level of data controls, including:
–	 Data management – how data is recorded (manual or automated)
–	 Human factors – the amount of human intervention involved in the manufacturing process 
(manual or automated) 
–	 GMP process – including written procedures, training, validation, etc. 
Thus, data criticality and current level of data controls, taken together, can aid in identifying the risk 
of data vulnerability. Data vulnerability can indicate the level of exposure to data integrity issues due 
to intrinsic weaknesses in the control of three key elements: data capture technology (data manage-
ment), human factors, manufacturing processes, or a combination of all three. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

14
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
Figure 4.2-1 also identifies the sections in this technical report that further describe the key elements 
of the risk management model. 
4.2.1	 Classification of Data Criticality
Data criticality is a function of the relationship between the specific data and product quality. It 
is based on knowledge of the product gained from process development, validation, and quality 
processes throughout the product lifecycle and is facilitated by a set of relevant questions leading to a 
classification of data criticality as High, Medium, or Low (see Table 4.2.1-1).1 
All data related to manufacturing is critical as it is necessary to allow for the reconstruction of actual 
events; however, the criticality level may differ due to the data’s use and the controls under which it 
was generated. Data that is related to product quality (or supports a disposition decision) and patient 
safety would generally be classified as High criticality. Critical quality attributes (CQAs) and criti-
cal process parameters (CPPs) would be classified as High criticality. Data that is related to process 
robustness and consistency would be considered Medium criticality. Process robustness is discussed 
in detail in PDA Technical Report No. 54 and the other technical reports in the TR 54 series (26). 
Data that is related to neither would be considered general GMP and of Low criticality.
Data criticality is a measure of the significance of a data point or data set in supporting the safety, 
quality, identity, purity, potency, and/or effectiveness of the product being manufactured. The 
manufacturer can best determine the criticality of the data generated by its own processes since it 
knows the quality target product profile, CQAs, critical processes, and CPPs for the product being 
manufactured (27). This concept also applies to clinical trial manufacturing. While CPPs and CQAs 
may not be fully established in that context, initial information should be available to determine the 
critical aspects of the manufacturing processes and existing controls.
1	 While this technical report uses high/medium/low risk ranking levels, organizations may use dif-
ferent risk ranking levels and adjust their approach accordingly. Users would need to be mindful 
not to compromise the intent of this framework. 
Determine
Data Criticality
(Section 4.2.1)
Map Data
Vulnerability to 9-Box
(Section 4.3)
Determine current level 
of Data Controls
(Section 4.2.2)
Identify a GMP process 
in a unit operation 
needing DI assessment
GEMBA 
Walk
Data Process Flow 
Mapping
Data 
Magmt.
GMP 
Process
Human 
Factors
Define risk control 
strategy to avoid Red/
Orange zones
(Sections 4.1.2 & 4.5)
In  
Red/Orange 
zones
Yes
No
Level of Controls in place ensures 
inadvertent data integrity issues are unlikely 
to occur but may not prevent intentional 
falsification. See Section 5.2 for potential 
differentiated controls.
Figure 4.2-1	
Data Integrity Risk Management Model
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

15
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.2.1-1 Classification of Data Criticality
Data Criticality
Definition
High
When the intended use of the data directly impacts product quality and/or product safety:
• Product quality monitoring and control of processes that may be responsible for causing 
variability during manufacturing, release, or distribution impacting critical quality attributes, 
critical material attributes, critical process parameters, or critical process controls, including 
those that may be linked with the product registration dossier (where applicable)
• Product safety monitoring and control of processes that ensure effective management of 
field alerts, recalls, complaints, or adverse events
Medium
When the intended use of the data relates to quality attributes, material attributes, process 
parameters, key process parameters, or process controls that are not CQAs/Critical Processes 
(CPs)/CPPs and may or may not be in the product registration dossier; this includes parameters of 
the manufacturing process that “may not be directly linked to critical product quality attributes but 
need to be tightly controlled to assure process consistency” (28)
Low
When the intended use of the data is to provide evidence of GMP compliance relating to 
monitoring and control of processes that do not fall into the High or Medium category
4.2.2	 Data Control Levels
An assessment must be performed to determine the existing level of data controls (Table 4.2.2-1). High-
level data controls are those associated with validated automated processes and minimal human intervention 
throughout the data lifecycle, whereas low-level data controls are those that involve manual processes with 
a high degree of human intervention throughout the data lifecycle. Section 5.0 provides some examples of 
high-, medium-, and low-level data controls that may be appropriate for the criticality of the activity.
Table 4.2.2-1	
Data Control Levels
Control Level
Definition/Examples
High
High degree of validated process automation; electronic data lifecycle (e.g., capture, analysis, 
reporting); minimal human intervention
Medium
Hybrid—some manual processes; semi-automated data lifecycle processes; partial or lack of 
system interfaces
Low
Manual data lifecycle (e.g., capture, transcription, second-person witnessing); manual process 
measurements and testing; manual processes with a high degree of human intervention
4.3	
Data Vulnerability (9-Box)
Data vulnerability is an indicator of the level of exposure to data integrity issues due to intrinsic 
weaknesses in three key elements: data management technology, human factors, GMP manufactur-
ing processes, or a combination thereof. 
To determine the vulnerability of the data being collected, the user first must assess the level of data 
criticality and the existing level of data control. Each will be assessed as High, Medium, or Low, us-
ing the definitions in Tables 4.2.1-1 and 4.2.2-1. 
Subsequently, a 9-Box grid can be created by mapping the data criticality level with the data control 
level. The 9-Box grid helps visualize how data criticality and data controls interact to rank levels of 
risk. The criticality of the data will determine the row of the vulnerability grid, while the level of 
control associated with the data will dictate the appropriate column.2 
2	 While this grid is based on the high/medium/low risk ranking levels, organizations may adapt it 
to reflect local needs and to use different risk ranking criteria for data criticality and level of data 
controls. The resulting grading of data vulnerability would likewise need to be adapted. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

16
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
This grid includes nine unique combinations (pairs) of data criticality and data control levels, as il-
lustrated in Table 4.3-1, that can be grouped into four different categories: 
• Red: Significant data vulnerability—the level of data controls is Low for High criticality data. 
• Orange: Moderate data vulnerability—the level of controls is not commensurate with the 
criticality of the data. 
• Green: Acceptable data vulnerability—the level of controls is commensurate with the criticality of the data. 
• Blue: Negligible data vulnerability—there may be more controls in place than the minimum 
required; this applies only for data that is not High criticality.
The objective is to have the right level of controls in place based on the criticality of the data, and 
avoid being in the red or orange boxes. The goal of mitigation strategies, then, is to move from right 
to left by increasing the level of data control. In this assessment, all data relevant to GMP is critical, 
even if it relates to routine operations.
The 9-Box grid in Table 4.3-1 provides a visual depiction of the vulnerability of data given the 
current level of data management controls and the criticality of the data. The 9-Box grid does not 
provide any opportunity or cover for falsification of data. 
Table 4.3-1 depicts only the data controls relating to data management technology. For a holistic assess-
ment of vulnerability, the data controls relating to human factors and the GMP process should be similarly 
assessed. Appendix 1 provides further instructions for using the 9-Box grid, with illustrative examples. 
Table 4.3-1	 Data Vulnerability Grid (9-Box) – Example for Data Management Technology Controls 
DATA CONTROL LEVELS
High
Medium
Low
DATA CRITICALITY LEVELS
(H/H) 
Criticality 
• CQA/CP/CPP impacting quality & 
safety
Data Controls
• Validated & effective automated 
or hybrid data capture & analysis 
system in place
(H/M) 
Criticality 
• CQA/CP/CPP impacting quality & 
safety
Data Controls
• Hybrid systems or manual data 
capture, limited automated 
data analysis, manual data 
transcription
(H/L) 
Criticality 
• CQA/CP/CPP impacting quality & 
safety
Data Controls
• Manual data capture, no 
automated data analysis, 
manual data transcription, heavy 
reliance on second-person 
witnessing of data entries 
(M/H) 
Criticality 
• Processes & process parameters 
that are not CQA/CP/CPP but 
need to be tightly controlled
Data Controls
• Validated & effective automated 
data capture & analysis system 
in place
• More controls than may be 
required based on data criticality 
(M/M) 
Criticality 
• Processes & process parameters 
that are not CQA/CP/CPP but 
need to be tightly controlled
Data Controls
• Hybrid systems or manual data 
capture, limited automated 
data analysis, manual data 
transcription
(M/L) 
Criticality
• Processes & process parameters 
that are not CQA/CP/CPP but 
need to be tightly controlled
Data Controls
• Manual data capture, no 
automated data analysis, manual 
data transcription, heavy reliance 
on second-person witnessing of 
data entries 
(L/H) 
Criticality 
• GMP compliance data that do 
not fall into high or medium 
criticality
Data Controls
• Validated & effective automated 
data capture & analysis system 
in place
• More controls than may be 
required based on data criticality
(L/M) 
Criticality 
• GMP compliance data that do 
not fall into high or medium 
criticality
Data Controls
• Hybrid systems or manual data 
capture, limited automated 
data analysis, manual data 
transcription
• More controls than may be 
required based on data criticality 
(L/L) 
Criticality 
• GMP compliance data that do 
not fall into high or medium 
criticality
Data Controls
• Manual data capture, no 
automated data analysis, 
manual data transcription, heavy 
reliance on second-person 
witnessing of data entries 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

17
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.4	
Using the Data Vulnerability Grid 
The data vulnerability grid (9-Box), as depicted in the flowchart in Figure 4.2-1, will not provide 
one overall categorization of a company’s data vulnerability, but offers a tool to use for each process 
and subprocess of operations that involve GMP data. The 9-Box is a holistic approach that allows 
users to categorize the risk to the data in their current manufacturing processes and data lifecycle 
processes using internal data criticality and data control assessments. Companies can leverage the 
information captured in previous risk assessments and data flow maps to provide information on 
the manufacturing process, methods of data capture, data migration, transfer of data from produc-
tion to analysis tools, and archiving. The 9-Box can also be used before implementing new or revised 
processes. The outcome of the assessments will be only as good as the completeness and objectivity 
of the internal assessments. Underestimating risk factors and overestimating current data integrity 
controls will diminish the effectiveness of the outcome.
The 9-Box also allows users to identify controls that could be implemented to decrease the risk to 
data in the manufacturing process. Implementation of those controls could decrease data vulnerabil-
ity from a high level to a lower level (from right to left in the grid). Examples for implementing the 
9-Box in specific scenarios are included in Appendix I. 
This technical report recommends, as the first step, selecting a product and identifying the data that 
is critical for that product to meet its approved specifications and its intended use (see Section 4.2.1.) 
The critical data for the product should have been identified already as part of the product develop-
ment process and included in corresponding documentation. After identifying the data that impacts 
the product CQAs and the processes that are critical in its manufacture, the user can prioritize internal 
assessments, identify risk factors, and categorize the data vulnerability for these critical processes. 
Because three main elements impact data vulnerability—data management technology, human fac-
tors, and GMP process—the next step is to consider these three categories when assessing the specific 
data management process for the operation being evaluated. After completing this analysis for a 
specific process or unit operation, the completed information may be leveraged for the same process 
or unit operation used for another product, giving due consideration to potential differences.
For data management, the full lifecycle of the data needs to be considered to determine areas of 
vulnerability. This includes how the data is captured (manual/automated/hybrid system), frequency 
of collection, validation of any automated systems used to capture the data, migration of produc-
tion data to data analysis tools, data transcription, and data archiving. Here, again, existing data flow 
maps from previous assessments can be leveraged.
For human factors, points of human intervention in the data lifecycle need to be considered to 
determine data vulnerability. As people are prone to error, processes that rely heavily on manual data 
capture and review are considered inherently more vulnerable than those that are automated. To deter-
mine the reliability of the current processes, the assessment should consider trends related to data tran-
scription errors and poor application of good documentation practices. Conversely, automated data 
collection, properly validated, will be less prone to error and more likely to yield high quality data.
For GMP process, the complexity and robustness of the manufacturing process being evaluated 
should be considered to determine areas of data vulnerability. More complex processes are likely to 
produce a larger volume of data, which could increase the number of factors that impact the data 
vulnerability. The assessment needs to look at all aspects of the manufacturing process and evaluate 
each process on a case-by-case basis. A newer manufacturing process that has been validated recently 
and that lacks a history of robustness will have greater data vulnerability than an established process 
with a high-process capability. Trends related to change control, out of specification (OOS) results, 
alarms, and out-of-calibration instances can also illustrate the vulnerability of data being collected 
for the manufacturing process. Once identified, the trends should be investigated to determine their 
relationship to data vulnerability. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

18
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
Additional examples of potential areas of vulnerability associated with each of these three risk catego-
ries are presented in Table 4.4-1. 
Table 4.4-1	 Potential Areas of Data Integrity Vulnerability
Categories
Example Areas of Consideration
Data Management 
Technology 
(consider the full 
data lifecycle)
• Data transcription
• Frequency of periodic reviews and change management based on intended use
• Hybrid systems (e.g., discrepancies between paper printout and corresponding 
electronic record, data duplication)
• New or complex manufacturing technology (causing repeat errors)
• Overwriting existing electronic data 
• System validation age 
• System controls related to data export, calculation, reporting, transfer, archiving 
and retrieval 
• Appropriate access level
• Technologies with inadequate data integrity elements such as unique access, audit 
trail, data backup & restore, electronic data review, date & time stamp, among 
others (e.g., spreadsheets, LIMS)
• Unexplained discrepancies between electronic raw data and reported data
Human Factors
• Lack of supervisory review
• Manual observations or measurements (e.g., weighing)
• Repeat human errors (e.g., due to multitasking, high personnel turnover, inadequate 
training, time pressures)
• Training and procedures (complex, long, unclear, incomplete, or difficult-to-access 
instructions)
• Unclear role definition or segregation of duties
• Culture (fear, frustration, intent, unacceptable local documentation practices)
GMP Process
• Aborted runs (e.g., due to lack of planning, understanding system operation, 
suitability of equipment and process)
• Complex process (e.g., many interfaces, high level of human intervention, high 
levels of manual data entry)
• Data flows and ownership not well defined
• Inadequate line clearance checks
• Negative trends related to changes, deviations, out of specification, alarms, out of 
calibration
• New or complex processes (causing repeat errors)
• Operation switching (GMP vs. non-GMP)
• Unavailability of quality-related data requested during regulatory inspections
Once the risk factors have been identified, the third step is to assess the existing controls as described 
in Section 4.2.2. The controls in place should have been identified, for instance, by using a data flow 
map as discussed in Section 4.5. A historical review of the information related to data integrity issues 
contained in the quality management system (QMS) can be valuable in determining the adequacy of 
the existing data integrity controls.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

19
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
After identifying the manufacturing process being evaluated and the criticality of the data; the data 
management, human, and GMP process risk factors associated with the process; and the data con-
trols in place, the user can evaluate this information to determine where in the 9-Box grid the unit 
operation best fits, then mitigate the risks deemed unacceptable. 
If the operation being evaluated fits into a red box (H/L) as shown in Table 4.3-1, the controls in 
place are insufficient for the highly critical data and risk factors that have been identified. If it fits 
into one of the two orange boxes (H/M or M/L), the data integrity controls in place for that opera-
tion could be improved, based on the criticality of the data and the risk factors identified. If the op-
eration fits into one of the green boxes (H/H, M/M, L/L), the controls in place are sufficient for the 
criticality of the data and identified risk factors. If the process fits into one of the blue boxes (M/H, 
L/H, L/M, L/L), the controls in place may be more than required for the criticality of the data and 
the minimal risk factors identified. This does not imply that the controls for these processes should 
be decreased, but that resources potentially could be shifted to other processes, such as those in the 
orange and red boxes.
4.5	
Data Process Flow Maps
Data process flow maps, a GMP requirement in certain parts of the world (29), are an extremely 
useful tool for visualizing the movement of data through a given operation and can facilitate the 
identification of areas of high risk to the data. Every step from start to end of a given process (e.g., 
from order creation to release of finished product) should be identified and documented in order to 
obtain a complete picture of the data flow in the process. For each step, the data process flow map 
should identify the activity performed, how the activity is performed, the systems used to perform 
the activity, the data created, the method of recording the activity, and the decisions made from the 
data. It also should include details on how data flows between systems or process steps and the means 
used to transfer data, taking the data lifecycle into consideration as part of the supporting documen-
tation. The data process flow map should start with the point of origin of the data and include the 
systems (e.g., equipment, devices, applications) used in the process. Documenting the data flows 
related to manufacturing processes and systems through personal observation, such as through a 
Gemba walk, can prove helpful in this process. 
Points in the process where data integrity could be compromised should be identified. Asking a series 
of critical-thinking questions at each stage of the data flow throughout the lifecycle can facilitate the 
process, for example:
• 
Are unique accounts assigned to each user?
• 
Is an audit trail available that demonstrates if and when data is manipulated in any way, and 
does it identify who has performed the operation?
• 
Is data held in temporary memory? What happens if there is no power to this unit?
For instance, unauthorized access to a system could potentially allow for manipulation of batch-re-
lated data. These points where data integrity could be compromised represent areas of risk. For each, 
a risk assessment should be conducted, and mitigations to reduce risk identified and implemented. 
Differences in detectability (including elements related to electronic vs. manual processes) should be 
considered as part of the risk assessment.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

20
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 84
4.5.1	 Examples of Process and Data Flow Mapping
The following examples show process or data flow maps for solid oral dosage granulation operations. 
The three main steps in developing and using these tools are:
1.	 Identify the key stakeholders involved in the process and hold a brief interview to obtain an 
overview of the process. 
2.	 Create a process data flow map to determine: 
–	
If the data is captured in paper or electronic format, 
–	
If the data flow takes place in real-time (solid line) or later (dashed lines),
–	
If automated printed outputs are available with out-of-validated-range alert, and 
–	
If procedural controls are already in place or in use (red ovals in Figure 4.5.1-2).
3.	 Once the process/data flow is graphed, areas of data integrity vulnerabilities can be highlighted 
and used as input to build a remediation plan. 
Case 1 (Figure 4.5.1-1) depicts a paper-based, manually controlled granulation process with an end-
point of total granulation time that has been derived from process validation work, included in the 
master batch record, and approved by the quality unit. Case 1 relies on the data being captured by 
the operator, with second-operator verification, by wet ink recordings directly into the paper batch 
production record in real time. In this example, the endpoint of the granulation operation is a CPP 
that impacts the CQA of the finished product and would therefore be considered High-criticality 
data. The existing level of controls would be considered Low because of the total manual operation 
(see Section 4.2.2.). The only controls in this case are the second-person verification and a review by 
the quality unit.
In Case 2 (Figure 4.5.1-2), the same validated granulation process has been automated. The total 
granulation time has been included in a recipe, approved by the quality unit, and programmed into 
a PLC that controls the process. This programming includes an automated alert when the validated 
range is exceeded. The control level is now considered High because the validated PLC automated-
data collection system does not depend on any human intervention. With this level of control and 
the PLC’s printout of the granulation process, which includes the data on the total granulation time 
and an out-of-range alert, second-person verification is not necessary. The automated data collection 
further protects the integrity of this High-criticality data by preventing changes to the total granula-
tion-time data in the system. The full batch production record is still reviewed by the quality unit as 
part of the release process. 
Automated data capture of the granulation time, printouts of the data, and automated alerts when 
the total granulation time exceeds the validated range can reduce the procedural burden as well as 
improve data integrity assurance. This becomes obvious when comparing the data flow of Case 1 to 
that of Case 2. In Case 2, where the PLC controls the process, captures and stores the data, and gen-
erates a printout with automated alerts that is attached to the paper batch production record, there is 
no need for peer review of the data on a per-batch basis. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

21
Technical Report No. 84
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.0 Data Integrity Controls
Many events during manufacturing may compromise the integrity of the data. Any number of fac-
tors may cause these events, including human error, insufficient training, system failure, inappropri-
ate qualification or configuration of systems, poor procedures, or people not following procedures, as 
well as intentional acts of falsification.
PDA recognizes that quality culture is critically important in the prevention and detection of data 
integrity breaches; however, this technical report is designed to identify risk and potential mitigation 
of a data integrity breach regardless of where on the spectrum of data integrity (system error, indi-
vidual error, individual or institutional malfeasance) that breach occurs. Of course, intentional fraud 
and intentional manipulation of data are unacceptable under any circumstances, regardless of data 
criticality, vulnerability, or existing level of controls. 
In supporting and communicating expectations around a culture of quality for data integrity, PDA 
recommends that entities use the PDA publication, Elements of a Code of Conduct for Data Integrity 
in the Pharmaceutical Industry (22, 21), which outlines key elements necessary to help ensure the 
reliability and integrity of data throughout all aspects of a product’s lifecycle. It can be used, in whole 
or in part, as a control approach to guide a company’s internal practices, to create or modify an 
Figure 4.5.1-1	 Case 1: Granulation Operation (Paper-Based Manual Process without Automated Alerts)
Figure 4.5.1-2	 Case 2: Granulation Operation (PLC-Controlled Process with Automated Alerts)
Quality Unit
Production 
Operator 1
Production 
Operator 2
Approve Validated 
Process 
(CPP / CQA)
Confirm 
Components
Peer Review
Total time
within VAL 
range?
Perform 
Deviation 
Investigation
Confirm process 
parameters in MBR
(paper based)
Yes
BPR – Batch Production Record
MBR – Master Batch Record
After the fact
Real-time
No
Enter Start & End 
Times 
(start granulation)
Initiate Deviation
Review BPR for 
total granulation 
time
No
Yes
Full BPR 
Review
Product 
Impact?
Pass
Fail
Reject 
Batch
Release 
Batch
Quality Unit
Production 
Operator 1
Approve Validated 
Process 
(CPP / CQA)
Confirm 
Components
printout shows 
out of VAL range
alert
Perform 
Deviation 
Investigation
No
Yes
No
Yes
Full BPR 
Review
Perform 
Granulation
Initiate Deviation
Product 
Impact?
Confirm process 
parameters in MBR
(PLC recipe)
PLC printout of total 
granulation time
BPR – Batch Production Record
MBR – Master Batch Record
After the fact
Real-time
Pass
Fail
Reject 
Batch
Release 
Batch
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

