5.0 
Ongoing Process Verification
After process design and process qualification of a TPS, the shipping organization should implement 
the TPS in operations according to the control strategy. By applying continuous process verification, 
this will ensure that the TPS will protect the product throughout transit—from its preparation at the 
shipping site, during transport, and until its arrival at the receiving site—as intended during the quali-
fication for quality, effectiveness, and safety. 
Continuous process verification applies to all transportation modes and to all parties involved in the 
transportation of medicinal products and its related activities, such as (but not limited to):
• 
Preparing the goods for transport
• 
Loading/unloading goods into shipping equipment
• 
Loading/unloading from one piece of shipping equipment to another
• 
In-transit handling between transportation (e.g., airport transit, harbor transit)
• 
Receipt of goods
Each participant in the distribution process has an obligation to support the goal of protecting the 
product, minimizing opportunities for exposure to temperatures outside the required range, and to 
assess and respond appropriately based on the impact of such exposures, should they occur. In par-
ticularly cold or hot climates, it may be advisable to extend the temperature protection to the docking 
areas of the vehicles (complete enclosure)
Participants in the transportation process can be categorized as shippers, logistics service providers 
(LSP) and receivers. LSP refers to the providers that contribute to the transportation and storage–dis-
tribution process, including carriers, integrators, forwarders, and customs brokers. 
There are also considerations specific to transportation using vehicles or containers providing active 
temperature-controlled environment as well as specific aspects for transportation using passive TPS.
In order to support implementation, shippers must thoroughly document the processes used and 
improvement modifications made, as well as the reasoning for those changes, during the qualification 
process. This documentation is the critical reference for the creation of a process SOP, which should in-
clude procedures for process monitoring, environmental monitoring, nonconformance management, 
training, and the application of these procedures by the managing stakeholders. 
Process monitoring must demonstrate that the state of control is being maintained where the set of 
controls consistently provides assurance of continued process performance and product quality. The 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
12
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
effectiveness of lane assessment should be evaluated to establish the state of compliance to deliver prod-
ucts with the expected quality required by customers, patients, healthcare professionals, and regulatory 
authorities.
Monitoring tools, control systems, and regular trend analysis must be in place to measure performance 
and establish the level of distribution process capability.
Distribution process capability should be checked based on risk management and organizational SOPs 
to facilitate the identification and evaluation of opportunities for correction and improvement.
Transfer of the qualified process to the operational areas and the involvement of service providers 
(stakeholders) is formally accomplished by means of approved procedures. When those procedures are 
followed, the controls of critical process parameters will ensure in repeatable, successful transport of 
medicinal products. The written, approved procedures should be in place, and responsible personnel 
should be trained prior to implementation of the process. Consideration should be given to the pro-
cedures attached to the OQ and PQ reports.
Relevant personnel and organizations participating in the temperature-controlled process should be 
provided instruction concerning the principles of packaging, qualifying, and transporting tempera-
ture-sensitive medicinal products. The purpose of the training is to ensure that the shippers, transport 
service providers, and their subcontractors maintain the integrity of the transport chain for medicinal 
products. 
5.1	
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP)
SOPs should be in place to describe in detail all steps of the process execution. SOPs should be re-
viewed and revised periodically according to the organization’s policies and guidelines. A key part of 
an SOP implementation would include training and a comprehension evaluation section to assess the 
knowledge of the SOP users (e.g., shippers, logistic service providers, carriers). A summary of changes 
and versioning is required for easier tracking. The review and approval system requires a defined pro-
cess of retrieval and removal of obsolete SOP versions.
5.2	
Monitoring
Data loggers and indicators, commonly referred to as monitors, are instruments that use micropro-
cessors with sensors and internal memory capacity to collect data on predefined attributes, such as 
temperature and/or humidity. They can be connected to a computer system and use software to col-
lect, store, and analyze data as, in an example of temperature-controlled storage premises, part of a 
continuous monitoring requirement. In such cases, computer/electronic system validation is required 
as a part of the GxP. 
In different circumstances, monitors can be connected wirelessly to a modem, device, or cloud-based 
system, or monitors can operate independently as stand-alone instruments. Data loggers can record 
and transmit predefined attributes in a real-time environment providing certain predispositions are 
fulfilled, such as connectivity to a GSM/Wi-Fi/Bluetooth signal operated within the restrictions of 
airfreight transport. Unlike temperature, humidity monitoring and control is predominately reserved 
for storage premises. Like shock and vibration, humidity monitoring during transport is a product-
specific consideration, not a standard in attribute monitoring.
When supported by the risk assessment, a time–temperature indicator (TTI) can be used as an alter-
native to data loggers. A TTI is a device or smart label that shows the accumulated time–temperature 
history of a product. TTIs are commonly used to indicate exposure to excessive temperature and/or 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
13
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
excessive time above or below a defined temperature. TTIs are usually smaller than data loggers and 
can assist with immediate decision-making due to a clear symbol or color visible on the device. 
The number and position of monitors used in a shipment should depend on the qualification studies 
and control strategy. Conducting a risk assessment is recommended to determine the use of monitors 
on each shipment, as distribution qualification cannot simulate all external environmental conditions 
that can influence the shipment’s temperature profile. The monitor position in a TPS should be de-
termined by conducting a worst-case monitor-position study according to the temperature-mapping 
qualification data. An external data logger may be used to support the root cause analysis of a non-
conformance. 
The frequency of monitoring or measurement interval should be based on a risk assessment that en-
compasses regulatory guidelines and requirements and includes, but is not limited to:
• 
Shipment duration
• 
Interval or frequency mandated by country regulations
• 
Memory capacity
• 
Stability budget of the product
If used, temperature monitoring during transportation should reflect the capability of the transporta-
tion provider and the TPS to maintain the product shipment within the acceptable temperature range 
as defined on the product label or allowed by the manufacturer. Monitors should be started, at the 
latest, as the container (e.g., lorry, truck, trailer, sea and air container, passive shipper) is closed and, in 
turn, should be stopped when the container is opened at the destination. Start-up delay can be used to 
account for the time required for loading and equilibration.
During picking, staging, loading, unloading, and put away of temperature-sensitive product, condi-
tions should be controlled to preserve the quality of the product according to its stability budget.
Each monitor is required to have a certificate of calibration and must not be used beyond the date 
specified on the certificate. The expiration of the calibration should be based on the sensor manufac-
turer’s recommendation and/or local regulations.
5.3	
Training
Training on all SOPs should be completed by all those who will be responsible for implementing the 
task the SOPs describe. Training records should be maintained and updated promptly so they are com-
plete and available for internal Quality Unit audits and external regulatory inspections.
5.4	
Stakeholder Management
The management process for vendors or service providers is an important component of a quality 
management system (QMS). Vendors, for the purpose of this document, are defined as qualified con-
tract acceptors and their approved subcontractors. The contract-acceptor approval process comprises 
verification of the vendor’s QMS system and level of compliance to good distribution practices (GDP). 
Verification for direct contract acceptors (providers of the logistics or transport service) is typically per-
formed through an audit or comparable assessment process based on risk assessment (as per organiza-
tion’s procedures). The frequency of quality and GDP audits for logistics vendors is related to the type 
of the service they are providing, based on risk as defined in the organization’s procedures. 
The type and scope of the contract would vary, depending on the type of service required, but the 
contract would require a signed quality agreement or quality service level agreement, in conjunction 
with the business agreement, as a part of the approval process. Not all LSPs require an audit performed 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
14
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
directly by the organization using them. Thus, the most important elements of the vendor approval 
process are:
• 
Audit 
• 
Quality Agreement or Quality Service Level Agreement
• 
Key performance indicators (KPI) or performance metrics for continuous improvement verification
A review of KPIs should be conducted periodically. Ad-hoc or for-cause audits could be required based 
on poor performance or significant changes related to services offered in accordance with an organiza-
tion’s internal procedures.
The main areas of a vendor’s QMS verification depend on the scope and services offered. Typically, a 
quality or GDP audit, as applicable, might include the following:
• 
Organization, staff, training
• 
Quality management system
• 
Deviations/nonconformances
• 
Supplier assessment/auditing program
• 
Record management (paper and electronic)
• 
Change control
• 
Annual reports
• 
Facilities, vehicles, and equipment, including environmental monitoring and qualification
• 
Cleaning, sanitation, hygiene, pest control
• 
Maintenance, including calibration 
• 
Deliveries
• 
Warehouse operations and qualification
• 
Safety
5.5	
Management of Nonconformances
From a temperature perspective, distribution must be designed to keep the product within the defined 
limits described by the manufacturers, applicable regulations, or visible on the outer packaging. The 
distribution process is a complex and dynamic process, where product is exposed to the external envi-
ronment, less controllable than e.g., a typical drug manufacturing process, not managed directly by the 
product manufacturer and exposed to various entities in the supply chain. Due to the inherent vari-
ability of the external environment, nonconformances should be expected and documented according 
to the level of impact on the product.
Written procedures should be in place so that nonconformances are defined, their impact on product 
quality is assessed, and their root cause investigated, determined and, as applicable, eliminated (see 
Section 5.5.1).
5.5.1	 Categorization of Nonconformances
Nonconformances can be categorized by their type (e.g., temperature excursions outside the defined 
limits described by the manufacturer or visible on the outer packaging, logistic process deviation, 
equipment breakdown, theft/loss, anomalous trends, noncompliance with a good-practices require-
ment), as well as their criticality (e.g., no impact or potential or determined minor or major impact 
on product quality or patient safety). The categorization applied by each company must be described 
in a written procedure.
5.5.2	 Impact Assessment
An impact assessment must be performed following written procedures. The impact assessment must 
also consider and define the boundaries of the nonconformance in terms of which products may have 
been affected and which are out of scope. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
15
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The level of impact determines the level of investigation and correction needed. A prompt correction 
of the nonconformance to limit its immediate impact is required, and all actions undertaken in that 
respect must be properly documented. 
All products impacted (or potentially impacted) must be individually assessed. An investigation should 
be conducted involving the appropriate subject matter experts (SME) for the product(s) to determine 
the impact on product quality. Stability data might be used to assess temperature excursions. Never-
theless, the cumulative impact of any possible previous excursion must be assessed. All investigations 
including temperature excursions should be properly documented and approved by the Quality Unit.
When product quality, compliance, or patient safety is not impacted, it is considered acceptable to close 
the nonconformance with minimal or no root cause investigation (as applicable and described by the 
procedure). The impact assessment must be formalized and approved as required by the local procedure.
5.5.3	 Corrective and Preventive Actions (CAPA)
If a root cause of a nonconformance is determined, a CAPA should be considered and implemented 
in order to remove the root cause of the nonconformance. A corrective action is taken to prevent 
recurrence, whereas a preventive action is taken to prevent occurrence. Depending on the CAPA, the 
implementation of the CAPA should be monitored for its timeliness and effectiveness. The thorough-
ness of a CAPA must be commensurate with the risk posed by the nonconformance.
A CAPA is used to address quality and compliance issues and should result in process improvements 
and process understanding. It should be used in conjunction with the root cause analysis. To facilitate 
the trend analysis, a root cause should be identified according to the elements, for example, the route 
where the nonconformance occurred, root cause location (where it happened), and root cause owner 
(who or what is at the origin). The level of effort, formality, and documentation of the actions should 
be commensurate with the level of impact of the issue on product quality.
The development, implementation, and verification of the CAPA’s effectiveness will often require col-
laboration with the LSP(s) and/or packaging/container manufacturers.
5.5.4	 Product Control and Disposition Decision
Should an absence of impact for products in the boundaries of the nonconformance be determined, 
the product can be distributed after that no-impact determination has been confirmed, according to 
product specifications and local procedures.
Should an impact be determined, product(s) must be held and can be distributed only after a correction 
of the impact, if possible, has been successfully executed and product quality impact no longer exists.
When correction of the impact is not possible, impacted product(s) must not be released. 
5.5.5	 Approval and Closure
The responsibilities for approving nonconformances and their investigations must be described in a local 
procedure. The Quality Unit is typically responsible for approving all nonconformances as described.
The person responsible for the approval and closure of a nonconformance must have access to all 
information and investigation elements as required to perform the closure. When more information 
or investigations are needed to enable the approval and closure of a nonconformance, these must be 
requested from and provided by the investigation team. 
The approval can be granted only after all investigative elements are available and formalized and all 
applicable CAPAs have been satisfactorily identified and approved. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
16
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
5.6	
Complaints
Similar to nonconformances discovered during distribution operations, procedures should be documented 
that describe the processes for receiving, evaluating, investigating, addressing, and trending of complaints 
from customers. A CAPA should be considered to remove root causes of complaints as appropriate.
Products returned due to complaints must be segregated and prevented from subsequent distribution, A 
comprehensive product quality impact assessment must always be performed by the manufacturer, if prod-
uct is planned to be further distributed, as defined by local procedure and allowed by local regulation.
5.7	
Periodic Review
Distribution performance must be monitored and reviewed periodically to ensure the state of control 
is maintained as expected by the qualifications. The extent and frequency of the distribution process 
capability should be reviewed at regular time intervals using a risk-based approach.
Distribution nonconformances (e.g., number, trends) and the system for the management of non-
conformances must be periodically reviewed. The aim of the review is identifying negative patterns or 
trends in the processes and highlighting areas for improvements.
Implementing a process to monitor the occurrence of nonconformances, by tracking appropriate met-
rics and KPIs, is necessary. Mechanisms for escalation should be included to discuss the trends.
Aspects to be reviewed include, but not limit to:
• 
Number or frequency of nonconformances for each process or product, as applicable
• 
Adequacy (effectiveness) of CAPAs (e.g., by measuring recurrent nonconformances)
• 
Adherence to the standards required by the local procedure (e.g., timeliness for investigating and 
approving nonconformances)
For nonconformances classified as minor, trending should be performed to ensure they do not repre-
sent (or hide) a major nonconformance that would warrant more incisive actions. 
This periodic review must be an integral part of the management review.
5.8	
Change Control
An effective change control system must be in place to control changes made to the qualified systems. 
Each change to a qualified system must be described and documented. 
According to the type of change, different systems can be used to record and manage changes (e.g., 
distribution change control, system logbook).
In distribution, a good practice is to maintain a list with all the routes/shipping lanes and their descrip-
tion (e.g., shipping/receiving site, LSP, airlines/haulers, cold chain solution). 
Changes made to the system may render the distribution process no longer qualified. All changes 
(planned or unplanned) and their potential impact on the qualification status must be documented 
and approved by the Quality Unit.
Examples of criteria that could trigger a change control process might include: 
• 
New transportation lane with a specific transportation mode (e.g., air, ocean, rail, road) or major 
modification of an existing qualified transportation lane (e.g., shift from air to ocean) 
• 
New type of data logger
• 
New passive TPS 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
17
Technical Report No. 39 (Revised 2021)
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Minor changes can be followed by a periodic report shared during management reviews.
• 
Minor modification of an existing qualified transportation lane (for example change of the transit 
airport)
• 
Change of the alarm/alert limits of an existing data logger
In contingency situations, such as an element for pandemic, proper risk assessment and change control 
should be assessed.
