 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
144
10.0 Appendix II: Types of Control Charts 
Section 10.0 (Appendix II) lists recommended statistical process control tools, such as control charts, that 
may be utilized for process validation (PV) data trending. Refer to TR 59 for additional information (16). 
10.1 Control Charts for Variables Data 
Commonly used control charts for variables data are (8,9): 
 
𝑥̅/R or 𝑥̅/S "Shewhart" chart using ±3-sigma limits 
 
Individuals/Moving Range (I/MR) chart 
 
Levey-Jennings chart  
 
Moving average chart 
 
Exponentially weighted moving average (EWMA) chart 
 
Cumulative sum (CUSUM) chart 
10.2 Control Charts for Attributes Data 
The most-used control charts for attributes data are (8,9): 
 
p-chart for fraction or percent nonconforming (binomial data) 
 
np-chart for number of units nonconforming (binomial data) 
 
c-chart for number of defects (Poisson data) 
 
u-chart for average number of defects (Poisson data) 
In addition, the I/MR chart can be used for attributes data if most of the plotted values are not zero (0).  
For very large sample sizes, for instance, greater than 500 or 1,000 (e.g., percent of tablets rejected across 
lots on a sample of 1000 or more tablets inspected per lot with an automatic metal detector) and long time 
periods, the assumptions of a binomial or Poisson distribution that attributes charts use is often violated. In 
that case, alternative approaches to the common charts for attributes data could be used:  
 
Laney’s p-chart and u-chart deal appropriately with under- or over-dispersion in the data, which 
lead respectively to an increased or a decreased number of points outside the control limits with the 
corresponding classical charts for attributes (17) 
 
I/MR or Levey-Jennings’s control chart 
 
Performance of Control Charts: Average Run Length 
The ability of a control chart to detect a shift in the process is measured by the average number of sample 
periods before the shift is detected. This is called the Average Run Length (ARL). When the process has not 
changed (a shift of 0), it is desirable to have a large ARL to keep the false-alarm rate low. However, if the 
process has shifted, it is desirable to have a small ARL to detect the change quickly. ARL is most important 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
145 
The ability of a control chart to detect a shift in the process is measured by the average number of sample 
periods before the shift is detected. This is called the Average Run Length (ARL). When the process has not 
changed (a shift of 0), it is desirable to have a large ARL to keep the false-alarm rate low. However, if the 
process has shifted, it is desirable to have a small ARL to detect the change quickly. ARL is most important 
in CPV, when it is desirable to detect a significant process change within a short period of time. The ARL 
can be used to help select the sample size and frequency of sampling. Tables of ARLs comparing different 
control chart types are available and can also be calculated by software. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
146 
11.0 Appendix References 
1. Meeker, W.Q., Hahn, G.J., Escobar, L.A. Statistical Intervals: A Guide for Practitioners and 
Researchers. John Wiley & Sons, 2017. 
2. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: PAT — A Framework for Innovative 
Pharmaceutical Development, Manufacturing, and Quality Assurance; U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services: Rockville, Md., 2004. 
3. Oliver, J. A 3-D Risk Assessment Model. J Validation Tech 2008, 14 (5), 70-76. 
4. Makkonen, L. Bringing Closure to the Plotting Position Controversy. Communications in 
Statistics—Theory and Methods 2008, 37, 460–67. 
5. Lenth, R V. Java Applets for Power and Sample Size [computer software]. 
http://homepage.divms.uiowa.edu/~rlenth/Power/ (accessed 20 Mar 2011). 
6. Hoffman, D; Kringle, R. Two-Sided Tolerance Intervals for Balanced and Unbalanced Random 
Effects Models J Biopharm Stat 2005, 15 (2), 283-93. 
7. Vangel, M. New Methods for One-Sided Tolerance Limits for a One-Way Balanced Random-
Effects ANOVA Model. Technometrics 1992, 34, 176-85. 
8. Montgomery, D C. Introduction to Statistical Quality Control, 6th Edition. John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc.: Hoboken, NJ;, 2009; p. 63. 
9. Wheeler, D J, Chambers, D S. Understanding Statistical Process Control, Third Edition. SPC 
Press: Knoxville, Tenn., 2010. 
10. Scherder, T. et al. Benefits and challenges of process capability metrics. Pharmaceutical 
Engineering, ISPE, November-December, 2023. 
11. Burdick, R. K. & Graybill, F. A. Confidence intervals on variance components. CRC Press, 1992. 
12. Farnuma, N; Stantona, L. Narrow Limit Gauging: Go or No Go? Qual Eng 1991, 3 (3), 293-307. 
13. Nelson, L. Nomograph of Sample Size for Estimating Standard Deviation. J Quality Tech 2018, 11 
(Sup1), 25-26. 
14. Greenwood, J A; Sondomire, M M. Sample Size Required for Estimating the Standard Deviation as 
a Percent of its True Value. J Am Statistical Assoc 1950, 45 (250), 257-60. 
15. Flight, L., and Julious, S. A. Practical guide to sample size calculations: non-inferiority and 
equivalence trials. Pharmaceut. Statist., 2016, 15: 80–89. 
16. Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 59: Utilization of Statistical Methods for 
Production Monitoring; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2012. 
17. Laney, D B. Improved Control Chart for Attributes. Qual Eng 2002, 14 (4), 531-37. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
147 
Relevant Vendor and Supplier Resources 
The following paid advertisement is presented to the reader as potential supplemental resources which may 
aid in execution or fulfillment of the concepts, material, and information resented herein. 
The inclusion of this resource does not imply any endorsement or preference on part of PDA or the authors 
of this technical document.  
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.) 
An Authorized User of this electronic publication in the purchase. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:  
•
Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
•
Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
•
Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the
individual use of an Authorized User
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following: 
•
Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to
anyone other than an Authorized User
•
Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites,
either available on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license
from PDA, Inc.
•
Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA
Electronic Publication
•
Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the
PDA Electronic Publication
•
Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA
Electronic Publication or its content
•
Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk
reproduction or distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial
purpose
•
Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
including any texts or graphics
•
Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright
information or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication
•
Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material
To License or purchase Reprints 
•
Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a
fee.
•
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
•
Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.
To order reprints, please contact:
Whitney Alexis, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Whitney Alexis, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Document No. 60: Process Validation: A Lifecycle Approach 
About PDA Technical Documents 
PDA Technical Documents (Technical Reports, Points to Consider, Technology Guides, etc.) are global 
consensus documents, prepared by member-driven teams (listed on inside front cover) comprised of content 
experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/biopharmaceutical industry, 
regulatory authorities and academia. The viewpoints and strategies presented in this document are those of 
the authors as independent subject matter experts and do not necessarily represent the policies and practices 
of their respective companies.  
While in development, PDA Technical Documents are subjected to a global review by PDA members and 
other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. Comments from the global review are then 
considered by the authoring team during the preparation of the final working draft. The level of expertise of 
the team and those participating in the global review ensure a broad perspective reflecting best thinking and 
practices currently available.  
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board(s) that sanctioned the project. PDA’s 
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products Advisory Board, 
Biopharmaceutical Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality Advisory Board. Following this 
stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and determines whether or not to 
publish the document as an official PDA Technical Document. 
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Document is of the highest quality, all readers are 
encouraged to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or 
mistakes that might be found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org.  
PDA thanks the following peer reviewers for lending their time and expertise to ensure the quality and 
relevance of this technical document: 
Peer Reviewers 
James Agalloco 
Agalloco & Associates Inc. 
Nilkantha Banerjee 
Nivagen Pharmaceuticals, LLC 
Cornelius Conor Collins, PhD 
GSK 
Albrecht Gröner, PhD 
PathoGuard Consult 
 
Stacey Largent 
ValSource, Inc. 
Hendrick Plante, PhD 
Pharmaceutical Consultant 
Lalit Saxena 
Samsung Biologics 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Document No. 60: Process Validation: A Lifecycle Approach 
Sanctioning Advisory Board: SAB 
Chair 
Gabriele Gori 
Chiesi Farmaceutici, S.p.A. 
Vice-Chair 
Ivy Louis 
VIENNI Training & Consulting LLP 
Frederic Ayers 
ValSource, Inc. 
Tiffany Baker 
ValSource, Inc. 
Gregory Bassett 
Bristol Myers Squibb 
Emily Cheah, PhD 
Charles River Laboratories 
Thomas Damratoski 
CivicaRX 
Cheryl Essex 
Sanofi 
David Exline 
Gateway Analytical, LLC 
Rhonda Ezell 
Alkermes 
Mauro Giusti 
Eli Lilly Italia 
 
Rishikesh Jaiwant 
GSK 
Austin Kuo 
Eli Lilly & Company 
Beth Kirschenheiter 
Bristol Myers Squibb 
Gitte Letting 
Novo Nordisk A/S 
Bruce Loxley 
GSK 
Vincent O’Shaughnessy 
Amgen 
Ken Paddock 
Merz Therapeutics 
Julian Petersen 
groninger & co. gmbh 
Jim Polarine Jr. 
STERIS Co. 
Alexander Stoll, PhD 
Fresenius-Kabi 
Kristin Valente 
Merck & Co., Inc. 
Rick Watson 
Merck & Co., Inc.
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Document No. 60: Process Validation: A Lifecycle Approach 
 PDA Officers 
Chair 
Anil Sawant, PhD 
Chair-Elect 
Melissa Seymour 
Secretary 
Bettine Boltres, PhD 
Treasurer 
Emma Ramnarine, PhD 
Immediate Past-Chair 
Sue Schniepp 
President 
Glenn E. Wright 
 
PDA Publication 
Production and Editing 
Jessie Lindner 
Project Manager, SAB 
Danielle Bretz 
Technical Designer, Scientific  
& Regulatory Affairs 
Josh Eaton 
Senior Director, Scientific 
& Regulatory Affairs 
Walter Morris 
Senior Director, Publishing 
and Press Relations 
Marilyn Foster 
Technical Editor/Writer 
 
PDA Directors 
Marcia Baroni 
Lisa Bennett 
Cristiana Campa, PhD 
Andrew Chang, PhD 
Cylia Chen Ooi 
Marc Glogovsky 
Andrew Hopkins 
Ivy Louis 
Amy McDaniel, PhD 
Morten Munk 
Brigitte Reuter-Haerle 
Osamu Shirokizawa 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
 
 
 
pda.org 
 
PDA Global Headquarters 
4350 East West Highway, Suite 600 
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA 
TEL +1 (301) 656-5900 
FAX +1 (301) 986-0296 
PDA Europe 
Am Borsigturm 60 
13507 Berlin, Germany 
PDA Asia Pacific 
20 Bendemeer Rd. #04-02  B S 
Bendemeer Centre, Singapore 
339914 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
