 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
94 
Once the design space region for the input parameters that results in quality attributes that meet 
specifications has been determined, additional experiments can be used to confirm the expected DoE results. 
This may consist of running a few experiments at various parameter combinations to verify that the DoE 
equation adequately predicts the results. In some cases, where there is already good confidence in the DoE 
results, Stage 2 results may be used. For further information on DoE, refer to Introduction to Statistical 
Quality Control, Empirical Model-Building and Response Surfaces, Statistics for Experimenters: Design, 
Innovation, and Discovery, Second Edition and Optimal Design of Experiments: A Case Study Approach 
(87-90).  
6.2.2 Statistical Process Control and Process Capability 
SPC may be used to determine if a process is stable, predictable, and in statistical control. Process capability 
is used to determine if the process is capable of consistently meeting specifications (91). 
A process is considered stable or in statistical control when only random variation around a stable process 
mean is observed, that is, only natural, common causes of variation are present. Figure 6.2.2-1 illustrates a 
stable process that is in classical statistical control. Figure 6.2.2-2 shows a process that is not in statistical 
control and had a special cause of variation occur at Lot 5. 
 
Figure 6.2.2-1 Process in Classical Statistical Control, Common Cause Variation Only 
 
Figure 6.2.2-2 Process Not in Statistical Control, Special Cause Variation 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
95 
Figure 6.2.2-3 shows a more complex form of a process that is also stable and in control. This pattern is 
typical of many processes where there is variation both within and between lots, but the variation between 
lots is in control. One purpose of validation and CPV is to determine both within- and between-lot 
variations. 
 
Figure 6.2.2-3 A Process with Both Within-Lot and Between-Lot Variations 
Statistical process control charts are used to determine if a process is stable and in statistical control, or if 
there are special causes of variation present in the process (92). Values that fall outside the control limits 
indicate that special cause variation is likely present, and the causes for these excursions should be 
investigated. An assessment should be completed to implement the most appropriate control chart rules 
(e.g., value outside 3 sigma limits, number of values defining a trend, alternating points, points above 1 
sigma or 2 sigma, etc.) (64). Control charts can be used during all three validation stages for within-lot or 
between-lot data. During Stages 1 and 2, they can be used to determine if the process is stable and in control 
in order to commence commercial production. Control charts are particularly useful during Stage 3. Special 
causes of variation affect almost every process at some point. Control charts help identify when such a 
special cause has occurred and when an investigation may be needed. As special causes are identified and 
corrective actions taken, process variability is reduced and quality improved. Control charts are easy to 
construct and can be used by operators for ongoing process control. They also create a common language 
for discussing process performance and can prevent unnecessary adjustments and investigations. They 
encourage staff to be responsible for monitoring and improving their process, rather than only taking action 
when quality control test results fail. 
6.2.2.1 Factors to Consider in Designing a Control Chart 
There are many factors to take into consideration when designing control charts, including:  
• 
Characteristic(s) to chart  
• 
Type of control chart to use  
• 
Sample size and frequency of sampling  
• 
How quickly the chart will detect a problem of a given magnitude  
• 
Economic factors (e.g., costs of sampling and testing, costs associated with investigating out-of-
control signals, costs of allowing defective units to reach the customer)  
• 
Production rate  
Refer to Section 10.0 (Appendix II), for additional information. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
96 
6.2.2.2 Types of Control Charts 
Control charts may be used for both variables and attributes data (92). Variables data are those that are 
measured quantitatively, such as potency, weight, and pH. Attributes data are those obtained by counting, 
such as the number of rejected lots per month and the percent of tablets rejected. For variables data, it is 
important to control both the process mean and variation, and both should be charted. A change in either 
indicates special causes acting on the process that should be investigated. For attributes data, such as the 
percent of nonconforming units or the number of cosmetic flaws in 100 glass vials, only a single chart for 
the variable of interest might be kept. A separate chart for variation is not necessary because the variation of 
attributes data is related to the mean value; for example, the number of cosmetic flaws in 100 glass vials is 
usually modeled by the Poisson distribution, where the standard deviation is the square root of the mean.  
When possible, using variables data rather than attributes data is preferred. A measured value contains more 
information than an attributes value, such as conforming vs. nonconforming. Control charts for variables 
data have more statistical power and can use smaller sample sizes than attributes data charts. Although the 
underlying theory for control charts assumes normally distributed and uncorrelated data, control charts are 
robust and generally work well even when these assumptions are not met (82). One exception is for 
attributes data with low values, which have a highly skewed nonnormal distribution. Bioburden monitoring 
is an example of a process with low attributes data values, where many or most of the data are zeroes. Exact 
probability control limits the use of the negative binomial, Poisson, or other suitable distribution that might 
be used to prevent too high a false-alarm rate (84). (Additional information on control charts is provided in 
Section 10.0 (Appendix 2).) 
6.2.2.3 Process Capability 
Statistical process control charts answer the question, “Is the process stable and consistent?” Process 
capability statistics answer the question, “Is the process capable of meeting specifications?” Process 
capability (Cp) is the ability of a process to manufacture a product that meets predefined requirements. It 
can be assessed using a variety of tools, including histograms and process-capability statistics. The two most 
common process capability statistics, Cp and Process Capability Index (CpK), are shown in Equation 1 and 
Equation 2 (87). Cp measures the capability of a process to meet specifications if it is centered between the 
specification limits. CpK assesses if the process is meeting specifications when any lack of centering is 
considered. Examples of normally distributed processes with various values of Cp and CpK are shown in 
Figure 6.2.2.3-1. 
Equation 1 
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 = 𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 − 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿
6 ∙𝑠𝑠
 
Equation 2 
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 =  𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 ൤𝑥𝑥̅  − 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿
3 ∙𝑠𝑠
; 𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 − 𝑥𝑥̅
3 ∙𝑠𝑠
൨ 
Where: 
LSL 
=  lower specification limit 
USL  
=  upper specification limit 
𝑥𝑥̅ 
 
=  average of data 
s   
=  standard deviation of data
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
97 
Figure 6.2.2.3-1 Examples of Process Capability Statistics Cp and CpK 
If the process is in statistical control, the standard deviation (s) used to calculate Cp and CpK in Figure 
6.2.2.3-1 is usually based on estimates derived from the control chart for the standard deviation or range. 
These estimates of s will not include between-subgroup variation that may have occurred in the mean. For 
an individual’s chart where n = 1 per subgroup, the standard deviation is usually based on the moving range, 
which minimizes the effect of between-subgroup variation. If the standard deviation is calculated by the 
familiar equation: 
Equation 3 
𝑠𝑠 = ඨ෍(𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖−𝑥𝑥̅)2
(𝑛𝑛−1)  
Where: 
s 
 
=  standard deviation of data 
xi  
=  first (initial) data 
𝑥𝑥̅ 
 
=  average of data 
n   
=  number of samples 
of all the data combined, this estimate will include between-subgroup variation, such as between-lot 
variation, and the indices are then called Pp and PpK. For an X/MR chart (with n = 1 per subgroup), the 
standard deviation is usually based on the moving range, which minimizes the effect of between-subgroup 
variation (“short-term” standard deviation). 
As done for the Levey-Jennings chart, this estimate (“long-term” standard deviation) will include between-
subgroup variation, such as between-lot variation, and the indices are then called Pp and PpK. If a process is 
in statistical control, there will be little difference between Cp and Pp or between CpK and PpK. If a process 
is not in statistical control, it is difficult to determine process capability because of the lack of process 
stability (refer to Figure 6.2.2.3-1). If a process is not in statistical control, Pp and PpK are preferred as they 
include variation due to lack of stability (variation related to special causes); however, this practice is 
somewhat controversial (64). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
98 
Figure 6.2.2.3-1 shows the relationship between the CpK and the probability the process output will be out 
of specification. Table 6.2.2.3-1 assumes the process is in statistical control, normally distributed, and 
centered between the lower specification limits (LSL) and upper two-sided specification limits (USL). If the 
process is not normally distributed, process capability methods for nonnormal distributions should be used.  
Table 6.2.2.3-1 Relationship Between Capability and % or Per Million Nonconforming 
USL – LSL 
±2σ 
±3σ 
±4σ 
±5σ 
±6σ 
Process Capability Index (CpK) 
0.67 
1.00 
1.33 
1.67 
2.00 
Nonconforming 
4.55% 
0.27% 
63 ppm 
0.6 ppm 
2 ppb 
% of Specification Used (±3σ limits) 
150 
100 
75 
60 
50 
Acceptable values for CpK depend on the criticality of the characteristic, but 1.0 and 1.33 are commonly 
selected minimum values. Six-sigma quality is usually defined as Cp ≥ 2.0 and CpK ≥ 1.5 for a normally 
distributed process in statistical control. Refer to Wheeler or Montgomery for more complete treatments of 
SPC and process capability (84, 87). 
6.2.3 Statistical Acceptance Sampling 
Statistical acceptance sampling is another commonly used statistical tool for validation. The general 
principle is that the sampling used for validation should provide higher confidence than sampling used 
during routine production. In validation, larger sample sizes, more replicates, and other such factors are 
typically used. Commonly used acceptance sampling plans for validation to ensure that a high percentage of 
individual units (e.g., tablets, vials) are conforming are:  
• 
Single sampling for attributes data  
• 
Double sampling for attributes data  
• 
Variables sampling for quantitative data  
Samples should be representative of the entire population being sampled. Random, stratified, and 
periodic/systematic sampling are the most used approaches. Targeted sampling to include suspected worst-
case locations within the batch or process may be used when appropriate. For example, samples from the 
very beginning and end of the batch may be selected to assure that these potential trouble spots are included, 
while the rest of the required samples are randomly selected from throughout the batch.  
Reaching at least 90% confidence at the end of PPQ is desirable when using statistical acceptance sampling 
for validation with little prior confidence. This means that the combined information from the PPQ runs 
shows that there is at least 90% confidence that the validation performance level has been met; 90% 
confidence is recommended as the minimum because it is the traditional confidence associated with 
detecting unacceptable quality levels (called the Rejection Quality Level (RQL), Lot Tolerance Percent 
Defective (LTPD), or Limiting Quality) (84). Note that this use of the term “confidence” is different from 
the traditional 95% confidence of acceptance associated with the acceptance quality limit (AQL) in routine 
lot acceptance sampling. The AQL relates to the Type I error of incorrectly rejecting an acceptable lot, while 
the 90% minimum confidence recommended here refers to the Type II error of incorrectly accepting an 
unacceptable process.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
99 
Single sampling for attributes is the simplest type of sampling. For example, a sampling plan of n = 388 
units, accept on 1 nonconformance, reject on 2, would detect a 1% nonconformance rate with 90% 
confidence. The statistical operating characteristic curve for this sampling plan is shown in Figure 6.2.3-1. 
 
Figure 6.2.3-1 Example of an Operating Characteristic Curve 
Double-sampling plans for attributes may take a second set of samples depending on the results of the first 
set. For example, the double-sampling plan n1 = 250, a1 = 0, r1 = 2; n2 = 250, a2 = 1, r2 = 2 will also detect a 
1% nonconformance rate with 90% confidence. The values n1 and n2 are the Stage 1 and Stage 2 sample 
sizes; a1 and a2 are the accept numbers; and r1 and r2 are the reject numbers. If a1 = 0 nonconformances are 
found in the first set of n1 = 250 samples, the sampling plan is passed. If exactly 1 nonconformance is found 
in the first sample of n1 = 250 units, an additional n2 = 250 units are sampled. If the total number of 
nonconformances found in the combined 500 samples is no more than a2 = 1, the sampling plan is passed. If 
the total number of nonconformances found in the combined 500 samples is r2 = 2 or greater, the sampling 
plan fails. One advantage of double-sampling plans is that they often have lower false-reject rates; that is, 
good processes will not fail the sampling plan as often.  
Several types of variable sampling plans may be used for validation, one of the most common being the 
normal tolerance interval. For example, one normal-tolerance interval sampling plan for two-sided 
specifications is n = 30, k = 3.17. If the average ±3.17 standard deviation is contained within the 
specification limits, the sampling plan is passed. This plan also provides 90% confidence in detecting a 1% 
nonconformance rate. Variables-sampling plans assume the data are normally distributed, and this 
assumption should be confirmed with a suitable normality test. An advantage of variables-sampling plans is 
that they often are able to use much smaller sample sizes than attribute plans to provide the same 
confidence.  
Standards ANSI/ASQ Z1.4 Sampling Procedures and Tables for Inspection by Attributes and ANSI/ASQ 
Z1.9 Sampling Procedures and Tables for Inspection by Variables are commonly used sampling plans for 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
100 
routine production. They should be used with care for validation, since they may not provide a high enough 
level of confidence (93, 94). For example, one Z1.4-tightened sampling plan for AQL 0.4% is n = 315, a = 
2, r = 3. If a validation lot has two (2) nonconforming units in a sample of n = 315, the validation lot would 
pass the sampling plan. (However, note that 2/315 = 0.63% is substantially larger than the AQL of 0.4%.) 
Finding 0.63% nonconforming units in a sample does not provide high confidence that the process is ≤ 0.4% 
nonconforming, if that was the goal of the PPQ. If Z1.4 and Z1.9 are used for validation, the operating 
characteristic curves in the standards should be consulted to verify that the desired confidence is achieved.  
Not all sampling plans used to make accept-or-reject decisions are for percent nonconforming units. For 
example, the U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) test for content uniformity (uniformity of dosage units) is specified 
in terms of a two-stage sampling plan USP provides. In this case, validation sampling should provide 
confidence that the USP test can be passed with high confidence (89). For example, the sampling plan will 
show with 95% confidence that the routine USP content uniformity (uniformity of dosage units) test 
requirements can be met.  
6.2.4 Number of Lots for Stage 2 Process Performance Qualification 
In the case where the amount of prior information and confidence is low at the transition of Stage 2, the 
more advisable approach is to use statistical methods to support the determination of the number of PPQ 
lots, where feasible and meaningful (refer to Section 4.4.2.1.4). Depending on the prior information and/or 
risk involved, it may not be necessary to determine the number of PPQ lots using statistical methods. The 
less information and confidence at the transition to Stage 2, the more advisable it is to use statistical methods 
to help determine the number of PPQ lots, where feasible and meaningful. Section 9.0 (Appendix I), 
provides statistical approaches to determine the number of lots. Regardless of the number selected and the 
acceptance criteria used, the data collected during PPQ should be statistically analyzed to help understand 
process stability, capability, and within (intra-) and between (inter-) lot variation.  
Lots produced during Stage 1, under similar (GMP) conditions as the PPQ lots, may potentially be used to 
reduce the number of lots required at PPQ. This can be done using Bayesian statistical methods or by 
combining the Stage 1 data and Stage 2 PPQ results—if there are no significant differences in the data (95). 
The criteria for combining Stage 1 data and PPQ data should be specified before the PPQ lots are produced. 
These criteria would typically include such statistical comparisons as analysis of variance to compare lot 
means, Levene/Brown-Forsythe test, or Bartlett's test to compare the lot standard deviations, SPC charts, 
and equivalence tests to demonstrate that the Stage 1 and PPQ data are similar (93, 96, 97). 
6.3 Process Analytical Technology 
PAT is a method of process control, where the product or in-process material quality attributes are 
monitored and measured during processing, and the process parameters and conditions are adjusted to 
compensate for the variability of the quality attributes with the goal of ensuring a consistent final product 
quality.  
PAT can provide high levels of product quality assurance through the analysis of material attributes and the 
process adjustments. In that quality attributes do not vary outside of the prescribed ranges, product and 
material quality is maintained (98). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
101 
PAT can support PV whether it is a parallel activity (concurrent with PV), reductive activity (reduces 
execution of existing tests), or replacement activity (alternative to traditional testing).  
Effective use of PAT to provide process control relies on the selection of the correct quality attributes, 
process performance ranges, and methods for monitoring and reporting. It also relies on the proper design, 
use, and validation of the PAT monitoring, measurement, and control loop systems.  
The validation of the PAT system is based in part on the following principles:  
• 
Measurement of the correct product and in-process quality attributes 
• 
Accuracy and understanding of the correlation between these quality attributes and the process 
parameters that will be adjusted 
• 
Reliability, suitability, capability, and accuracy of the monitoring, measurement, and process 
control loop or adjustment systems 
• 
Acceptable performance of the PAT system throughout commercial manufacturing, including the 
ability to identify opportunities for process improvement 
6.3.1 Selection of Process Analytical Technology 
PAT is an enabler to product and process understanding and an element of the control strategy. Prior to the 
selection of the PAT system, the product and manufacturing process must be developed and well-
understood. Selecting the right PAT system should be based on fitness for purpose, system ruggedness, and 
vendor customer service. Selection criteria should include, but are not limited to, specificity, sensitivity and 
accuracy, electronic integration requirements of information technology compatibility, data management, 
and communication. 
6.3.2 Process Validation Considerations during the Process Analytical Technology 
System Design 
During PAT system design, information is developed to confirm that the correct product and in-process 
quality attributes are being measured, and that the correlation between these quality attributes and the 
process parameters that will be adjusted is understood and accurate. PAT system design begins in Stage 1 
and is qualified in Stage 2 and continually verified in Stage 3. During PAT system design, an understanding 
of how process-parameter changes affect product attributes is established. Process monitoring and control 
systems are designed and linked to specific product attributes. Ranges of acceptable process-parameter 
variation are determined. PAT design efforts should include risk assessment, system feasibility and 
selection, in-process application development, and consideration of regulatory requirements. 
6.3.2.1 Risk Assessment 
The risk assessment should identify product and in-process quality attributes that influence final product 
quality. The risk assessment should identify process steps and conditions that affect these attributes and can 
be measured and adjusted to ensure product quality. Quality attributes and corresponding process steps and 
conditions that are not monitored by the PAT system may require other means to ensure or validate 
performance. Having PAT systems is expected to lower the risk to product quality by having additional 
controls, timely responses, increased detectability, increased understanding, and information (e.g., 
identification, measurement, control of CQAs). These features enable a more informed risk-assessment 
decision. Tools for the assessment and evaluation of PAT processes and systems are discussed in Section 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
102 
6.1 of this technical report, as well as in ICH Q9(R1), TR 54, and the FDA PAT Framework guidance, 
among other publications (37, 78, 99). 
6.3.2.2 In-Process Application and Method Development 
The PAT methods for in-process product measurement and process adjustment should be selected and 
validated for specificity, linearity, range, accuracy, precision, repeatability, robustness, detection limit, and 
quantitation limit to ensure that the method is fit for purpose (37). 
6.3.3 Process Qualification Considerations for Process Analytical Technology 
The process qualification stage is where information is developed to confirm that the monitoring, 
measurement, and process control or adjustment systems are suitable, capable, accurate, and reliable. One 
key to effective PAT process control is the reliable operation of instruments and equipment. For 
implementation, an implementation and validation team should be assembled to categorize the validation 
requirements and propose acceptance criteria for each unit of operation, based on the application or intended 
use of the PAT system and method. These requirements and criteria will ultimately be included in a 
validation protocol and described in the validation report. The acceptance criteria should be aligned with the 
expected specification, protocol requirements, development experience, and manufacturing practice.  
The function and operation of the equipment and instrumentation used in the PAT system should be 
qualified to ensure that it will monitor and control the process parameters accurately and reliably. 
Equipment and instruments used during the process should be qualified to verify that they are suitable for 
in-process use, including compatibility with process materials and conditions, accuracy, sensitivity, security, 
and reliability.  
6.3.4 Continued Process Verification Considerations for Process Analytical Technology 
The CPV stage is where information is obtained to confirm that the PAT system performs at an acceptable 
level throughout commercial manufacturing. It also determines where product and in-process quality 
attributes, or process parameters, fall out of expected ranges; those that do are identified, investigated for 
cause, and addressed.  
PAT provides continuous process and product attribute verification. Stage 3 activities should therefore focus 
on accuracy and reliability of control methods, possible process-control improvements, and process 
variables missed during process development and qualification. Evaluation of PAT and or in-process 
derived data should be part of the quality system and review processes (17). Where data trending shows 
excursions in anticipated monitoring results, an analysis of the cause of the excursion should be conducted 
to determine if changes to the control system are needed or what opportunities for process improvement can 
be identified.  
When variables are found that are not being monitored adequately, changes to the monitoring methods may 
be needed. All changes should be evaluated for the impact on the process and product attributes. Changes 
should be evaluated, and actions should be implemented to assure that residual risks do not adversely affect 
process performance or product quality. These actions may include steps to qualify the changed process and 
equipment.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
103 
6.4 Technology Transfer 
For a lifecycle approach to PV to be effective, all information that is available to support process 
understanding (i.e., including other sites and similar process knowledge), should be considered. This 
information should be useful, accurate, and complete. The goal of TT activities (refer to Figure 6.4-1) is to 
effectively communicate product and evolution of process knowledge/understanding between development 
and manufacturing, and within or between manufacturing sites (within the firm or to contract development 
and manufacturing organizations (CDMOs)) to achieve product realization. This information forms the basis 
for the manufacturing process, control strategy, PV approach, and ongoing continual improvement. It also 
provides valuable insight into the development of the process, including process variables, process 
performance, and process control strategies. TT is successful if the recipient of the TT (Receiving Unit) is 
able to demonstrate, through the validation of the process, that its outcome enables reliable manufacturing of 
the transferred product and process (36). 
Figure 6.4-1 Distribution of Technology Transfer Activities throughout the Product Lifecycle 
TT can occur at different stages of the PV lifecycle. If a new process is being transferred from research and 
development to commercial manufacturing, the TT may occur between Stages 1 and 2. However, if a new 
process is being transferred from research and development to commercial manufacturing, the TT may 
occur between Stages 1 and 2. If the transfer takes place after a product has been launched (product is in the 
commercial manufacturing phase), the transfer will generally occur during Stage 3 (or eventually between 
Stage 2 and Stage 3). Table 6.4-1 displays the distribution of TT activities throughout the product lifecycle, 
which outlines the increasing knowledge and process understanding with each transfer.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
104 
Table 6.4-1 Technology Transfer Activities throughout the Product Lifecycle 
Process 
Validation 
(PV) Lifecycle 
Stage 
Activities 
Knowledge Development / Data 
Application 
Stage 1 
Process Design provides product and 
process development knowledge and 
data for TT 
• 
Development Report 
• 
Development history, including criticality 
assessments  
• 
DoE with sources of variation 
• 
Data and knowledge development from 
stability studies and development batches 
• 
Rationale for specifications and methods 
• 
CPPs 
• 
CMAs 
• 
CQAs 
• 
PARs, NORs  
• 
Manufacturing process description, equipment 
training 
TT batches 
manufactured during 
Stage 1 are intended to 
establish comparability 
of product quality 
between sites and 
develop filing/market 
authorization data. 
Development Report 
summarizes activities 
from Stage 1. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
105 
Process 
Validation 
(PV) Lifecycle 
Stage 
Activities 
Knowledge Development / Data 
Application 
Stage 2 
Most TT activities in a product lifecycle 
are carried out at Stage 2: 
• 
Development of transfer 
strategy 
• 
Manufacturing of commercial-
scale PPQ batches 
• 
Site equivalency analysis (from 
Receiving Unit to Sending Unit) 
• 
Transfer and validation of 
analytical methods 
• 
Confirming CPPs at commercial-
scale 
• 
Conducting stability studies at 
commercial-scale under 
commercial package 
configurations 
• 
Confirming risk assessments, 
criticality analysis 
• 
Establish sampling plans and 
statistical methods at 
commercial-scale 
• 
Comparability protocol (with 
statistical decision procedure) 
and report 
• 
Evaluation of personnel 
qualifications and training 
• 
Validation of microbiology-
related tests (microbial limit test, 
bacterial endotoxins test, 
bioburden, sterility test) 
 
TT Strategy 
Control strategy and validation plan 
Product and process description (as designed from 
Stage 1 and reported in the Development Report) 
Assessment of site change requirements, e.g., post-
approval and prior approval with rationale.   
Category under scale-up post-approval (SUPAC) 
guidelines, if applicable 
Number of batches required to meet transfer 
requirements, including validation/PPQ 
strategy/matrix approach 
Specifications and methods transfer plan 
TT batches 
manufactured during 
Stage 2 are intended to 
reproduce the 
manufacturing process, 
including components 
and composition 
configurations at the 
transfer site, and to 
execute PPQ. 
Equivalency between 
sites (gap analysis) is 
intended to compare 
equipment and facilities 
to assure that they are 
equivalent and qualified 
for commercial 
manufacturing. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
106 
Process 
Validation 
(PV) Lifecycle 
Stage 
Activities 
Knowledge Development / Data 
Application 
Stage 3 
TT activities at Stage 3 are most likely 
carried out for products that have 
already been validated and are on the 
market. These are known as post-
approval changes under the SUPAC 
guidelines, ICH Q5E and ICH Q12 and 
apply to changes to alternate 
manufacturing sites within a firm or to 
contract manufacturers. 
Similar to activities in Stage 2, a TT strategy is 
required. The strategy would include data listed under 
Stage 2 of this table. For products at Stage 3, 
additional data and knowledge will be available; care 
should be taken to ensure that the Receiving Unit will 
receive the maximum benefit of this background.  
At Stage 3, TT activities may pose opportunities for 
process improvement at the Receiving site using 
historical control and quality systems data. 
Data to evaluate includes: 
• 
Stage 2 TT and validation reports 
• 
Annual Product Reports, including process 
trending and process capability 
• 
History of investigations, CAPA, change 
control, OOS, complaints reports, field alerts, 
stability studies, yield variations 
• 
Executed batch records  
• 
Sampling and test plans 
• 
Analytical data 
Conduct gap analysis at current sites. Transfer site to 
assess risks and variations, including:  
• 
Scale change 
• 
Manufacturing equipment train design and 
operating principle, as well as qualification 
status 
• 
Confirmation of CPPs and equipment 
operating ranges at new site 
• 
Suppliers 
• 
Personnel 
Transfer to a new 
location within a 
manufacturing site, to 
an alternate site of the 
firm, or to a contract 
manufacturer. Filing 
requirements are 
defined by SUPAC, as 
these have different 
implications from the 
regulatory standpoint. 
Validation requirements 
apply equally to any of 
the scenarios. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
107 
Process 
Validation 
(PV) Lifecycle 
Stage 
Activities 
Knowledge Development / Data 
Application 
Stage 3 
 
New site state of compliance: 
• 
Product and process description (as designed 
from Stage 1 and reported in Development 
Data Report and Validation Reports) 
• 
Assessment of site change regulatory 
requirements: Post-approval, with rationale 
• 
Number of batches required to meet transfer 
requirements, including validation/PPQ 
strategy/matrix approach 
• 
Specifications and methods transfer plan 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
108
6.5 Knowledge Management 
KM for CPV refers to the systematic approach of capturing, storing, sharing, and utilizing knowledge 
gained from the CPV process to enhance the efficiency, consistency, and quality of manufacturing 
processes. It involves managing the insights, data, and experiences accumulated throughout the lifecycle of 
a product or process, especially in regulated industries like pharmaceuticals, where maintaining product 
quality and regulatory compliance is crucial. 
In the context of CPV, KM ensures that relevant data, process performance information, lessons learned, 
and best practices are accessible to all stakeholders. This facilitates continuous improvement, informed 
decision-making, and the smooth implementation of changes, all while maintaining compliance with 
regulatory standards. 
6.5.1 Introduction 
KM is an enabler for the PV lifecycle (refer to Figure 6.5.1-1). ICH Q10 defines KM as a systematic 
approach to acquiring, analyzing, storing, and disseminating information related to products, manufacturing 
processes, and components. It dictates that product and process knowledge should be managed from 
development through the commercial life of the product, up to and including product discontinuation.  
To ensure appropriate applicability, a systematic approach must be implemented to guarantee continuous 
transformation and utilization of raw data, information, knowledge, and application gathered from both tacit 
and explicit knowledge. 
 
Figure 6.5.1-1 Knowledge Management 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
