 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
41 
and performance requirements. Specifications for equipment, facilities, utilities, or systems should be 
defined in User Requirements Specifications (URS) and/or a functional specification. The essential elements 
of quality need to be built in at this stage, and GMP risks should be mitigated to an acceptable level. The 
URS should be a point of reference throughout the validation lifecycle.  
In situations where the process is being transferred to an operational facility with qualified equipment, a risk 
assessment should be performed to identify any equipment control gaps (36). These can be addressed 
through equipment modifications (which may require requalification) or through operational controls. 
Applying a life-cycle model to these situations is best practice. 
A risk-based and science-based approach to the specification, design, verification, and qualification ensure 
that the manufacturing systems and equipment are fit for intended use (27).  
4.1.1.1 Risk Assessment 
Risk assessments determine which systems and system components have an impact on the establishment 
and maintenance of process parameters and conditions that affect product quality and patient safety. This 
information helps develop system qualification plans, protocols, test functions, and acceptance criteria. The 
process steps and systems that affect the product quality, mode of effects, and correlation between system 
performance and the control of process variables should be studied and understood. For more information 
on risk assessments, refer to Section 6.1.  
4.1.2 Installation 
Upon completion of a setup, system testing and inspection should be used to verify that the systems have 
been fabricated, constructed, and installed to engineering and process specifications. The information from 
this verification should be accurate, reliable, and useful and may be leveraged or used to support 
qualification testing. 
The start-up and commissioning of systems should confirm that they are in good working order and operate 
as designed. Engineering studies can provide confidence that the systems will perform under process 
conditions and will keep performing regardless of seasonal variations. Adjustments to the systems to 
achieve the specified level of performance and operation may be needed. Information on modifications or 
adjustments should be documented and transferred to the team preparing the qualification plans and 
protocols.  
4.1.3 Qualification Plan 
The qualification plan may be developed once the process requirements and correlation to process systems 
are understood. Early development of the qualification plans may provide valuable guidance to the design, 
installation, and commissioning efforts. To capture changes that result from start-up and commissioning, 
however, it may be prudent to complete the qualification plans and protocols after all the information from 
the commissioning has been transferred. This approach also enables a better understanding of the type and 
amount of information that can be leveraged from prequalification activities. This approach means that 
Stage 2 activities may be underway during and prior to completion of all Stage 1 activities. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
42 
4.1.3.1 Test Functions and Acceptance Criteria 
System qualification tests or studies should be based on knowledge gained from previous activities, 
including Stage 1 and engineering studies. Test functions should be based on good scientific and 
engineering principles designed to demonstrate and assure that anticipated operating parameters will be met 
throughout the manufacturing process in a consistent and predictable manner. Acceptance criteria should be 
based on sound scientific rationale; the criteria should be useful, attainable, and where appropriate, 
quantifiable.  
If sufficient process understanding is not available, or the scale-up effect is unknown, existing knowledge 
may be used during design and commissioning to define user requirements. 
Formal system operating and maintenance procedures or instructions should be in place prior to the 
execution of test functions. Operators and those conducting studies should be trained in the operation of the 
systems and conduct of the tests. The training should be conducted under GMP conditions and documented 
according to good documentation practices (GDPs). All measuring and test instruments should be calibrated 
and traceable to appropriate standards.  
When developing systems PQ studies, an effort should be made to design them as close to being 
representative of the future process as possible. Formulated placebos that possess major or critical qualities 
of the product being planned to run on the equipment could be used for this purpose. PQ studies conducted 
with such materials may help in future process understanding without using actual product. Deviations in 
the execution of qualification testing should be documented, investigated, and addressed. Conclusions 
should be based on the suitability and capability of the system to meet the process requirements. When 
necessary, systems may be modified, and studies may be repeated.  
4.1.4 Maintaining Systems in a State of Control 
Qualification studies ensure that the manufacturing systems, as designed and operated, are in a state of 
control throughout the lifecycle of products being manufactured. For the process to remain valid and 
controlled, the systems must be maintained to operate within the parameters established during qualification.  
Periodic assessment and evaluation of the system to determine its control status is important. The 
assessment should include a review of information that indicates or supports assurance of control. This 
information may include, but is not limited to, such items as: 
• 
Calibration records 
• 
Preventive and corrective maintenance 
records 
• 
Equipment logs 
• 
Critical process alarms 
• 
Equipment (filters, compressed gasses, 
water) testing data 
• 
Training records 
• 
Standard operating procedures 
• 
Utilities standards 
• 
URS repositories 
• 
Change requests 
• 
Work orders 
• 
Monitoring results and trends 
• 
Nonconformance reports and deviations 
and their trending 
• 
Failure investigations and their trending 
• 
Periodic requalification assessments and 
studies 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
43 
Periodic assessment of systems may lead to additional qualification-related activities or testing. In addition 
to periodic assessments, event-driven assessments and requalifications may arise from process-related 
changes, out-of-specification (OOS) results and trends, and investigations. The system assessments and the 
events that trigger event-driven assessments should be recorded in a formal procedure that also addresses the 
mechanism for deciding when requalification is warranted, the criteria for doing so, and those responsible 
for it. It is recommended that subject matter experts and the Quality Unit should also be involved in these 
decisions. Maintenance trending should be benchmarked and periodically reviewed at a quality council 
forum to assess a state of qualification at the facility that helps in determining PPQ readiness from an 
equipment, utilities, and facilities perspective. In case of an emergency, such as sudden novel disease 
outbreaks arising, submitting the proof of the manufacturing equipment qualification, as well as a list of 
critical equipment for a products’ manufacturing, is especially important (27).  
4.2 Performance Qualification 
Performance qualification (PQ) must be performed at the end of the operational qualification (OQ) or in 
conjunction with the OQ or the PPQ. The following statements from EU GMP Annex 15 contains an 
accurate definition that PQ should include, but is not limited to, the following (50):  
• 
Testing using production materials, qualified substitutes or simulated product proven to have 
equivalent behavior under normal operating conditions with worst-case batch sizes. The frequency 
of sampling used to confirm process control should be justified. 
• 
Testing should cover the operating range of the intended process, unless documented evidence from 
the development phases confirming the operational ranges is available. 
For parenteral products, the type of PQs to be performed can vary substantially and are designed to verify 
the ability to: 
• 
Clean components and equipment parts 
• 
Sterilize loads using steam or EtO (ethylene oxide), for example, and decontaminate via vapor 
phase hydrogen peroxide (VPHP) or other sterilants 
• 
Depyrogenate containers 
• 
Fill a placebo and fill media-filled units (APS)  
• 
Inspect placebo units 
• 
Ensure an environment meets microbiological and total-particle requirements 
• 
Perform clean-air projector use and unidirectional flows to protect from a possible contamination 
(air-flow pattern tests) 
Usually, during the PQ, possible risks can be identified more precisely before going into the PPQ, because it 
is the first time that equipment, facility, components, and process come together. The fact that PQ is a partial 
simulation cannot rule out the possibility that some unexpected surprise could come up during the PPQ. 
There is another potential activity, called Line PQ, that should be considered. Depending on the complexity 
of the system, there might be instances where the overall PQ of the system needs to be assessed following 
the successful PQ of specific components of the system. Therefore, the Line PQ is targeted to prove that a 
combination of individually qualified systems can interact successfully, yielding satisfactory performance. 
The Line PQ is focused on verifying the functionality of the system in its entirety with regard to real 
working conditions, including the use of manufacturing instructions. This can also test the full functionality 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
44 
and integration between the instructions, the process automation, and the equipment. If a product trial or 
APS is performed, the final report from these studies can fulfill the requirement of the Line PQ. 
For this reason, it is also prudent to manufacture demonstration lots or engineering lots. These manufacture 
demonstration lots or engineering lots reflect the proposed process to be qualified, and may be manufactured 
with rejected DS or with non-commercial DS, such as material from engineering runs.  
4.3 Process Performance Qualification 
PPQ marks the transition from development and clinical manufacturing to routine commercial production. 
The PPQ combines the actual facility, utilities, equipment (each now qualified), and trained personnel with 
the commercial manufacturing process, control procedures, and components to produce commercial 
batches. PPQ confirms the process design and the success of the process control strategy to produce batches 
at the commercial manufacturing scale, as expected. PPQ provides confidence that the systems of 
monitoring, control, and procedures in routine manufacturing are capable of detecting and compensating for 
potential sources of process variability over the product lifecycle.  
The number of successful batches executed during the PPQ study should not be viewed as the primary 
objective of a PPQ campaign. While successful runs of commercial-scale batches can indicate overall 
operational proficiency and sound process design, these batches should also be viewed as a means to collect 
the data needed to demonstrate that the process control strategy is effective. The type and amount of data 
should be based on the understanding of the process, the impact of process variables on product quality, and 
the process control strategy developed during Stage 1. Prior knowledge should be used as well. For instance, 
in the cases of emergencies when the accelerated development and validation of products are desired, the 
data to support the formulation may differ depending on the platform but, at a minimum, should include the 
critical aspects of product characterization, a potency assay, and the data on stability generated, as well as 
the qualification state of the manufacturing equipment being used (27). The number of batches needed to 
acquire this information and data may be mainly based on a statistically sound sampling plan that supports 
the desired confidence level. It may also be influenced by the approach selected to demonstrate that the 
within-batch and batch-to-batch variabilities of CQAs are acceptable. 
The entirety of Section 4.3 discusses design strategy for the PPQ, recommended content for the protocol 
and report, and transition to Stage 3 of the PV lifecycle.  
4.3.1 Process Performance Qualification Readiness 
The transition from Stage 1 to Stage 2 of the PV lifecycle may not be strictly sequential. Completion of 
some Stage 1 activities may overlap with those from Stage 2 and may include parallel studies, such as 
mixing and/or hold studies. Likewise, some preparative Stage 2 activities will be initiated in parallel with 
those from later Stage 1 activities. Components of Stage 2 PPQ readiness activities (refer to Section 3.1) 
include, among others: 
• 
Drafting PV master plan  
• 
Drafting project plan  
• 
Qualifying facilities, utilities, and equipment 
• 
Completing successfully the required PQ studies, including APS 
• 
Training personnel 
• 
Drafting the initial CPV plan 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
45 
Although the initiation of PPQ activities is not contingent upon completion of all Stage 1 activities, a 
readiness assessment should be conducted to determine the timing of sufficient information and completion 
of activities to support moving forward with PPQ batch manufacture. The readiness assessment should 
include deliverables from Stage 1, as outlined starting from Section 3.1, and other elements as required:  
• 
Quality Target Product Profile (QTPP): Initiated at the start of Stage 1, it should be updated to 
reflect the knowledge obtained from Stage 1 prior to initiating PPQ (17). 
• 
Critical Quality Attributes (CQAs) with Criticality Assessment: CQAs are identified early in 
Stage 1. They are confirmed to account for additional analytical characterization, clinical and/or 
nonclinical data, and information gathered during Stage 1. CPPs that impact CQAs are reviewed 
and updated based on detectability and occurrence (17, 27). 
• 
Material Attributes with Criticality Assessment: Material attributes are identified early in 
Stage 1. They are confirmed to account for additional analytical characterization, clinical and/or 
nonclinical data, and information gathered during Stage 1. CPPs that impact material quality 
attributes are reviewed and updated based on detectability and occurrence (17, 27).  
• 
Commercial Manufacturing Process Description: This is started in Stage 1 and updated to 
reflect the finalized commercial process supported by Stage 1 studies and data. These include 
elements outlined in Section 3.4 and any changes resulting from the qualification of the facilities, 
utilities, and equipment as outlined in Section 4.1. 
• 
Analytical Methods: Appropriately validated or suitably qualified methods should be identified. 
Methods for product release and stability should be fully validated according to ICH requirements 
prior to initiating PPQ batch testing. Any additional tests beyond normal release testing used to 
support PPQ should be identified and suitably qualified/validated prior to being used to test PPQ 
batches (33, 34, 51). The justification of the status for use in the PPQ studies (qualified and/or 
validated) should be fully documented for each analytical method.  
• 
Approved Commercial Batch Production and Control Records: Changes may be made to 
batch records during Stage 1 to enhance, clarify, or optimize manufacturing instructions and/or 
reflect knowledge gained during process characterization. Master batch records reflecting the final 
commercial process to be studied in PPQ should be approved prior to PPQ batch execution.  
• 
Process Design and Development Report: This report (refer to Section 3.7) is documentation 
for the process design and development justifications, which includes risk-ranking of parameters 
and ranges for the process that will undergo PPQ study. This information should be finalized prior 
to the PPQ study design since it provides the scientific support to justify the PPQ acceptance 
criteria.  
• 
PPQ Risk Assessment Report Prior to Stage 2: This report documents risk assessment 
exercise(s) based on the knowledge summarized in the Process Design and Development Report. 
This activity summarizes decisions regarding the type and extent of process controls of the process 
being qualified. These risk management events should be conducted by an interdisciplinary team 
that includes experts from a variety of disciplines (e.g., process engineering, industrial pharmacy, 
analytical chemistry, microbiology, statistics, manufacturing, and quality assurance). 
• 
Process Validation Master Plan (PVMP): Drafting of the PVMP should begin in Stage 1 and 
should be finalized prior to initiation of the PPQ study. Elements of the PVMP are outlined in 
Section 3.8.  
• 
Quality System and Training: Qualified and trained personnel are essential to PPQ studies. 
Detailed, documented training specific to the PPQ is required for functional groups directly 
involved in the execution of each study. To minimize the risk of human error, personnel should 
understand their role in protocol execution. Quality Unit approval of PPQ activities should be 
completed prior to initiation of every PPQ study, and all PPQ studies should be conducted within 
the quality system.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
46 
• 
Approved Protocols for PPQ Studies: Protocols for each study should be approved, including 
Quality Unit approval, and finalized prior to initiation of PPQ studies. Refer to Section 4.4 for the 
design and content of PPQ protocols. 
4.4 Design Strategy for Process Performance Qualification 
Design Strategy for PPQ refers to a systematic approach used in the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical 
industries to ensure that a manufacturing process is capable of consistently producing products that meet 
predefined specifications and quality attributes. The strategy focuses on validating the manufacturing 
process through testing and gathering data under normal operating conditions. This strategy should be 
internally evaluated by a multi-department team, including quality assurance and regulatory affairs 
personnel. 
4.4.1 Use of Prior Knowledge and Stage 1 Data to Support Process Performance 
Qualification 
In a lifecycle approach to PV, sources of data and information outside of the PPQ batches may be used to 
support a high degree of confidence in an ongoing state of process control. Prior knowledge is that which 
has been gained from similar products and processes. It may come from experience with a portfolio of 
similar molecules, where platform manufacturing strategies have been developed using existing facilities 
and equipment (e.g., platform manufacturing processes for monoclonal antibodies) or from similar process 
and unit operations. Leveraging the data from similar products and processes may provide an additional 
level of confidence in the process control of a product and process that uses a similar control strategy and 
unit operations. However, the situation could change in the case of molecule-specific sensitivity (e.g., 
sensitivity to gamma-irradiated critical consumables or VPHP) resulting in the need to apply changes to the 
platform manufacturing strategies (e.g., switching from gamma-sterilized to steam-sterilized consumables) 
and to consider additional aspects of the control strategy. 
By contrast, likely first-in-class molecules and/or products manufactured in new facilities or with new 
equipment will probably require increased emphasis on data-gathering in Stage 1 to support PPQ readiness. 
To gather sufficient data to demonstrate an acceptable level of confidence in the commercial manufacturing 
process when little prior knowledge or Stage 1 data are available, the scope and extent of PPQ may need to 
be increased. This increased scope can both be translated in the need to run demo or engineering lots prior to 
official PPQ lots and/or by increasing the number of PPQ lots. Demo lots or engineering lots may be 
manufactured to gain knowledge into the process while also exploring operational ranges for CPPs. 
Successful demo or engineering lots can be used as a gateway to proceed into PPQ. In addition, successful 
completion of demo or engineering lots could be used to justify the number of lots needed for PPQ.  
The rationale and scientific justification for the use of existing data (prior knowledge) to support Stage 2 
should be documented in the PV master plan. All prior knowledge and Stage 1 data used to support PPQ 
must be retrievable, traceable, verified, and generated using good scientific practices.  
Where there is greater prior knowledge or process design for a new product or process, that knowledge and 
data is used in a scientific, statistical, and risk-based manner to determine the appropriate size of PPQ 
studies. Limited prior knowledge will require proportionally more Stage 1 and/or PPQ knowledge. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
47 
Some examples of cases where prior knowledge may be useful for PPQ include: 
• 
Setting acceptance criteria in PPQ studies, for example, bioburden and endotoxin in-process 
acceptance criteria, in cases where facility history and limits for other processes can be applied to 
similar processes that employ the same facility and equipment. (Assumes the limits for the previous 
product are appropriate for the quality of the new product.)  
• 
Using data from other product PPQ supportive studies, for example, in platform purification 
operations where the same or similar buffer formulations will be used in the same vessels, buffer 
hold-studies already performed for a different product can be used to support the PPQ for buffers 
used for the new product (52). 
 
Note: For more information regarding solid and semi-solid dosage forms, refer to TR 60-2 (53).  
4.4.1.1 Use of Stage 1 Data for Process Performance Qualification 
Processes and products for which there is little or no prior knowledge may require a greater emphasis on 
Stage 1 and PPQ activities to demonstrate an acceptable level of confidence in the process control strategy. 
Data from Stage 1 process characterization studies and clinical manufacturing are generally used to support 
the establishment of the control strategy for new products (refer to Section 3.0). Stage 1 data may be used to 
support PPQ if sufficient scientific evidence for its use is available. At a minimum, the studies claimed to 
support PPQ should represent the commercial-manufacturing scale (e.g., be scale-independent) or derived 
from qualified small-scale model(s) proven to represent the full-scale process. In some cases, data from 
clinical-manufacturing batches may be used in conjunction with data gathered during PPQ to increase the 
amount of data that can be used to achieve an acceptable level of confidence in the process. For example, 
the use of Stage 1 data to support the PPQ might include (1, 50): 
• 
In some cases, Stage 1 data that supports PPQ may be supported by adding stricter testing for a 
defined number of batches to confirm the results obtained in the Stage 1 studies and the PPQ 
batches. For example, small-scale column lifetime studies may be used to support column reuse 
limits. These are then confirmed with a heightened level of impurity-monitoring until the reuse 
period has been reached at full scale.  
4.4.2 Process Performance Qualification Study Design 
PPQ is a means to demonstrate that all critical and other process parameters of unit operations are under the 
appropriate degree of control, and that all important variables and elements of the unit operation have been 
considered, that is, facility, utilities, equipment, personnel, process, control procedures, and components 
(refer to Figure 4.4.2-1). 
Figure 4.4.2-1 Stage 2 Activities 
Typically, a PPQ Master Plan would be developed as required, based on the complexity of the PPQ study. 
The plan would include the summary of the design of the study as well as previous knowledge that aided in 
implementation of the study. The PPQ Master Plan should serve as a bridge between the QTPP and the 
QRM and PPQ protocols (refer to Table 3.8-1). In other words, starting with QTPP, you would perform 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
48 
your risk assessment and, based on that, determine the PPQ study design, which would result in a PPQ plan. 
Based on the complexity of the PPQ study, the information that would typically comprise the PPQ plan 
could reside in the PPQ protocol. 
It should be noted that the complexity and effort of the PPQ master plan should be commensurate with the 
complexity and criticality of the PPQ studies. 
Typical aspects covered by the PPQ plan are: 
• 
Process flow, including possible variations 
• 
Number of batches and rationale 
• 
Operating conditions 
• 
Variability in the reagents, excipients, and 
primary containers 
• 
Individual unit operations validation 
• 
Justification behind selection of 
bracketing, matrixing, and/or family 
approach 
• 
Sampling plans and justification 
• 
Stability studies, including comparison 
with development or tech-transfer product 
• 
Combination-product assembly and 
packaging requirements  
• 
Shipping requirements 
• 
Statistical analysis and evaluation 
requirements 
• 
Environmental monitoring 
During PPQ, CPPs and CQAs are monitored along with process performance parameters. Their evaluation 
is useful in demonstrating consistency and can enhance confidence in the overall process control strategy 
when included in the PPQ. All parameters and attributes intended for ongoing CPV in Stage 3 should be 
included in the PPQ.  
Prior to entering commercial PPQ batches, it would be advisable to run demo, engineering, or trial batches. 
This would be representative of the initial PPQ batches and would constitute a general trial for the 
commercial facility and proposed commercial process. It is also possible to leverage these engineering 
batches to confirm the PARs for given parameters, thus confirming the robustness of the process. 
4.4.2.1 Risk-Based Process Performance Qualification Sample-Size Justification 
QRM or risk-based approaches are used to assist in demonstrating control and capability throughout the PV 
lifecycle activities. Risk-based rationales are used to justify the number of batches manufactured and the 
number of samples taken during PPQ. It should be noted that there is no set number of expected batches 
prescribed in regulatory expectations or industry standard practice because the number of batches will be 
unique to a given product and process based upon the variability. The rationales assure sufficient data is 
available for the evaluation to demonstrate, with a high level of assurance, a process is capable of 
consistently delivering quality product, allowing the normal range of variation and trends to be established 
and providing sufficient data for evaluation. The evaluation of data should include objective measures (e.g., 
statistical metrics), wherever feasible and meaningful, to achieve adequate assurance. 
Additionally, FDA’s GMP regulations regarding sampling set forth a number of requirements for validation: 
• 
Samples must represent the batch under analysis (54) 
• 
Sampling plan must result in statistical confidence (55) 
• 
Batch(es) must meet its predetermined specifications (55) 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
