 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
69 
5.1.3 Documenting the Continued Process Verification Program 
Planning for CPV begins during the establishment of the commercial-scale control strategy (Stage 1). Stage 
3 includes heightened sampling and testing under Stage 3a based on regulatory guidance, and routine 
monitoring under Stage 3b (refer to Figure 3.0-1) (1). Trending the defined parameters and attributes of a 
qualified process will ensure ongoing product lifecycle management. The Stage 3a CPV follows the 
approved commercial manufacturing process and is manufactured under normal conditions by the personnel 
who routinely perform each step of the operations. Normal operating conditions include the utilities, 
systems, material, personnel, environment, manufacturing procedures, and approved test methods. The 
number of Stage 3a batches is estimated based on the Stage 2 PPQ outcome. The manufactured commercial 
batches are tested with a heightened sampling plan, as applicable. The statistically relevant sample sizes 
collected at various stages are in addition to the routine commercial sampling and testing. The protocol-
driven Stage 3a monitoring will allow for developing a baseline for a data-driven, scientifically sound Stage 
3b CPV program. 
Figure 5.1.3-1 illustrates an example of the development of a Stage 3a monitoring strategy. The specifics of 
the Stage 3a sampling and testing strategy may not be finalized until completion of PPQ. Therefore, the 
PVMP may include general commitments to the planned CPV (Stages 3a and 3b) strategy. High-level 
quality system policies and documents outline how various departments interact and how information is 
compiled and reviewed to ensure maintenance of the validated state. Under that policy document and/or a 
PVMP, a Stage 3a and Stage 3b plan considers the following elements, at a minimum (61, 62): 
• 
Roles and responsibilities of various functional groups 
• 
List of monitored process control elements (e.g., CQA, CPP, CMA) 
• 
Monitored trending (OOS, OOT, deviations or specific events) 
• 
Data collection process and data format 
• 
Statistical monitoring (63) 
• 
Tools, methods and software used for statistical analysis  
• 
Reassessment of process Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) 
• 
Product-specific rules (similar to Nelson rules) of CPV signal recording and management (e.g., on 
which signal to take action, what action, when, and by whom) 
• 
Interface strategy with annual product reviews (annual product reviews should not be used as a 
replacement for CPV) 
• 
Frequency of evaluation and reviews (periodic or continuous, as applicable) 
• 
Strategy for handling OOS results and deviations, where there are true failures (this is in addition to 
analysis of CPV signals) 
• 
Impact of change on the ongoing monitoring 
• 
Lifecycle management of the CPV program 
• 
Reference to CPV site procedures 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
70 
Figure 5.1.3-1 Development of a Continued Process Verification Stage 3a Plan 
The FDA PV guidance recommends that the number of samples should be adequate to provide sufficient 
statistical confidence of quality, both within a batch and between batches. Hence, statistical risk-based 
approaches are applied to determine the number of Stage 3a batches required (62). Process capability 
targets, as appropriate, may be set within the Stage 3a protocol based on process performance indices, such 
as Process Performance (Pp) and process performance index (PpK). The PpK estimate can diagnose 
decentralization problems aside from the process variation. There are other data-driven methodologies that 
can also be applied. 
ICH Q10 notes that the process performance and process monitoring systems should provide the tools for 
analyzing CMAs, CPPs, and CQAs that are identified in the control strategy. The fine-tuned, enhanced 
control strategy may be finalized based on QbD product development data, PPQ results, and the analysis 
outcome of the Stage 3a heightened sampling and testing. FDA recognizes the importance of utilizing post-
commercial manufacturing learning to enhance the product control strategy. Process parameters and 
material attributes evaluated at Stage 3a provide insight into any process drifts. Statistical process control 
charts and multivariate models may be used to identify the degree of impact and any observed trends would 
trigger appropriate corrective actions. While CPPs are defined in Stage 1 based on QbD-based product 
development, Stage 3a data enables further verification of the design space with ample datasets, while 
capturing the majority of the variables encountered by a process. Finalizing a Stage 3b monitoring plan is a 
component of the Stage 3a assessment outcome. The ongoing Stage 3b monitoring plan should be 
developed such that the sources of variability can continue to be identified along with their impact on 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
71 
downstream processes, materials, and product quality. The Stage 3b plan should provide an opportunity to 
shift controls upstream and minimize the need for extensive product testing. Ultimately, the Stage 3 CPV 
data may be used for process development of similar products. 
5.1.4 Introduction of Legacy Products into Continued Process Verification Stage 
Figure 5.1.4-1 outlines one possible approach and additional measures to be followed for assessing what is 
needed to apply the lifecycle approach to a legacy product. Legacy products developed prior to the adoption 
of ICH Q8 have not undergone the same rigor during product development as newer products and thus 
present a problem for organizations with a portfolio of legacy products (17). Organizations need to place the 
legacy product into either Stage 1, Stage 2 or Stage 3 of the PV lifecycle in order to continue meeting 
regulatory expectations (1, 2). The scenario calls for a specialized data-driven risk assessment of the legacy 
products to determine the next steps. 
Figure 5.1.4-1 Legacy Product Assessment 
Risk assessments of legacy processes help to determine the current state of controls and gauge the overall 
process design and PPQ efforts. The assessment outcome can direct the organization to place the legacy 
product into one of the three possible pathways: 
1. Develop a Stage 3b monitoring plan for formulations determined to be robust. 
2. Develop a protocol-driven heightened sampling and monitoring plan where additional data 
needs to be gathered for determination. 
3. Return the product to Stage 1 based on the gaps identified. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
72 
A structured assessment provides insights into product compliance, sustainability, and any potential patient 
risks based on available product/process data including pharmacovigilance, field alerts, etc. The heightened 
sampling may result in determining the variability estimates, thus identifying the need for Stage 1 
continuous improvement studies. The assessment may also result in modifying the legacy product control 
strategy and include the following two aspects:  
1. Comprehensive compliance review to summarize and verify compliance with PV regulatory 
guidances and emerging guidance based on the available data leading to a plan to address the 
gaps identified.  
2. Legacy process control strategy review. 
The legacy process control strategy review starts with identifying the sources of variability: materials, 
methods, machine, measurement, manpower, and mother nature (commonly referred to as the “6Ms” of an 
Ishikawa or fishbone diagram). In a manufacturing process, this relates to attributes of material, formulation, 
and associated processing parameters including scale-up factors, processing equipment, test methods, 
personnel, and facility/utilities. The overall CQA variability is a function of individual component 
variability. Once the risk factors are identified through cause-and-effect techniques (e.g., Ishikawa, 
pFMEA), risk-rating enables the quantification of associated risk. The criticality assignment is 
commensurate with the product characteristics and whether or not the impacted CQA directly affects 
patients. The assessment confirms if the current control strategy for each attribute is supported by the 
cumulative documented data from relevant Stage 1 studies though the legacy product’s lifecycle. Data from 
all three stages of the PV lifecycle (e.g., DOE, manufacturing trials, statistical analysis, annual product 
review (APR), commercial batch data) may justify the suitability of the current control strategy. Data from 
previous credible experience with sufficiently similar products and processes may also be used to support 
the control strategy. If the need to gather additional data is determined, then a statistically sound, risk-based 
approach protocol may be applied. A heightened sampling and testing plan can expand the body of 
knowledge for a legacy process where Stage 1 studies did not previously apply QbD principles and when 
data is missing throughout the product’s lifecycle. The determination of sampling, testing, and data analysis 
may be determined based on a review of existing Stage 1 and Stage 2 products, process knowledge, and 
product quality and compliance history.  
According to the FDA PV guidance, a process is likely to encounter sources of variation that were not 
previously detected or to which the process was not previously exposed, hence necessitating extensive 
sampling at different manufacturing stages where required. The data collected from heightened sampling 
and the historical batches are analyzed statistically to identify patterns and insights into the impact of 
potential sources of variability on the CQAs. 
5.2 Data Science 
Data science plays a crucial role in CPV by leveraging advanced data analytics, machine learning, and 
statistical techniques to optimize manufacturing processes and ensure consistent product quality. In CPV, 
data science helps in continuous monitoring, early detection of deviations, process optimization, and 
predictive modeling to improve decision-making. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
73 
5.2.1 Continued Process Verification Data Acquisition and Management 
Acquisition of manufacturing process data and centralized data management (e.g., product attributes, 
process parameters, and attributes) are instrumental in the efficiency of the CPV designed to fit the 
regulatory requirements in terms of DI and data security. CPV is at the heart of the current digitalization 
efforts in the industry targeting continuous process improvement and productivity improvements. As much 
as possible, data acquisition should be performed directly from the instruments, from which the data are 
automatically acquired and parsed for subsequent use. Strong data governance and DI controls should be in 
place to ensure data consistency and alignment with industry-standard ontologies and taxonomies. 
Appropriate format for statistical analysis, supportive of streamlined CPV and annual product quality review 
(APQR) and yearly biologic product report (YBPR) are required. Metrology checks, with their traceability, 
can be embedded in the data acquisition process, ensuring the instruments are continuously fit for use and 
qualified – those data can then offer a framework for their predictive and prescriptive maintenance in 
relation to the CPV results. Seamless data acquisition and centralized data management (use of validated 
cloud environments being the current trend) constitute the launchpad to leverage machine learning and 
artificial intelligence. These activities allow continuous improvement in terms of efficiency of execution. 
5.2.2 Classical Statistical Process Control Assessment in Continued Process Verification  
Classical statistical process control (SPC) tools are the backbone of CPV for monitoring both product and 
process and for the maintenance of the validated state of the process. The choice of the control charts should 
be made according to the typology of the data. More specifically, it is important to distinguish between: 
• 
Control charts for variable numerical data that are process control elements for which the group of 
units controlled in the batch group size may be ≥ 1 and are measured on a numerical scale. 
• 
Control charts for qualitative attribute data that consists of the count or proportion of 
nonconforming or defective units in the group of units controlled in the batch. Control charts for 
attribute data are used generally on qualitative data for DP batches, which are generally composed 
of discrete units of the medicinal product. 
Choice of the control chart should consider elements such as the number of units in the controlled group, the 
nature of the distribution of the process control (e.g., normal, other characterized distribution, 
uncharacterized distribution), and the magnitude and/or the consistency of the shifts that should be detected. 
For Shewhart control charts (refer to Section 10.0 (Appendix II)) with symmetric control limits around the 
central line, sensitizing control rules may be added allowing earlier detection of trends or nonrandom 
variations of the process (e.g., drift, shift, change in variability). The number of added rules should remain 
reasonable as it comes with the risk of increasing the number of false alarms (false-positive rate) 
significantly.  
Multivariate control charts may be used to provide a graphical depiction of a statistic that represents more 
than one process control element: the approach allows both detection of single elements but also breaking 
points in the correlation of the different elements.  
Practical tools or measures have been suggested for minimizing false-positives among process data plotted, 
as is, on charts and for streamlining the implementation of the CPV stage (64). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
74 
5.2.3 Digital Twins 
Digital twins are a virtual replica of a process (65). They can have various applications and benefits in CPV 
Stage 3 activities since CPV is more than just univariate trending to demonstrate capability. A digital twin 
can be used to support justification of PARs, as well as augment information in the event of a deviation. 
Integrated process modeling (IPM) is a lifecycle companion for CPV. Digital twins link process 
understanding and CPP–CQA relationships of single-unit operations with the entire process chain. By 
propagating distributions across the unit operations using Monte Carlo simulations, the probability of 
product quality failure can be computed depending on the actual performances and variability of the 
individual unit operations (66). The benefits of this approach, in terms of CPV tasks, is that intermediate 
acceptance criteria for CQAs can be deduced for each step.  
The digital twin assesses the quality of the CQAs of a complete process chain depending on the distributions 
and set points of all CPPs of the individual process steps.  
PARs can be deduced, as manufacturing data are provided from a real CPV into the digital twin which can 
justify or improve the control strategy, based on the interactivity of the process unit operations and 
probability of failure thresholds (refer to Figure 5.2.3-1). 
Figure 5.2.3-1 Definition of Proven Acceptable Ranges (e.g., elution pH) of an Early Unit 
Operation 
Overall, a digital twin can act as a system that recommends suggestions supporting continuous improvement 
of the control strategy to avoid batch failure. However, such systems need to be qualified. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
75 
The digital twin approach with process modeling can be used for integrating the product lifecycle, in line 
with ICH Q12: Technical and Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle 
Management, within the CPV program to support (4): 
• 
Regulatory compliance via justification of deviations – Basing decisions on sound statistical 
intermediate acceptance criteria  
• 
Adaptive control strategy throughout the ICH Q12 lifecycle – Use of the digital twin as a 
recommended platform to provide sound science evidence of process control systems (PCS) for 
continuous improvement 
• 
Commercial manufacturing optimization by operational flexibility – Opportunity to use complete 
multivariate autoregressive models available from PCSs and control in the multivariate space 
• 
Real-time release – Avoiding batch failure and predicting product quality with real-time deployed 
IPM 
5.2.4 Artificial Intelligence Applications in Continued Process Verification 
Two artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms (neural networks and support vector machines) were introduced 
by the European Pharmacopoeia as valid chemometric methods applied to analytical data in pharmaceutical 
contexts and the FDA has described a methodology for AI application in medical devices (67, 68). There are 
also strategies described to qualify AI algorithms for GxP environments or establishing the foundations for 
good practices of applying AI in regulated processes such as being used for CPV-signal decision-making 
process with algorithms supervised with process knowledge elements (69). 
Stage 3 is typically a lengthy manufacturing phase where extensive data is accumulated, trended, and 
analyzed to ensure that the process is always under control. The drug manufacturing operations and the 
implemented industrial processes are verified at Stage 2, but variability can be introduced due to the huge 
number of elements involved in the industrialization of the drug design.  
Since AI is based on a multivariable approach that employs statistical capabilities to detect unexpected 
interactions and predictability within complex interconnected factors, it can monitor complex processes with 
numerous variables to make fast operational decisions, such as image recognition, multivariate prediction, 
or fast classifications. One of the main root causes of issues in pharmaceutical manufacturing is variability 
in human interactions in production which could otherwise have been detected by emulated human (i.e., AI) 
supervision (69). AI is able to apply data intelligence to specific and repetitive tasks, like detecting 
anomalies in continuous automated processes to keep the process under control via a multivariable 
approach. 
Note: It is the responsibility of the practitioners that utilize AI to assure that applications of AI are in 
compliance with current regulatory requirements (70). 
5.3 Reacting to Continued Process Verification Data Signals 
The practical implementation of CPV is expected to reduce the cost of quality, provide opportunities to 
improve product quality, increase product and process knowledge, and reduce regulatory compliance risks. 
A system or systems for continually and efficiently detecting unplanned departures from the process as 
designed is essential to accomplish the CPV goal. Collection and evaluation of process performance data 
should allow detection of process drift if adequately monitored through application appropriate 
methodologies. These efforts can identify variability in the process, signal potential process improvements, 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
76 
and provide opportunities to mitigate and control those variabilities if properly carried out. The FDA PV 
guidance specifically states that trending should be performed in such a way that it guards against 
overreaction to individual events. An upfront approach for addressing the relevant variables and signals is 
therefore important in avoiding under-detection or overreaction. The CPV signals are “yellow flags” that 
represent the process variability and drifts and the severity of the signal is then determined (71). 
5.3.1 Continued Process Verification Decision-Making 
Routine CPV trending within established alert limits, signal detection and action enables organizations to 
maintain an enhanced product control strategy. A CPV signal can be for a quality attribute, material 
attribute, process parameter defined in the control strategy, and/or performance indicator with varying 
degrees of severity. A risk-based categorization of signals received (e.g., CPP, CQA) is also required, as all 
signals are not equally significant, which leads to requiring different action plans to address the signals on a 
case-by-case basis. When a significant amount of data is available, the suggested action in Figure 5.3.1-1 
may be applied. Paths are determined based on practical relevance and the statistical strength of the signal. 
For instance, taking Path 1 is proposed when the observed drift results from an assignable event extrinsic to 
the process and characterized by an isolated event which may or may not have been identified as a quality 
management system (QMS) deviation or incident. 
Figure 5.3.1-1 Decision-Tree Guideline (Stage 3b) 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
77 
The CPV signal, once determined not to be an OOS/OOT/deviation, is further assessed for statistical 
significance. A change review step provides insights into any potential impact of the sources of 
variability, that is, personnel, raw material, process, test method, equipment, utilities, facility, and 
environmental conditions. Understanding the causes of variability allows for control at the source. The 
preliminary assessment allows for determining the signal as either assignable, common, or special-cause 
variation. The proposed path of either continuing monitoring, assessment of control strategy, or a change 
requirement is then documented. Defined systemic decision-making steps guard against overreaction to 
individual events as well as against failure to act on the observed process variability. The systematic steps 
justify the robustness of routine CPV operational decision-making process, reduces person-to-person 
variability, and minimizes operational delays, holds, or product loss. A CPV program with both Stage 3a 
and Stage 3b would need different approaches for each stage because the data set available during Stage 
3a is less compared to Stage 3b. When limited data is available, a science- and statistics-driven deep dive 
into the available data is warranted to understand what actions can be taken until additional data are 
generated. 
5.4 Applying Continued Process Verification for Lifecycle Change 
Management 
Applying CPV to lifecycle change management refers to the integration of CPV principles and practices to 
monitor and ensure consistent product quality and process stability throughout the entire lifecycle of a 
product, especially during and after any changes in the process or product. 
In regulated industries like pharmaceuticals, medical devices, or manufacturing, lifecycle changes—such as 
adjustments in raw materials, equipment upgrades, process optimization, or even regulatory changes—are 
inevitable. Applying CPV in these contexts helps ensure that these changes do not negatively impact the 
product's quality, safety, or compliance with regulatory requirements. 
5.4.1 Quality Systems and Continued Process Verification 
The best tools for continued confirmation and refinement of process control are the quality system elements 
that provide feedback and objective measures of process control. The tools are based on product and process 
understanding and are enabled by procedures that monitor, measure, analyze, and control the process 
performance. Communication of CPV signals to the manufacturing, quality, and regulatory stakeholders (for 
improvement and/or compliance reasons) is an iterative and essential part of the lifecycle. Feedback 
mechanisms, where required, can vary between immediate (intra-batch or real-time), after each batch, after a 
series of batches, or after a defined period. Figure 5.4.1-1 depicts integration of sources of data and 
information for the purpose of process control to enable real-time continuous improvement decision-
making. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
78 
 
Figure 5.4.1-1 Integration of Data Sources for Improved Process Controls 
5.4.2 Regulatory Commitments and Established Conditions 
Although the common technical document (CTD) format has been defined for regulatory submissions, 
harmonized approaches to defining what changes would require a submission have yet to be determined. 
Established conditions (ECs) are legally binding information (or approved matters) considered necessary to 
assure product quality. They are contained in a regulatory submission, proposed by the applicant, and 
approved by the regulatory authority. Any change to ECs necessitates a submission to the regulatory 
authority that is consistent with regional regulations or guidances or has been agreed upon during the review 
and approval of the marketing application. ICH Q12 provides a framework to facilitate the management of 
post-approval CMC changes more predictably and efficiently across the product lifecycle (4). It allows 
regulators to better understand the firm's PQS for the management of post-approval CMC changes (72). 
Incremental changes over time should also be considered, and the need for any additional actions (e.g., 
enhanced sampling) should be assessed (50). The lack of harmonized requirements for lifecycle 
management is a disincentive for manufacturers to make improvements to increase process robustness. One 
post-approval change can take three to five years to implement across all regions, resulting in additional 
costs and potential supply disruption due to the need for multiple inventories since opportunities for 
“operational flexibility” offered by the science- and risk-based approaches in ICH guidelines Q8–Q11 have 
not been fully realized. Additional information and approaches to manage process changes can be found in 
PDA Technical Report No. 91: Post Approval Change Management and Implementation for Biologics and 
Pharmaceutical Drug Products — A User’s Guide. 
5.5 Continued Process Verification Data Review and Reporting 
Stage 3a is a product-specific, protocol-driven initial assessment following a new product launch that uses 
data from all stages of the PV lifecycle for statistical evaluation to gain deeper product understanding and is 
pivotal in understanding product variability (62). The Stage 3a protocol may be initiated upon completion of 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
79 
Stage 2b. The number of batches required for Stage 3a should be statistically significant to provide 
sufficient data, understand variation in the process, and establish limits for Stage 3b. To achieve this goal, 
the sampling and testing requirements may be maintained at the same level of Stage 2b, as applicable. 
5.5.1 Stage 3a Reporting 
Stage 3a is designed to allow close monitoring of process parameters and quality attributes while detecting 
the undesirable process variabilities and providing an opportunity to enhance the product control strategy. 
Additional sampling and testing are typically conducted at Stage 3a. Confirming the Stage 3b monitoring 
plan is part of Stage 3a. Evaluation of data from Stage 3a and Stage 3b is a valuable resource for product 
development and risk mitigation of similar products and processes. The assessment demonstrates an 
organization’s compliance in establishing an enhanced product control strategy and quality. Stage 3a allows 
for an improved understanding of the sources of analytical and process variability which is important for 
acquiring further knowledge of the newly qualified commercial manufacturing process and suggesting 
continuous improvement or enhancement of the initial control strategy changes at the earliest opportunity. 
The Stage 3a report may systematically summarize: 
• 
Statistical assessment to determine the impact of material attributes 
• 
Statistical assessment to determine the impact of process parameters 
• 
Statistical assessment of quality attributes 
• 
Multivariate correlation analysis 
• 
Impact of changes, if any 
• 
Product stability data analysis 
• 
Inter-batch and intra-batch variability 
• 
Estimating inherent process and method variability 
• 
Process capability and robustness indices 
• 
Verification of Stage 1 (QbD) design space with newly gathered data* 
• 
Review of OOS, deviations, complaints, and field alerts; where applicable, data collated for APQR 
should be utilized 
• 
Enhance control strategy recommendations and conclusions 
• 
Ongoing CPV (Stage 3b) monitoring criteria and justification 
*Note: The preliminary process capability assessment needs to be interpreted with caution considering the 
low number of batches. 
A product-specific quality dashboard may be a component of a Stage 3a assessment for determining product 
robustness, similar to any dashboards being used in Stage 2b (73). The dashboard can address the elements 
in FDA’s Quality Metrics Reporting Program, where the Agency suggests optional metrics as evidence of 
manufacturing robustness and a commitment to quality. Data reported may suggest the manufacturing site 
and processes are of low risk. Each processing stage can be evaluated against a predetermined process 
capability target to provide an overall product performance synopsis. The Stage 3a assessment is a resource 
for product development and risk mitigation activities (74). A trained statistician should be responsible for 
the selection of the statistical tools employed in this assessment. The process and product understanding 
gained can be applied to new, similar process or product development. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
80 
5.5.2 Stage 3b Reporting 
SPC tools and predefined rules are primarily used in CPV to alert to potential drifts. Triggering a signal 
indicates with reasonable statistical confidence that something may have changed within the process that 
may have an impact on the product's quality, safety, process robustness, and control. While these signals 
should trigger a response reaction, the reaction strategy should depend on the risk level. The continual Stage 
3b sampling and testing requirements may be included in the master batch record and monitored batch-to-
batch electronically through other controls. Systems should be in place to ensure that Stage 3b signals, if 
any, are addressed prior to the start of processing the next batch of the product or similar products. Qualified 
monitoring systems with real- or near-real-time data trending integrate product information, parameters, and 
quality attributes, thus allowing for swift decision making on an observed signal. Section 5.3.1 discusses a 
decision-making process that can be followed. The assessment outcome is documented electronically or 
according to standard operating procedure (SOP) requirements.  
5.5.3 Utilizing Continued Process Verification for Annual Product Review/Yearly 
Biologic Product Report 
Ongoing monitoring allows for early detection of potential process drift. Where the corrective actions are 
required, they could be implemented before reaching the failure point. On-going monitoring and corrective 
and preventative action (CAPA) implementation should not be postponed until the next APQR season but 
executed for each batch manufacturing. However, the CPV data summary should be used or referenced for 
completing the applicable sections of an APQR report (75). Stage 3b covers many APQR components, a 
few of which are identified in Table 5.5.3-1. The opportunity to continually analyze process data more often 
than in the traditional APQR makes the CPV program critical in detecting drifts and proactively taking 
action (if required) on those signals to avoid potential process failures. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Technical Report No. 60 (Revised 2026) 
© 2026 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
81 
Table 5.5.3-1 Sample of Annual Product Review or Yearly Biologic Product Report Elements 
Supported by Continued Process Verification 
Report Elements/Sections 
Supported by CPV Data 
Yes 
No 
Manufactured Batches Review 
X 
 
Raw Material Attribute Review 
X 
 
Environmental Monitoring Review 
X 
 
Media Fill Review 
X 
 
PM / Cal Review 
 
X 
Yield Trend Review 
X 
 
Training Review 
 
X 
Change Trend Review (Continuous 
Improvement included) 
X 
 
CPP Trend Review 
X 
 
CQA Trend Review 
X 
 
Re-Qualification / Validation Results 
Review 
X 
 
Non-Conformance / Investigation 
Review 
 
X 
Rejected Batch Review 
 
X 
Complaint Trend Review 
 
X 
Field Aer / Recall Review 
 
X 
Retain Sample Review 
 
X 
Quality Agreement Review 
 
X 
Review of Previous APR 
 
X 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
