environment is achieved. This technical report provides comprehensive information and suggested 
best practices as well as appropriate references to support such guidance. 
For individuals wanting a historical perspective of disinfection, a summary can be found in Appendix I 
(Section 17.0). 
The technical report team consisted of members who are cleaning and disinfection experts from vari-
ous global pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical companies, academia, and companies that manu-
facture agents used in disinfection.
1.1 Purpose
The purpose of this document is to identify systematic elements that are essential to assuring an 
appropriate and compliant cleaning and disinfection program for aseptic and bioburden controlled 
manufacturing facilities and classified environments. 
1.2 Scope
The document covers cleaning and disinfection within controlled and noncontrolled environments 
using chemical agents that reduce or destroy microorganisms. The document provides guidance for 
non-product-contact surface cleaning and disinfection. This document is not intended to fully address 
product-contact surface cleaning from a clean-in-place (CIP) or clean-out-of-place (COP) system which 
is specifically addressed in PDA’s Technical Report No. 29 (Revised 2012): Points to Consider for Cleaning Vali-
dation and Technical Report No. 49: Points to Consider for Biotechnology Cleaning Validation (1,2).
This document should be considered as technical guidance; it is not intended to establish any manda-
tory or implied standard.
1.0 Introduction
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
2
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
Technical Report No. 70
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) 
Any substance or mixture of substances intend-
ed to be used in the compounding of a drug 
preparation, thereby becoming the active ingre-
dient in that preparation and furnishing pharma-
cological activity o other direct effect in the diag-
nosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention 
of disease in humans and animals or affecting 
the structure and function of the body. 
Adverse Trend 
A series of alert-level or action-level excursions 
that indicates the system or areas are not in con-
trol and have the potential to affect the product 
quality.
Airlock 
A room that controls the airflow between two 
rooms of different classification. 
Analyte 
Substance for which an analysis is being per-
formed.
Antimicrobial Chemical Agent 
Substance used to destroy or suppress the growth 
of microorganisms, whether bacteria, fungi, or 
viruses, on inanimate objects and surfaces.
Area Disinfection 
Disinfection of floors, walls, ceilings, and other 
surfaces.
Aseptic Processing Area (APA) 
A controlled environment that directly supports 
the aseptic processing of product consisting of 
several zones in which the air supply, materials, 
equipment, and personnel are regulated to con-
trol microbial and particulate contamination to 
acceptable levels. 
Bioburden Load 
A measure of the number of viable organisms in 
a given environment or material.
Change Control 
A documented system for reviewing proposed or 
actual changes that might affect a validated system 
or process; change control includes the determi-
nation of any corrective action required to ensure 
that the system remains in a validated state.
Clean (v.)
The implementation of procedures to render an 
area, piece of equipment, system, or object free 
of adulterants and contaminants.
Clean(liness) 
The measurement for the level of particulates, 
microbes, or other extraneous substances on an 
item or surface. 
Cleaning Agent 
The solution or solvent used in the washing step of 
a cleaning process. Examples of cleaning agents are: 
water, organic solvent, commodity chemical diluted 
in water, and formulated detergent diluted in water.
Colony-Forming Unit (CFU) 
The visible outcome of growth of microorgan-
isms arising from a single or multiple cells.
Contact Time 
The minimum amount of time that a sanitizer, 
disinfectant, or sporicide must be left in com-
plete (wet) contact with the surface to be treated 
in order to be effective.
Contaminant
 Any adventitiously or externally introduced ma-
terial (e.g., chemical, biochemical, or microbial 
species) not intended to be part of the process.
Coverage
The appropriate distribution of a chemical agent 
needed on the equipment surface to be effective. 
Degradation
 The breakdown (usually chemical) of material 
during manufacture, including during and after 
the cleaning process.
Depyrogenation
 Removal or destruction of pyrogens.
Detergent
A synthetic wetting agent and emulsifier that 
can be added to a solvent to improve its cleaning 
efficiency. 
Disinfectant 
A chemical or physical agent that reduces, de-
stroys, or eliminates vegetative forms of harm-
ful microorganisms but not spores. 
2.0 Glossary of Terms
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
3
Technical Report No. 70 
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Disinfection 
The destruction of pathogenic and other kinds of 
microorganisms by thermal or chemical means. 
Environmental Monitoring (EM) 
Describes the processes and activities that need 
to take place to characterize and monitor the 
quality of the environment. 
First Air
Refers to the air exiting at the face of HEPA fil-
ters. Based on the airflow through HEPA filters 
and its unidirectional air flow the air exiting at 
the filter face is for the purposed of aseptic pro-
cessing free of particulate contamination (both 
viable and non-viable). 
Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning 
(HVAC) 
Refers to technology of indoor and automated 
environmental control.
High-Efﬁciency Particulate Air (HEPA) 
Filter
A type of air filter that must satisfy certain stan-
dards of efficiency such as those set by the Unit-
ed States Department of Energy (DOE). The air 
filter must remove 99.97% of all particles great-
er than 0.3 micrometer from the air that passes 
through it.
Gamma Irradiation 
The process by which a material is rendered 
sterile by exposing the material to a radioactive 
source, such as Cobalt 60.
Germicide 
A compound that destroys all vegetative micro-
organisms.
In-Use Testing (also called In-Situ Testing) 
A field study that validates the effectiveness of a 
disinfecting agent, the trained operators, and the 
approved operating procedures.
Isolates 
Microorganisms that are recovered from a facility. 
Largest Daily Dose 
Maximum daily dose of the next product to be 
produced in the equipment train.
LD50 
Median lethal dose, or median lethal concentra-
tion, of a toxin, radiation, or pathogen; the dose 
required to kill half the members of a tested 
population after a specified test duration. LD50 
figures are frequently used as a general indicator 
of a substance’s acute toxicity. 
Log Reduction
Log reduction is defined as the first log being 
90%, the second log being 9% and the third log 
being 0.09% of the original inoculums.
Manual Cleaning 
A cleaning procedure requiring operator-per-
formed critical steps (e.g., scrubbing with a brush 
or rinsing with a hose).
Metabolite 
A substance that is either the result of metabo-
lism or a requirement for a metabolic process.
Mycoplasma 
Small, flexible bacteria that lack a cell wall. My-
coplasma can pass through 0.2 μm and some 
0.1 μm rated filters and are unaffected by some 
antibiotics, such as penicillin.
Penicylinder 
A small, ceramic carrier surface used to hold cul-
tures of microorganisms. Used in antimicrobial 
effectiveness testing procedures. 
Pesticide 
Any substance or mixture of substances intended 
for preventing, destroying, repelling, or mitigat-
ing any pest. Any substance or mixture of sub-
stances intended for use as a plant regulator, de-
foliant, or desiccant and any nitrogen stabilizer. 
Pyrogen 
A material that elicits a pyrogenic response (fever).
Sanitize 
To make physically clean and to remove and de-
stroy, to the maximum degree that is practical, 
agents injurious to health.
Sanitizer 
A compound that will reduce the number of 
vegetative microorganisms to a safe level as de-
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
4
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
Technical Report No. 70
termined by public health requirements. Nor-
mally a reduction of 103 in vegetative microor-
ganisms is obtained.
Sonicate 
To use sound energy to agitate particles; gener-
ally used to accomplish mixing or cleaning.
Sporicide 
A compound that destroys all vegetative micro-
organisms and bacterial and fungal spores. 
Sterile 
The absence of viable microorganisms.
Sterilization 
A process by which something is rendered sterile 
(i.e., moist heat, dry heat, chemical, irradiation); 
normally validated at 106 organism reduction.
Substrate 
Primary construction material of a surface to be 
cleaned or disinfected.
Total Organic Carbon (TOC) 
Measurement term for the total organic carbon 
in a sample. 
Transfer Disinfection 
A disinfection process conducted on materials 
and equipment that coats the surface for a vali-
dated wetted time to remove bioburden prior to 
introducing such items into classified areas. 
Trend Analysis 
Analysis of environmental data over time indicat-
ing a shift; adverse trends require investigation. 
Vapor Phase Hydrogen Peroxide (VPHP) 
A disinfection system in which 35% hydrogen 
peroxide is changed to a vapor phase and used 
for bioburden reduction of a chamber or items 
in a chamber.
Validation 
A documented program that provides a high de-
gree of assurance that a specific process, meth-
od, or system will consistently produce a results 
meeting predetermined acceptance criteria. 
Visually Clean 
Absence of materials that would adulterate a 
product when inspected with the eyes.
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
5
Technical Report No. 70 
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
 3.0 Sanitizer, Disinfectant, and Sporicide 
Claims and Classiﬁcations 
Sanitizers, disinfectants, and sporicides are chemicals agents that reduce, eliminate, or destroy micro-
organisms. Registration testing of these chemical agents to meet the requirements of organizations 
such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), EU Biocidal Directive, Australian Thera-
peutics Goods Administration (TGA), Health Canada, and many others are performed at very high 
levels to address the high-bioburden environments in which they may be used. High-bioburden envi-
ronments include hospitals, food processors, clinical laboratories, institution, consumer, and others. 
Registration and approval are required prior to sale in the marketplace and are defined by regulatory 
requirements in most every county. The label claims seen on product are approved in this fashion. 
See Appendix II for additional information on registration of sanitizers, disinfectants, and sporicides.
Testing for the use of these same chemical agents in GMP manufacturing operations also requires 
testing prior to use. However, this testing is significantly different, as the bioburden load within a clean 
room environment is much lower. As such, the testing is performed with lower bioburden levels, de-
creased dry (wetted) time periods, and on varying substrates. This type of testing or internal qualifica-
tion (performed by the firm who intends to use the product or by a third party contract laboratory) 
is an expectation of drug regulatory agencies worldwide such as the U.S. FDA, the European EMEA, 
and health ministries throughout the world and may be reviewed as part of the inspection process. 
Sanitizers can best be described as chemical agents that reduce the number of vegetative microorgan-
isms to a safe level but do not destroy bacterial and fungal spores. Disinfectants are chemical agents 
that reduce, destroy, or eliminate vegetative forms of microorganisms but not spores. Sporicides are 
chemical agents that will destroy all vegetative microorganisms as well as bacterial and fungal spores. 
However, time frames to destroy high levels of vegetative microorganisms and spores may be exten-
sive and reach far beyond the bioburden level and normal dry (wetted) times characteristic of the 
clean room operation. 
The classifications of sanitizers, disinfectants, and sporicides include the following:
r Alcohols
r Iodine/bromine-containing compounds
r Aldehydes
r Quaternary ammonium compounds
r Phenolic
r Hydrogen peroxide
r Chlorine and sodium hypochlorite
r Peracetic acid/hydrogen peroxide
r ß-Propiolactone
r Ethylene oxide
r Ozone
r Chlorine dioxide
The term “disinfectant” is often used as a general term as well as a term referring to a specific type of 
chemical agent. To avoid confusion, in this document the term antimicrobial chemical agent will be used 
when referring to sanitizers, disinfectants, and sporicides in general.
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
6
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
Technical Report No. 70
4.0 Regulatory Expectations
4.1 Regulations and Guidance 
Reference to the cleaning and disinfecting of manufacturing areas can be found in regulations and guidance 
documents from various regulatory and standard-setting organizations. Listed below are citations from U.S. 
regulations and guidances, EU guidances, the PIC/s Convention, the U.S. Pharmacopiea, and the ISO.
r CFR Title 21 Part 211.42(c), (c10i), (c10v) (3):
Operations shall be performed within specifically defined areas of  adequate size. There shall 
be separate or defined areas or such other control systems for the firm’s operations as are nec-
essary to prevent contamination or mix-ups during the course of… (c)
Floors, walls and ceilings of  smooth, hard surfaces that are easily cleanable (c10i)
A system for cleaning and disinfecting the room and equipment to produce aseptic conditions 
(c10v)
r U.S. FDA, Guidance for Industry Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Processing—Current Good 
Manufacturing Practices, section X. Laboratory Controls: Sanitization Efficacy (4):
The suitability, efficacy, and limitations of sanitization agents and procedures should be assessed.
r EU Human and Veterinary Medicinal Products, Annex 1, Manufacture of  Sterile Medicinal Products (5):
In clean areas, all exposed surfaces should be smooth, impervious and unbroken in order to 
minimize the shedding or accumulation of  particles or micro-organisms and to permit the 
repeated application of  cleaning agents, and disinfectants where used. 
r The Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention (PIC/S) Guide to Good Manufacturing Practices for 
Medicinal Products (6):
Premises and equipment must be located, designed, constructed, adapted and maintained to 
suit the operations to be carried out. Their layout and design must aim to minimize the risk 
of  errors and permit effective cleaning and maintenance in order to avoid cross-contamina-
tion, build-up of  dust or dirt and, in general, any adverse effect on the quality of  products. 
(Part I Chapter 3, Premises and Equipment)
Using cleaning and decontamination procedures of  known effectiveness, as ineffective clean-
ing of  equipment is a common source of  cross-contamination. (Chapter 5, Production)
r The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union Volume 4 EU Guidelines for Good 
Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use Part 1 Chapter 3: 
Premises and Equipment (7):
Premises and equipment must be located, designed, constructed, adapted and maintained to suit 
the operations to be carried out. Their layout and design must aim to minimise the risk of  errors 
and permit effective cleaning and maintenance in order to avoid cross-contamination,build-up 
of  dust or dirt and, in general, any adverse effect on the quality of  products.
r The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union Volume 4 EU Guidelines for Good 
Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use Part 1 Chapter 5: 
Production (8):
Cross-contamination should be prevented by attention to design of  the premises and equip-
ment as described in Chapter 3. This should be supported by attention to process design and 
implementation of  any relevant technical or organizational measures, including effective and 
reproducible cleaning processes to control risk of  cross-contamination.
	
	

	
	
	

	
	 	!"		#

	

$
7
Technical Report No. 70 
© 2015 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
r USP <1072> Disinfectants and Antiseptics (9):
A sound cleaning and sanitization program is needed for controlled environments used in 
the manufacture of  Pharmacopeial articles to prevent the microbial contamination of  these 
articles. Sterile drug products may be contaminated via their pharmaceutical ingredients, 
process water, packaging components, manufacturing environment, processing equipment, 
and manufacturing operators 
r International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 13408-1, Aseptic Processing of Health Care 
Products; and ISO 14698, Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments—Biocontamination 
Control (10,11): 
This part of  ISO 14698 establishes the principles and basic methodology of  a formal system 
of  biocontamination control (Formal System) for assessing and controlling biocontamina-
tion when cleanroom technology is applied for that purpose. This part of  ISO 14698 specifies 
the methods required for monitoring risk zones in a consistent way and for applying control 
measures appropriate to the degree of  risk involved. In zones where risk is low, it can be used 
as a source of  information.
These documents are general in nature, providing a limited amount of information on how cleaning 
and disinfection are to be executed but do convey the expectation that these programs are in place. The 
responsibility of proving the effectiveness of the chemical agents used remains with the individual firms. 
4.2 Regulatory Inspections
