=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-Mar-2024
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-B1C4ACBB-A2C5-4298-AD66-23570AACBD27_2_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M8098_02_01
DOI Ref:
kwcjs
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈1228.1〉 DRY HEAT DEPYROGENATION
Change to read:
INTRODUCTION
Dry heat is the method most frequently used for the depyrogenation of heat stable materials. Dry heat depyrogenation is dependent upon
two parameters: time and temperature, which equates to a thermal input. As a result, dry heat depyrogenation processes can be easily
monitored/controlled and are highly reproducible. Depyrogenation processes typically operate at a range of temperatures from
approximately 170° up to about 400°.
The most prevalent pyrogenic agents in ▲
parenteral▲ (ERR 1-Mar-2024)
manufacturing that are of concern relative to patient safety are
bacterial endotoxins, found in the outer cell walls of Gram-negative bacteria. The destruction of bacterial endotoxins (depyrogenation) by dry
heat has been studied extensively and has been shown to follow «rst order kinetics. The well-de«ned kinetics of inactivation makes it
possible to predict the e­cacy of dry heat processes operating at different times and temperatures by understanding the total thermal input
(F
).
The range of temperatures used for dry heat depyrogenation overlaps the upper range of temperatures used for dry heat sterilization (see
Dry Heat Sterilization 〈1229.8〉). This is because bacterial endotoxins are more resistant to the effects of dry heat than the most heat-
resistant bacterial spores. This chapter provides an overview of the process of dry heat depyrogenation, its control, and validation.
TECHNOLOGIES USED FOR DEPYROGENATION BY DRY HEAT
Although all dry heat depyrogenation processes rely strictly on time of exposure and temperature to assure effectiveness, the equipment
used typically falls into two categories: the dry heat “batch” oven and continuous tunnel systems. Batch ovens are routinely used for the
depyrogenation of product containers, most often glass, but also other heat stable product contact par ts or laboratory equipment.
Continuous tunnels, on the other hand, are used primarily to depyrogenate glass product containers.
Batch Ovens
Circulating heated air is used to heat the load items, which may be individually covered or wrapped in a material that is unaffected by the
temperature used, or placed in a lidded container for protection during pre- and post-process handling. When depyrogenation and
sterilization are to be achieved in the same process, air supplied to the oven is passed through one or more high e­ciency par ticulate air
(HEPA) «lter(s) to maintain sterility within the oven after completion of the dwell period. These forced air ovens typically operate at a positive
air pressure differential relative to the surrounding room. This design results in par ticulate air quality that can meet ISO 5 requirements to
reduce par ticulate matter and microbial contamination risk throughout processing.
In order to ensure su­cient lethality and process control, oven control probe(s) must maintain a prede«ned temperature for a prede«ned
time period prior to cooling. The limited heat transfer capacity of air requires that items in the oven be placed in «xed locations con«rmed
acceptable during the cycle development/validation effor t. Caution should be exercised in de«ning variable load patterns as minimum load
sizes may result in inadver tent slower heating of the load and greater temperature variability. Smaller facilities may use a single door oven,
but the principles of operation and validation are the same as with larger double door production units. The impor tant batch oven process
variables are set-point temperature, duration of dwell period, load type and con«guration, air¬ow characteristics, and container size.
Continuous Tunnels
The use of tunnels for dry heat depyrogenation of glass containers on a moving conveyor allows for substantially higher throughput and
packing densities than the batch process, reduces handling, and is ordinarily integrated with a washing and «lling system. Tunnels typically
use forced heated air systems or radiant IR systems that recirculate air through a battery of HEPA «lters. Load items in tunnels are typically
fed directly from an integrated container washing system.
Depyrogenation tunnels have separate zones for heating and cooling, allowing for continuous in-feed and discharge at temperatures
appropriate for production purposes. The tunnel is maintained at constant air¬ow and temperature conditions during use, and as glass
passes through the tunnel it is heated to depyrogenating temperatures and cooled before exiting. Although the conditions within the tunnel
are essentially constant and well controlled, the temperature of the glass as it passes through the tunnel on the conveyor will change with its
location. Dwell time is controlled by adjusting the conveyor speed,
1
 which in the depyrogenation tunnel is the process parameter that
governs exposure time.
The air in the tunnel is most commonly heated using electrical coils but other heat sources, such as infrared or high-pressure steam, have
been used. For energy conservation, heated air in depyrogenation tunnels is often recirculated. The impor tant continuous tunnel process
D
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:38 PM
USP-NF 〈1228.1〉 Dry Heat Depyrogenation


=== PAGE 2 ===
variables are heating zone temperature, cooling zone temperature, belt speed, and container mass per unit.
DRY HEAT DEPYROGENATION FUNDAMENTALS
Dry heat depyrogenation uses air «rst to heat and then to cool the items. The limited heat capacity of dry air results in relatively slow
heating and cooling of the load items. Variability in temperature distribution in dry heat ovens and tunnels is typically much higher than that
observed in moist heat systems. The limited heat capacity of air requires that items in ovens be placed in the same locations as con«rmed
acceptable in the cycle development/validation effor t. Packing and thermal mass will also play critical roles in temperature management.
Caution must also be exercised with varying load mass and distribution as in some instances (resulting from oven design, air ¬ow
characteristics, and control probe position) minimum load sizes may result in process variability.
DEPYROGENATION PROCESS CONTROL
Process temperatures in dry heat depyrogenation are controlled by calibrated temperature sensors placed at speci«c locations within the
equipment. The exposure por tion of the process is designed to attain a minimum dwell time at a prede«ned minimum temperature ensuring
that depyrogenation conditions are adequately uniform. The de«ned dwell time is determined by using measurement devices (e.g.,
thermocouples) directly in contact with the items to be depyrogenated during development. The inactivation of bacterial endotoxins by dry
heat involves the control of only two parameters: time and temperature.
The simplicity of process control for these parameters provides a predictable depyrogenation effect. Once validated, a clear understanding
of the inputs to the system, meaning resident endotoxin load on incoming materials, and outputs of the system, meaning reduction of
resident levels of endotoxin to safe levels, is more meaningful than spiking with unnaturally high levels of challenge material and looking for
a prescriptive requirement for log reduction. The dosimetric measurement for dry heat depyrogenation processes is the F
 unit. An F
 = 1 is
de«ned as the depyrogenation effect achieved by 1 min of heating at 250°. The F
-value enables the integration of temperature over the
process duration (time). By convention, the rate at which depyrogenation destruction rate (D-value) varies as a function of temperature
change is de«ned as the z-value. The z-value for dry heat depyrogenation has been shown to be in the range of 45°–55°. For the purposes of
this chapter, 50° is used as a standard z-value. Other values may be used. (1,2)
The F
 approach is used as a means to compare dry heat depyrogenation effects produced by processes that operate at varying
temperatures. Basic mathematics can be used to calculate the depyrogenation effect produced at temperatures other than 250° to
determine equivalence to that provided at 250°.
Using a reference temperature of 250° and an assumed z-value of 50°, the F
 calculation can be determined:
F
 = accumulated destruction
t
 = process star t time
t
 = process end time
T = temperature at each time increment
Δ t = time interval between temperature measurements
Summing the instantaneous temperature contributions over the entire depyrogenation process allows for the calculation of the overall
process e­cacy or F
 delivered over the course of the process. Many commercial data loggers are equipped with software that enables
them to make this calculation and integrate the total F
 accumulated during a process. The F
 calculation is used during initial validation,
validation maintenance, and change control. The mathematical principles of the F
 calculation are essentially the same as those used to
calculate lethality (F
) values in moist heat sterilization. F
 values are used to con«rm process consistency over time as correlation to
endotoxin destruction is rarely possible.
VALIDATION
Because dry heat depyrogenation is appropriate only for heat stable materials, a high margin for safety is always attainable. Times and
temperatures used for the purpose of destroying challenge materials can result in extreme challenges to material integrity and stability.
Attention to depyrogenation processes, including an understanding of the resident endotoxin load on incoming materials and reduction to
levels needed to assure patient safety, should take place during drug product development, prior to validation.
Equipment Quali«cation
Equipment Quali«cation (EQ) is a prede«ned program that focuses on the processing equipment to con«rm that it has been properly
installed and operates as intended prior to evaluation of the process. In some companies, EQ may be separated into installation quali«cation
(IQ) and operational quali«cation (OQ), or combined together under a joint terminology of installation/operational quali«cation (I/OQ).
Equipment quali«cation provides a baseline for preventive maintenance and change control assuring reproducibility of equipment operation
over time.
D
D
D
D
D
D
1
2
D
D
D
D
0
D
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:38 PM
USP-NF 〈1228.1〉 Dry Heat Depyrogenation


=== PAGE 3 ===
Empty Chamber Temperature Distribution for Ovens
The oven should be evaluated for empty chamber temperature distribution. This is assessed by measurement of temperature at each
corner of oven, near the controlling probe(s) and other locations as justi«ed. Differences in the cycle dwell period can be discounted in this
evaluation, as only the shor test dwell period need be evaluated. The evaluation is best performed over the last few minutes of the dwell
period once the system has fully stabilized. The acceptance criteria for this test vary with the oven's design and operating conditions;
however, temperature distribution is typically substantially less uniform than observed in autoclaves and may be ±15° or more.
Depyrogenation ovens that are located at ¬oor level may have even greater ranges in temperature. The temperature distribution
measurement may be of value in the evaluation of changes to the oven.
Empty Temperature Distribution in Tunnels
While these studies are often done, they are actually of limited value. Unloaded depyrogenation tunnels will always produce far more
variability in temperature distribution than will a fully loaded tunnel. Therefore, for depyrogenation tunnels, temperature studies under fully
loaded conditions only are indicated. Impor tant to the proper operation of the dry heat tunnel is the establishment of the required air ¬ow
balance between the tunnel and the adjoining areas. Improper air ¬ow can cause uneven heating across the load being processed. The
temperature distribution measurement may be of value in the evaluation of changes to the tunnel.
Component Mapping
The ability of dry heat to penetrate load items and to bring them to the required temperature should be determined.
Load items that are complex, of signi«cant mass, with enclosed volumes and product contact surfaces that must be depyrogenated,
should be subjected to component mapping to determine internal cold spots. All load items should be prepared, wrapped (if that is the
practice), and oriented in a manner consistent with how they will be processed. Glass typically enters the depyrogenation process (whether
tunnel or oven) wet and must be evaluated wet to properly determine the effect on overall thermal input. Mapping of glass components to be
processed in tunnels is not necessary; all monitoring of temperature in tunnels is accomplished with probes in contact with the bottom of the
container.
Load Mapping in Ovens
Fixed loading patterns are necessary in oven depyrogenation because of the limited heat capacity of the air; fully packed conditions
because of their greater mass ordinarily result in the best process temperature uniformity. Load mapping assures that items placed
throughout the load attain the desired depyrogenation conditions. Identi«cation of cold zones within the oven should be established during
depyrogenation cycle development. Information from the load mapping is used to adjust cycle timing to assure appropriate e­cacy across
the entire load. It may be possible to validate maximum and minimum loads (as determined by either the number of items or their mass).
F
 is calculated from the temperature data at all monitored locations within the load pattern.
Load Mapping in Tunnels
Load mapping can be assessed using sets of calibrated sensors (i.e., trailing or wireless temperature sensors) positioned within the glass
pack as it moves through the tunnel. Temperature sensors should be placed into direct contact with the glass item at the bottom of the
container. Temperature measurements should be made on the leading edge, the middle (highest density), and the trailing edge of the glass
pack across the width of the conveyor belt. There should be NL
T 5 temperature sensors positioned across the belt in each section of the
load. F
 is calculated from the temperature data at all monitored locations. Studies should be performed using all container sizes to
determine the lowest F
 locations. The F
 results can be used to suppor t the selection of containers/conditions to be evaluated in the
con«rmation studies (see below). There is no requirement to perform temperature heat distribution measurements during these studies.
Con«rmation of Depyrogenation
The materials/glass components to be depyrogenated should be assessed for their incoming endotoxin content prior to the validation
study. This would include glass as received and immediately after washing. All tested materials should be handled and prepared using
de«ned procedures. Materials and glass prepared in the same manner are used in the depyrogenation validation studies. The addition of
challenge material to the load items, including a requirement to demonstrate a 3-log reduction, may not be required if time and temperature
studies consistently indicate that depyrogenation conditions are met. Temperature monitoring as described above must be done
simultaneously with the depyrogenation con«rmation studies. The con«rmation studies should be performed at reduced time-temperature
conditions from those utilized in routine processing and deliver lower F
 results when compared to those determined in the mapping studies
and are considered “worst case” con«rmation of depyrogenation process e­cacy. There is no requirement to perform temperature heat
distribution measurements during these studies.
ovens
A minimum of «ve (5) samples should be taken in proximity at NL
T 10 temperature-monitored locations (including those determined to be
the coldest from the oven load mapping study) in the oven and tested for endotoxin content post-processing. The process is considered
acceptable if the amount of endotoxin per sample is NMT 0.1 EU.
tunnels
A minimum of «ve (5) samples should be taken in proximity to each monitored position within the tunnel load (including those
determined to be the coldest from the tunnel load mapping study) and tested for endotoxin content post-processing. The process is
D
D
D
D
D
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:38 PM
USP-NF 〈1228.1〉 Dry Heat Depyrogenation


=== PAGE 4 ===
considered acceptable if the amount of endotoxin per sample is NMT 0.1 EU.
ROUTINE PROCESS CONTROL
As with all processes, after the dry heat depyrogenation process has been validated, it must be subject to ongoing controls that maintain it
within the validated state at all times. Temperature and exposure time, which are the impor tant dry heat depyrogenation parameters, can be
used to con«rm performance on a routine basis. Where direct assessment of F
 is not possible, assuring that the temperature and exposure
time conditions were met results in an equivalent con«dence that the depyrogenation system operated in a validated state of control.
Depyrogenation 〈1228〉 details the general practices that are appropriate for all depyrogenation systems. This is accomplished by a number
of related practices that are essential for the continued use of the process over an extended period of time. The essential practices to
maintain validated status include calibration, physical measurements, periodic endotoxin assessment on incoming materials, ongoing
process control, change control, preventive maintenance, and periodic reassessment and training.
APPENDIX
Additional Sources of Information
Tsuji K, Harrison S. Dry heat destruction of lipopolysaccharide: dry heat destruction kinetics. Appl Environ Microbio. 1978; 36(5):710–
714.
Ludwig J., Avis KE. Dry heat inactivation of endotoxin on the surface of glass. J Parenteral Sci Technol. 1990; 44(1):4–12.
Parenteral Drug Association (PDA), technical repor t 3, Validation of dry heat processes used for depyrogenation and sterilization.
2013.
REFERENCES
1. Tsuji K, Lewis A. Dry heat destruction of lipopolysaccharide: a mathematical approach to process evaluation. Appl Environ Microbio.
1978; 36(5):715–719.
2. Akers MJ, Ketron KM, Thompson, BR. F value requirements for the destruction of endotoxin in the validation of dry-heat
sterilization/depyrogenation cycles. J Parenteral Sci Technol. 1982; (36):12–6.
1
Not all tunnels have a variable speed capacity.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<1228.1> DRY HEAT DEPYROGENATION
Leslie Furr
Associate Scienti«c Liaison
GCM2022
General Chapters - Microbiology
2022
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. PF 40(3)
Current DocID: GUID-B1C4ACBB-A2C5-4298-AD66-23570AACBD27_2_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M8098_02_01
DOI ref: kwcjs
D
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:38 PM
USP-NF 〈1228.1〉 Dry Heat Depyrogenation
