Topic I:  Sterilizing Grade Gas or Vent Filter Integrity Testing 
Problem Statement
How often should sterilizing gas or vent filters be verified for integrity? 
Recommendation
Assurance of microbial retention throughout the critical filtration process should be confirmed by a 
post-filtration integrity test. 
As a general rule, a sterilizing gas filter (hydrophobic) should be integrity-tested prior to being placed 
into a critical application to ensure that it is capable of performing its stated function. For critical ster-
ile applications (product or critical surface-contact), the best practice is to test filters upon installation 
or in situ, and after use. For gas filters in extended-use applications, or in less stringent applications, 
some filter users have specified an integrity-test frequency based on factors such as historical process 
durability, time online, or number of sterilization cycles. No single approach applies to all applications, 
and an appropriate testing frequency and rationale should be selected using risk analysis considering 
the impact on product quality. 
A risk-based approach to integrity-testing should be used for sterilizing-grade filters in nonsterile ap-
plications. 
Rationale
The risk associated with some of these practices is that any product produced since the last success-
ful integrity test may not meet the expected microbial quality attributes if the filter fails to meet the 
required test criteria. This, in turn, will trigger the need for thorough investigation and may result in a 
loss of product. In these cases, more frequent testing may be more appropriate. 
References
1.	 European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, EudraLex – Volume 
4 – EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and 
Veterinary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2022. https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/
files/2022-08/20220825_gmp-an1_en_0.pdf (Accessed April 26, 2023). 
2.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 40: Sterilization Filtration of Gases; PDA, 
Bethesda, Md., 2005. www.pda.org/bookstore (Accessed November 19, 2014). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
113
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Topic J:  Pre-Use, Post-Sterilization Integrity Test of Sterilizing Filters 
Problem Statement
Should a pre-use, post-sterilization integrity test (PUPSIT) of sterilizing filters be performed? 
Recommendation
The current version (2022) of the EU Annex 1 requires the performance of a pre-use, post steriliza-
tion integrity test, where possible. Specifically, “the integrity of the sterilized filter assembly should be 
verified by integrity testing before use, to check for damage and loss of integrity caused by the filter 
preparation prior to use.” 
It is however recognized that “pre-use post sterilization integrity testing (PUPSIT) may not always be 
possible after sterilization due to process constraints (e.g., the filtration of very small volumes of solu-
tion). In these cases, an alternative approach may be taken providing that a thorough risk assessment 
has been performed and compliance is achieved by the implementation of appropriate controls to 
mitigate any risk of non-sterility.” (EU Annex 1)
The PUPSIT of liquid sterilizing-grade filters as a means to ensure a filter’s integrity throughout its use 
should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by a comprehensive risk assessment. 
It is essential that the PUPSIT process and assembly be designed so that it does not pose an unaccept-
able level of risk to sterile product. A risk assessment should be used to identify product quality risks 
and controls of the current process and, if required, to mitigate those risks. 
Where a risk assessment is used to determine product-quality risk associated with the filtration process 
and the use of the PUPSIT, the risk assessment should be executed by line and by product to include 
a side-by-side comparison of control measures that may include conducting versus not conducting 
the PUPSIT. The risk assessment should evaluate product and process characteristics and establish the 
most appropriate controls for the process. The risk assessment should be performed in an unbiased 
manner and must not have predetermined outcomes. 
The risk assessment should include risk-related elements, such as the following: 
•	
Effect of a filter failure, should one occur, including the potential introduction of nonsterile 
product into an aseptic area 
•	
Risk of contamination due to additional manipulations on presterilized filters (e.g., ready-to-use 
filters) 
•	
Ability to detect a potential breach 
•	
Likelihood of microbial ingress to the downstream side of the filter (when a PUPSIT is performed) 
•	
Potential for blocking the sterilizing filters due to the processing stream (particulate or bioburden) 
•	
Whether the existing production lines can be modified to add the ability to perform a PUPSIT and 
assess the potential risk to the product or sterile boundary by implementing such modifications 
•	
Whether there is a CCS in place for the steam-sterilization process (e.g., SIP) to prevent filter 
damage during SIP 
•	
Impact of wetting fluid on product dilution and product attributes 
•	
Impact of the additional time required on time-sensitive processes 
The interventions and manipulations associated with the assembly and performance of PUPSIT 
should be included in the APS program, including those performed in the Grade A environment and 
those performed outside of the Grade A area that are assessed to pose a risk to the aseptic process. 
NOTE: PUPSIT is not required for filtration of sterilized product-contact gases, as it is expected that a 
gas does not have the properties to mask any eventual damage in the filter membrane. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
114
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
Rationale
The prior recommendation by PDA for PUPSIT was with reference to a risk-based assessment and 
with due consideration of existing processes for which the introduction of PUPSIT may otherwise 
result in a higher risk profile by virtue of required manipulations. PDA recognizes that PUPSIT is an 
expectation of European Union and PIC/S regulators. Therefore, PDA is noting and recommending 
that PUPSIT be implemented in- line with evolving regulatory expectations and on the basis of a well-
designed implementation. 
If a well-designed PUPSIT procedure is assessed to show that the use of PUPSIT does not result in 
increased risk, then the risk of PUPSIT should not outweigh its benefit. Provisions can be made, how-
ever, for processes for which the undertaking of PUPSIT is not supported, for example, in the case 
of small volumes. These provisions include a comprehensive risk assessment for which an alternative 
to PUPSIT may be rationalized and for which the controls in place must be capable of detecting a 
nonintegral filter. 
Whereas a PUPSIT could provide added assurance of a filter’s integrity throughout processing and re-
duce the risk of product loss, the risk of implementation of such a test must be assessed for each process 
and manufacturing site. A PUPSIT procedure may result in a higher risk to product quality, especially 
where activities are performed in the Grade A area and may involve exposure of open connections. 
Integrity tests of filters after sterilization and pre-use, in many cases, may increase the actual risk of 
product contamination due to downstream manipulations and/or the addition of equipment into the 
downstream process. This contamination might not be detected afterward; therefore, it is important 
to perform or simulate these activities during the APS. 
A PUPSIT may provide the opportunity to detect nonintegral filters after sterilization and prior to use, 
thus preventing potential product loss (in case refiltration is not possible) and preventing the introduc-
tion of contamination into an aseptic area. 
The use of PUPSIT, in part, is based on concerns related to the potential masking of a nonintegral filter 
by product or product debris. Since the risk of masking depends on the characteristics of the product, 
these characteristics could provide valuable information to be used in support of the PUPSIT design.
References 
1.	 Bartel, K., et al. Pre-Use/Post-Sterilization Integrity Testing of Sterilizing Grade Filters. PDA J. 
Pharm. Sci. Tech. September/October 2012, 66(5), 394-395. 
2.	 European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, EudraLex – Vol-
ume 4 – EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and 
Veterinary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2022. https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/
files/2022-08/20220825_gmp-an1_en_0.pdf (Accessed April 26, 2023). 
3.	 Jornitz, M.W., and Meltzer, T.H. Pre-Use/Post-Sterilization Integrity Testing of Sterilizing Grade 
Filter: The Need for Risk Assessment. American Pharmaceutical Review. July 1, 2011, Vol. 14, 
Issue 5. http://www.americanpharmaceuticalreview.com/Featured-Articles/36745-Pre-use-post-
sterilization-Integrity-Testing-of-Sterilizing-Grade-Filter-The-Need-for-Risk-Assessment/ (Ac-
cessed April 26, 2023).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
115
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Topic K:  Integrity Testing of Sterilizing Filters 
Problem Statement
What is the maximum number of times that a post-use integrity test of a sterilizing filter should be 
performed in case of initial failure? 
Recommendation
The current recommendation in PDA Technical Report No. 26: Sterilizing Filtration of Liquids includes 
a detailed process including up to three tests at the filter-user site. After a filter has failed three times 
at the user site, submitting the filter to the filter manufacturer for further investigation and testing is 
recommended.
The integrity of the filter assembly and connections to the integrity tester should be checked prior to 
each integrity test. 
Rationale
After initial failure, the tests are performed in a progressive and corrective manner to determine wheth-
er the integrity test result is a false failure or true failure. Most filter failures are the result of improper 
wetting of the entire filter membrane matrix. This happens for a multitude of reasons, for example, 
product residues, temperature fluctuations, and pressure conditions during flushing. Rewetting and 
checking the filtration system for leaks can remedy the false failure. If the filter fails a second time, it 
commonly is recommended to flush a liquid filter with a lower surface-tension fluid like water or a 
solvent mixture to determine whether wetting problems are the issue. 
If the filter fails a third time at the filter-user site, submitting the filter to the filter manufacturer for 
thorough investigations is advisable as they have the expertise, tools, and means to provide supporting 
information for the investigation to determine whether the filter-integrity test failure is a true failure 
and why the failure may have happened. It is important to determine the root cause of the filter failure 
to avoid future filter failure or filter damage. 
References
1.	 European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, EudraLex – Vol-
ume 4 – EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and 
Veterinary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2022. https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/
files/2022-08/20220825_gmp-an1_en_0.pdf (Accessed April 26, 2023). 
2.	 Jornitz, M.W., and Meltzer, T.H. Sterile Double Filtration. Pharm. Tech. 1998, 22(10). 
3.	 Jornitz, M.W., and Meltzer, T.H. Addressing Uncertainties in Sterile Filtrations: Substituting 
Double Filters and 0.1 μm for 0.2 μm Filters. Pharm. Tech. Europe 2000, 12(2), 22-24. 
4.	 Jornitz, M.W., and Meltzer, T.H. Sterile Filtration – A Practical Approach, Marcel Dekker, Inc., 
NY: 2001. 
5.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 26: Sterilizing Filtration of Liquids. PDA, 
Bethesda, Md., 2008. www.pda.org/bookstore (Accessed April 19, 2015).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
116
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
Topic L:  Use of Two Sterilizing-Grade Filters for Product Sterile Filtration 
Problem Statement
Should redundant (in-series) sterilizing filters be used and, if so, where should the filters be located? 
Recommendation
The use of redundant, or two sterilizing-grade filters in series should not be required. A company may 
make a risk-based decision to include a second sterilizing filter in a series. 
The use of filters in parallel is not redundant filtration and may be qualified to be used in specific 
circumstances. 
The final sterilizing filter should be physically located to minimize the number of aseptic connections 
that occur after filtration of the product. 
The final sterilizing filter should be positioned as close to the point of fill as possible, provided the po-
sitioning of that filter does not adversely affect the performance of aseptic processing activities or pose 
an increased risk of contamination to the sterile product. 
Where redundant filters are used and PUPSIT is performed, considerations should be used to perform 
PUPSIT on the filter considered to be the product sterilizing filter.
Rationale
A single set of sterilizing-grade filters that are appropriately selected, sized, validated, and operated 
within the validated parameters should be adequate to sterilize products with proper bioburden con-
trol. Therefore, a redundant filter system should not be needed to further reduce the risk of inadequate 
sterilization and may add unnecessary interventions. 
When product loss due to possible post-use filter-integrity failure is an unacceptable risk, redundant 
filtration could be considered as a business decision. In that situation, both filters should be located as 
close as possible to the filling operation. At least one of the two filters must demonstrate integrity for 
the sterilization to be considered successful. However, it must be clear in the appropriate documenta-
tion (e.g., CCS, chemistry, manufacturing, and controls section, or master validation plan) how such 
a process is to be managed. 
In situations where parallel filtration is required (e.g., increasing filtration surface area without increas-
ing filter length), use of two or more smaller filters in parallel could be considered. However, this is not 
redundant filtration, and all filters must meet all requirements, including the integrity requirement. 
References
1.	 European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, EudraLex – Vol-
ume 4 – EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and 
Veterinary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2022. https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/
files/2022-08/20220825_gmp-an1_en_0.pdf (Accessed April 26, 2023). 
2.	 Folmsbee, M., and Moussourakis, M. Sterilizing Filtration of Liposome and Related Lipid-Con-
taining Solutions: Enhancing Successful Filter Qualification. PDA J. Pharm. Sci. Tech. March/
April 2012, 66(2), 161-167. 
3.	 Madsen, R., and Meltzer, T. Critical Influences of Particles, Pores, and Prefilters in Sterilizing 
Filtration. PDA J. Pharm. Sci. Tech. May/June 2009, 63(3), 240-244. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
117
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
VII.  Critical Utilities 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
118
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
Topic A:  Methods of Production Requirements for Water for Injection
Problem Statement
What methods of production for WFI should be employed? 
Recommendation
WFI must meet pharmacopeial requirements for purity. Any method that has been validated to reliably 
yield and maintain water in compliance with the relevant pharmacopeial standard may be employed. 
Distillation is a method referred to by European regulatory agencies; alternative methods, such as 
reverse osmosis in combination with other purification methods, are appropriate if the quality of WFI 
is shown to be equivalent. 
Proper design, control, and monitoring should be implemented and should include both the produc-
tion and distribution systems to ensure continuous assurance of the quality of the output and preven-
tion of distribution system biofilm. 
Levels of control and monitoring should be based on a risk assessment of the specific WFI production 
process and equipment capabilities. 
Rationale
Flexibility in selection of technologies that can provide the required quality of water will permit the 
adoption of the best methodologies as more advanced systems become available. 
References
1.	 European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, EudraLex – Vol-
ume 4 – EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and 
Veterinary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2022. https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/
files/2022-08/20220825_gmp-an1_en_0.pdf (Accessed April 26, 2023). 
2.	 United States Pharmacopeia. General Chapter <61> Microbiological Examination of Nonsterile 
Products: Microbial Enumerations Tests. In USP 43-NF 38. USP, Rockville, Md., 2014. www.
usp.org (Accessed June 27, 2023).
3.	 United States Pharmacopeia. General Chapter <71> Sterility Test. In USP 43-NF 38; USP, 
Rockville, Md., 2014. www.usp.org. (Accessed June 27, 2023).
4.	 United States Pharmacopeia. General Chapter <1231> Water for Pharmaceutical Purposes. In 
USP 43-NF 38. USP, Rockville, Md., 2021. www.usp.org (Accessed June 27, 2023).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
119
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Topic B:  Requirements for Water for Injection
Problem Statement
What are the requirements for preventing microbial contamination of WFI? 
Recommendation
Production of WFI should be via distillation or other equally effective, qualified technology or com-
binations of qualified technologies. Maintenance of WFI quality may be achieved via a continuously 
recirculating system that operates at an elevated temperature. Hot recirculating systems operating at 
lower temperatures, or even ambient or cold loops, are acceptable but should have a method to ensure 
that the bioburden of the WFI remains under control. This may also be achieved through periodic 
sanitization (e.g., through hot water recirculation or periodic steaming of empty loop and vessel) dur-
ing periods of non-use. WFI systems should be tested according to the requirements of the applicable 
pharmacopeia to demonstrate control. 
Dead legs in the design and installation of the WFI distribution system and points of connection 
should be avoided. Special consideration should be given, and steps taken, to prevent microbiological 
contamination and biofilm formation, where user-point connections result in spaces where standing 
water and/or moisture can accumulate. 
Rationale
Contact of WFI at elevated temperatures (e.g., >70 °C) should be sufficient to maintain the WFI 
distribution system in a quality state. However, a well-designed system can be validated to maintain 
acceptable quality at lower temperatures. A system designed to operate at ambient temperatures (e.g., 
<70 °C) requires periodic sanitization with hot water or steam. Steam should not be used when water 
systems are not designed to vent steam. Systems that are able to be pressurized and are properly de-
signed may use steam. 
References
1.	 European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, EudraLex – Vol-
ume 4 – EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and 
Veterinary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2022. https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/
files/2022-08/20220825_gmp-an1_en_0.pdf (Accessed April 26, 2023). 
2.	 International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. Baseline Guide Vol 4: Water & Steam Systems, 
3rd Edition. ISPE, Bethesda, Md., 2019. https://ispe.org/publications/guidance-documents/
baseline-guide-vol-4-water-steam-systems-3rd-edition (Accessed April 26, 2023). 
3.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 69: Bioburden and Biofilm Management in 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Operations. PDA, Bethesda, Md., 2015. www.pda.org/bookstore 
(Accessed April 26, 2023). 
4.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. High Purity Water System (7/93): Guide to Inspections 
of High Purity Water Systems. U.S. Health and Human Services Administration, 2016. https://
www.fda.gov/inspections-compliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/inspection-
guides/high-purity-water-system-793 (Accessed April 26, 2023).
5.	 United States Pharmacopeia. General Chapter <1231> Water for Pharmaceutical Purposes In 
USP 43-NF 38. Rockville, Md., 2021. www.usp.org (Accessed June 27, 2023).
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
120
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
•	 Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
•	 Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
•	 Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an 
Authorized User 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
•	 Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other 
than an Authorized User 
•	 Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available 
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
•	 Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic 
Publication 
•	 Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA 
Electronic Publication 
•	 Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication 
or its content 
•	 Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or 
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose 
•	 Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any 
text or graphics 
•	 Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information 
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication 
•	 Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material 
To License or purchase Reprints
•	 Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a fee.  
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact: 
Tehya Enger, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Tehya Enger, 4350 East West Highway, 
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
•	 Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.  
To order reprints, please contact:  
Tehya Enger, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Tehya Enger, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150, 
Bethesda, MD 20814.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside 
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are 
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. 
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the 
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a 
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s 
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Biotechnology Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality 
Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and deter-
mines whether to publish or not publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged 
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be 
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org. 
PDA Officers and Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Susan Schniepp, Regulatory Compliance 
Associates
Chair-Elect: Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck, 
Sharp & Dohme
Secretary: Emma Ramnarine, Roche Pharma
Treasurer: Melissa Seymour, Biogen
Im. Past Chair: Jette Christensen, Novo Nordisk A/S
President: Glenn Wright
Directors 
Bettine Boltres, PhD, West Pharmaceutical Services
Christiana Campa, PhD, GSK
Javier Camposano, Celltrion
Mirko Gabriele, PhD, Thermo Fisher Scientific
Marc Gloglovsky, ValSource Inc. 
Andrew Hopkins, Abbvie
Stephan O. Krause, PhD, AstraZeneca Diagnostics
Ivy Louis, VIENNI Taining & Consulting LLP
Amy McDaniel, BMS
Cylia Chen Ooi, Amgen 
Mathias Romacker, (Retired)
Osamu Shirokizawa, Life Scientia
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Jessie Lindner, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Josh Eaton, Senior Director, Scientific & Regulatory 
Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing and Press 
Relations
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer
Sanctioning Advisory Board: SAB
Gabriele Gori, Biogen International GMBH (Chair)
Ivy Louis, Vienni Training & Consulting, LLP  
(Vice-Chair)
Greg Bassett, Amgen (Immediate Past Chair)
Fred Ayers, Eli Lilly and Company
Marcia Baroni, Emergent BioSolutions Inc.
Rebecca Brewer, Quality Executive Partners
Emily Cheah, PhD, Charles River Laboratories 
Tom Damratoski, CivicaRx
David Exline, Gateway Analytical, LLC.
Rhonda Ezell, Alkermes
Mauro Giusti, Eli Lilly Italia
Ken-ichi Izutsu, National Institute of Health Sciences, 
Japan
Austin Kuo, Eli Lilly and Company
Gitte Letting, Novo Nordisk A/S
Bruce Loxley, GSK
Martine Nolan, Kiadis Pharma Netherlands B.V.
Vincent O’Shaughnessy, Amgen
Ken Paddock, Baxter 
Jim Polarine, STERIS Corporation
Matthew Schmidt, Merck & Co., Inc.
Alexander Stoll, PhD, Fresenius-Kabi
Luca Tamarindo, Akka
Kristin Valente, Merck & Co., Inc.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
