© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Introduction
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023) offers PDA’s thoughts and does not represent 
a standard or regulatory guidance. 
PDA first issued Points to Consider for Aseptic Processing in 2003. To address the impact of the knowledge 
gained in the intervening years, PDA assembled a task force of subject-matter experts from industry to 
revise this report. Published in 2015 and 2016, Points to Consider for Aseptic Processing parts 1 and 2 
provided positions on current topics, best practices, and areas of clarification important to the manufac-
ture of quality sterile products. 
NOTE: The topics discussed in the 2015 and 2016 Points to Consider documents are superseded by this 
revision. 
With technology and regulatory advancements, specifically the issuance of the revised European GMP 
Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products (EU Annex 1)1 in August 2022, another update of 
this document was undertaken. This revision reflects current industry best practices and scientific posi-
tions as well as regulatory expectations. Where there may be a divergence between recommendations 
in this Points to Consider document and a regulatory position, that divergence is noted. 
Many of the topics included in the 2015 Points to Consider resulted from discussion and input from 
PDA members at conferences and meetings. These topics were reviewed considering the advancements 
made in the past decade and, where applicable, this report has been revised based on similar inputs. 
While the current revision maintains the original organization of topics into categories, topics that had 
been discussed separately in Parts 1 and 2 have been combined into a single document. Each topic 
discussion begins with a problem statement in the form of a question about issues or points needing 
clarification on that specific topic. Recommendations from the PDA task force are then presented as 
an answer to the question. The rationale and references for each recommendation follow. 
This document provides points to consider on topics related to the physical environment in which aseptic 
processing is conducted, monitoring of that environment, cleanroom personnel, material transfer, aseptic-
process simulation and validation, “modern” blow-fill-seal technology, cleaning, disinfection and sterilization, 
and critical utilities. It also includes points to consider on aspects of filter-integrity testing and water-for-injec-
tion (WFI) preparation. For additional information on specific topics, other PDA points to consider, techni-
cal reports, or similar documents are referenced. The recommendations presented in this Points to Consider 
document are based on five guiding and linked principles for improvement in sterile health care products: 
1	 The PIC/S GMP Annex 1 is identical to the EU Annex 1 and, hereafter, EU Annex 1 means EU-PIC/S Annex 1.
1.	 Scientifically sound, risk-based approaches should be used to obtain information needed to make 
decisions related to the evaluation, design, qualification, operation, and monitoring of sterile-prod-
uct manufacturing processes. Risk- and science-based approaches should be used as well to develop 
and implement control strategies and acceptance criteria designed to ensure the establishment and 
maintenance of manufacturing conditions that affect the sterility of products. Sterile drug-product 
manufacturing processes and testing requirements should have a basis in and relevance to risks to 
product quality and patient safety. Similar principles and considerations may also apply to non-
sterile drug products. Risk management and assessment methods should be developed not only to 
identify risks, but also to allow the improvement of processes and control strategies. 
2.	 Where feasible, the use of newer technologies should be considered to mitigate or reduce risks to 
product quality identified in manufacturing processes and operations. Companies involved in the 
manufacture of sterile drug products should be encouraged to identify and consider the use of 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
modern technologies, and regulatory guidance should enable this by presenting expectations that 
encourage the use of these technologies. Technologies and facility, equipment, and process designs 
that protect products and product-contact surfaces from personnel and environmental contact 
and that provide more reliable and useful information are particularly beneficial to reducing the 
risk of microbiological contamination during aseptic processing. 
3.	 The effectiveness of certain traditional testing and monitoring methods used as control strategies should 
be reevaluated. As technology has been introduced and knowledge has been acquired, the usefulness and 
value of testing procedures have changed. Testing and monitoring should be designed and performed, 
and the results should be evaluated, based on scientific value, risk to product quality, patient safety, and 
usefulness in determining process control. Where testing and monitoring approaches and methods no 
longer meet current needs or are not optimal, their replacement or modification should be considered. 
The use of outdated testing and monitoring methods has the potential to increase risk, provide a false 
sense of control, prove ineffective, and deploy resources in a manner that may not be efficient or optimal, 
thus detracting from the development and use of more effective testing and monitoring approaches. 
4.	 New product/container presentations, therapies, and technologies present challenges to existing 
methods for the development, manufacture, validation, and testing of sterile products. To meet 
these challenges, an emphasis on thorough technical and process understanding, science, and risk 
will become important in designing effective means to ensure product quality. Companies should 
be encouraged to seek out the most effective means rather than try to fit traditional methods to 
these new products, technologies, and therapies. 
5.	 When scientific approaches are similar and agreed upon, global health authority requirements 
and guidance should be consistent in technical language and definition. Harmonized technical 
and regulatory language, where possible, should be consistent with approaches presented in other 
similar guidance documents. This practice should promote clarity of global regulatory expecta-
tions and reduce the risk of misunderstanding and redundant efforts. 
Glossary
Definitions have been provided to help clarify the concepts discussed in this document. While some of 
the definitions vary among companies, the definitions described below are consistent for use within this 
Points to Consider document. Where a definition is based on another published source, the source is cited. 
Aborted Run
Aseptic process simulation run that begins and is then stopped and not filled to completion.
Action Limit 
An established relevant measure (e.g., microbial, or airborne particle limits) that, when exceeded, 
should trigger appropriate investigation and corrective action based on the investigation (1).
NOTE: In a prior version of this document, this term was called “Action Level.” 
Advanced Aseptic Processing Personnel Qualification 
A defined and documented procedure for determining the criteria by which personnel are permit-
ted to enter and perform higher-risk and complex activities, under less supervision, in the aseptic 
processing area during commercial operations. (See Section IV, Topic B.)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
3
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Air Shroud 
A physical enclosure for a blow-fill-seal (BFS) machine that contains or surrounds the filling zone. 
It is typically supplied by sterile filtered or Grade A quality air. The air shroud should be sterilized or 
decontaminated to maintain Grade A conditions. 
Air Visualization Studies/Airflow Visualization Studies
Tests using a visible medium (e.g., smoke or vaporized liquid nitrogen) simulating the properties 
of air flow, designed to indicate the direction and disruption of air flow. Sometimes referred to as 
‘smoke studies’.
Aseptic Preparation/Processing 
The handling of sterile product, containers and/or devices in a controlled environment in which 
the air supply, materials and personnel are regulated to prevent microbial, endotoxin/pyrogen and 
particle contamination (1).
Aseptic Process Simulation (APS) 
A means for establishing the capability of an aseptic process as performed using a growth medium.
At-Rest 
The condition whereby the installation of all the utilities is complete including any functioning 
HVAC, with the main manufacturing equipment installed as specified but not operating and with-
out personnel present in the room (1). 
Blow-Fill-Seal (BFS) Process
The BFS machine, including the parison extrusion, parison transport (if applicable), container filling 
and final sealing operations. 
NOTE: Some companies refer to this process as “Form-Fill-Seal” (FFS). However, EU Annex 1 defines 
Form-Fill-Seal as “An automated filling process, typically used for terminally sterilised products, 
which constructs the primary container out of a continuous flat roll of packaging film while simul-
taneously filling the formed container with product and sealing the filled containers in a continuous 
process” (1).
Corrective and Preventive Actions (CAPA)
Actions to eliminate the cause of a detected nonconformity or other undesirable situation. 
NOTE: Corrective actions are taken to prevent recurrence, whereas preventive actions are taken to 
prevent occurrence.
Cleaning Agents 
The solution or solvent used in the washing step of a cleaning process. Examples of cleaning agents 
are water, organic solvent, commodity chemical diluted in water, and formulated detergent diluted 
in water.
Closed Parison (Rotary or Reciprocating Machines) 
BFS machines that use a fill system enclosed in the continuous parison. Containers are closed in such 
a way as to not expose the parison interior or fill zone to the environment. 
Contamination Control Strategy (CCS)
A planned set of controls for microorganisms, endotoxin/pyrogen and particles, derived from 
current product and process understanding that assures process performance and product qual-
ity. The controls can include parameters and attributes related to active substance, excipient and 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
drug product materials and components, facility and equipment operating conditions, in-process 
controls, finished product specifications, and the associated methods and frequency of monitoring 
and control (1).
Critical Surface
A surface within a critical zone that may come in direct contact with sterilized products, containers, or closures.
Critical Zone
A location within the aseptic processing area in which product and critical surfaces are exposed to the 
environment (1). 
NOTE: This term was previously referred to as “Critical Area.” 
Disinfectant 
A chemical or physical agent that reduces, destroys, or eliminates vegetative forms of harmful micro-
organisms, but not spores. 
Disqualification of Aseptic Processing Personnel
A defined and documented procedure for determining the criteria by which previously qualified 
aseptic processing personnel are no longer permitted to enter and perform higher-risk and complex 
activities in the aseptic processing area during commercial operations. (See Section IV, Topic B: 
Aseptic Personnel Qualification Program.)
Environmental Monitoring (EM)
Describes the processes and activities that need to take place to characterize and monitor the quality 
of the environment. 
First Air
Refers to filtered air that has not been interrupted prior to contacting exposed product and product 
contact surfaces with the potential to add contamination to the air prior to reaching the critical zone 
(1).
Grade A Air Supply
Air which is passed through a filter qualified as capable of producing grade A total particle quality 
air, but where there is no requirement to perform continuous total particle monitoring or meet grade 
A viable monitoring limits. Specifically used for the protection of fully stoppered vials where the cap 
has not yet been crimped (1).
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP)
Best practices in manufacturing of pharmaceuticals or biopharmaceuticals. From a regulatory stand-
point, GMPs are regarded as the minimum current good manufacturing practice for methods to be 
used in, and the facilities or controls to be used for, the manufacture, processing, packaging, or hold-
ing of a drug to assure that such drug meets the requirements of safety, identity, and strength and 
meets the quality and purity characteristics that it purports or is represented to possess. 
High-Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) Filter
High efficiency particulate air filter with minimum 0.3 µm particle retaining efficiency of 99.97 percent (3).
In-Operations
Condition where the installation of the cleanroom is complete, the HVAC system fully operational, 
equipment installed and functioning in the manufacturer’s defined operating mode with the maxi-
mum number of personnel present performing or simulating routine operational work (1). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Invalid Run 
Aseptic processing simulation run that was filled to completion and then invalidated.
Isolator 
A contained, decontaminated environment meeting Grade A/ISO 5 conditions used for aseptic pro-
cess manufacturing that provides an uncompromised, continuous isolation of its interior from the 
external environment. Once decontaminated by a validated cycle, an isolator prevents the microbio-
logical contamination of sterile products and product contact surfaces of the interior by enclosures 
and the supply of continuous, controlled overpressure of HEPA-filtered air. (2)
Closed isolator systems exclude external contamination from the isolator’s interior by accom-
plishing material transfer via aseptic connection to auxiliary equipment, rather than using open-
ings to the surrounding environment. Closed systems remain sealed throughout operations (1).
Open isolator systems are designed to allow for the continuous or semi-continuous ingress and/
or egress of materials during operations through one or more openings. Openings are engineered (e.g., 
using continuous overpressure) to exclude the entry of external contamination into the isolator. (1)
Initial Aseptic Processing Personnel Qualification 
A defined and documented procedure for determining the criteria by which personnel are permit-
ted to enter and perform certain low-risk and less complex activities, under direct supervision, in the 
aseptic processing area during commercial operations. (See Section IV, Topic B.)
Ongoing Aseptic Processing Personnel Assessment
A defined and documented procedure for determining the criteria by which the performance of 
personnel, deemed as qualified to enter and perform activities in the aseptic processing area during 
commercial operations, is assessed on a prescribed, periodic basis. (See Section IV, Topic B.)
Open Parison (Shuttle Machines) 
Blow-fill-seal machines where the parison is cut from the extruder and the open parison is contained 
in the mold during transport to the critical fill zone. 
Requalification of Aseptic Processing Personnel following Disqualification
A defined and documented procedure for determining the criteria by which previously disqualified 
aseptic processing personnel are again permitted to enter and perform activities in the aseptic pro-
cessing area during commercial operations. (See Section IV, Topic B.)
Restricted Access Barrier System (RABS) 
An area that includes one or more critical work areas that is fully or partially enclosed with ridged 
or semi-rigid walls, which restricts the access of aseptic processing personnel, via fixed gloves, to the 
critical work area during aseptic operations. 
Sanitizers 
A compound that will reduce the number of vegetative microorganisms to a safe level as determined 
by public health requirements. Normally, a reduction of 103 in vegetative microorganisms is obtained.
Total Particulate 
Refers to what is often termed “nonviable particles,” which, in fact, are measures of both viable and 
nonviable particulates. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
References
1.	 European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, EudraLex – Vol-
ume 4 – EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and 
Veterinary Use; European Commission: Brussels, 2022. https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/
files/2022-08/20220825_gmp-an1_en_0.pdf (Accessed August 28, 2023).
2.	 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceu-
tical Products in Isolators; PDA, Bethesda, Md., 2020. 
3.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by 
Aseptic Processing—Current Good Manufacturing Practice; U.S. Department of Health and Hu-
man Services: Rockville, Md., 2004. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplian-
ceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM070342.pdf (Accessed April 26, 2023).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
7
Points to Consider No. 1: Aseptic Processing (Revised 2023)
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
