=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 13-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-Dec-2016
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-8736649A-88BB-436E-912D-AAEBED7516E9_1_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M8101_01_01
DOI Ref:
5jpo5
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈1228.3〉 DEPYROGENATION BY FIL
TRATION
1. INTRODUCTION
2. TECHNOLOGIES USED FOR DEPYROGENATION BY FILTRATION
2.1 Microporous Membrane Filtration
2.2 Reverse Osmosis
2.3 Ultrafiltration
2.4 Charge-Modified Depth Filters
2.5 Activated Carbon Depth Filters
2.6 Membrane Adsorbers
3. VALIDATION
1. INTRODUCTION
Depyrogenation by «ltration involves the physical removal of endotoxins from pharmaceutical solutions by adsorption and size exclusion.
Endotoxins are responsible for making up the majority of pyrogens, which must be removed from pharmaceutical products including
injectable biologics. There are many factors to be considered when designing a depyrogenation «ltration process for solutions containing
proteins and peptides: type of target protein and its concentration, electrolyte concentration, pH and buffer system, protein molecular weight
and isoelectric point (pI), «ltration parameters (e.g., ¬ow rate), and interactions with other components causing aggregation. In general, a
combination of these factors determines the most effective depyrogenation method.
Depyrogenation of liquids may be accomplished by means of «ltration through various types of «lter media including microporous
membranes, reverse osmosis (RO) membranes, ultra«lters, charge-modi«ed depth «lters, activated carbon, and membrane absorbers.
Depyrogenation «ltration processes are not intended to remove microorganisms from a process stream; however, by their nature, «lters
selected for use in depyrogenation processes may also be capable of retaining many types of microorganisms.
2. TECHNOLOGIES USED FOR DEPYROGENATION BY FIL
TRATION
2.1 Microporous Membrane Filtration
Microporous membranes (typically with pore size or retention ratings between 1.0 and 0.1 µm) can be very effective in removing intact
bacteria via size exclusion and adsorption within ¬ow pathways. The use of microporous membranes on a freshly prepared solution to be
«ltered can effectively prevent bacterial proliferation in the solution, along with any potential subsequent endotoxin formation. Endotoxin,
however, is composed of fragments of bacterial cell wall, often <0.025 µm (1) that may easily penetrate most bacteria-retentive membrane
«lters. These negatively charged par ticles with endotoxin activity can be removed via adsorption by positively charged membranes (2).
Adsorption of endotoxin has also been shown by hydrophobic membranes, where it is thought that a hydrophobic interaction occurs between
the Lipid A core and hydrophobic sites on the membrane ¬ow path surfaces (3). Reduction or removal of endotoxin activity by adsorption to
microporous membranes can be dependent on ¬ow rate, pH, concentration, and ¬uid and membrane surface proper ties. Once the effective
binding capacity of the membrane approaches saturation under applied conditions, remaining endotoxin will pass through the membrane.
2.2 Reverse Osmosis
RO membranes are the tightest membranes in size separation. They can separate dissolved salts and sugars from water. Pyrogens, and
essentially everything else, are removed from water via size exclusion. RO systems are operated most e­ciently at high pressure (200–1000
psi) to overcome osmotic pressure. RO membrane rating or tightness is measured and expressed with retention or rejection of marker salts
such as sodium chloride or magnesium sulfate.
RO membranes may be composites (thin «lm coated on top of ultra«ltration membranes) or cast as a single layer (cellulose acetate type).
Con«guration of RO membrane modules can be ¬at sheet, tubular, or hollow «ber. All commercially available RO membranes are polymeric,
and most are of a spiral-wound, ¬at-sheet format.
RO systems are not intended to remove all bacteria, and because they are run at ambient temperatures, microbiological contamination is a
concern. Ultraviolet (UV) light may be used in the system downstream from the RO units to control microbiological contamination.
OFFICIAL
2/13/25, 9:37 PM
USP-NF 〈1228.3〉 Depyrogenation by Filtration


=== PAGE 2 ===
2.3 Ultra«ltration
Ultra«ltration (UF) is a process whereby a ¬uid is passed through membranes with pore sizes nominally between about 1 and 100 nm
under pressure. The «lters are usually not rated by the pore size but by the molecular weight cut-off (MWCO). The methods to determine the
MWCO vary by the manufacturer and usually involve measuring passage of molecules of a cer tain size, such as a solution of mixed dextrans,
polyethylene glycol, or proteins to assign a numerical rating (4).
UF membranes are usually polymeric porous structures, manufactured from a range of materials, most commonly regenerated cellulose or
polyether sulfone, but also ceramics. UF membranes may be produced as ¬at sheet, hollow «bers, or ceramic tubes.
UF is generally operated in tangential/cross ¬ow mode, which separates the star ting (feed) solution into two components: permeate (the
por tion of solution going through the membrane) and retentate (the concentrated solution that is passed over the membrane). UF
membranes need to be encased in a suitable integral device to enable practical operation. Heat sealing, over-molding, and resin-potting are
all used to assemble membrane devices and ensure integral ¬ow paths. Ceramic tubes are sealed by gaskets within tubular cylinders.
It is generally assumed that the basic subunit of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is about 10–20 kDa (5). Membranes of 6–10 kDa cut-off are
often used for depyrogenation by size exclusion. However, monomeric LPSs are rarely found in solution because of their poor solubility in
water. LPS is usually present in aggregated forms, such as vesicles ranging in molecular weight from 300 to 1000 kDa. Thus, endotoxin can
be successfully removed by higher ¬ux membranes, with MWCOs of 30–100 kDa (6).
Adsorption, in addition to size exclusion, also can be a mechanism of endotoxin removal by UF
. Several hollow-«ber membrane materials
have been evaluated, and the best removal was obtained with more hydrophobic membranes. Endotoxin removal was correlated to the
degree of endotoxin adsorption on the membranes in an equilibrium experiment (7).
UF has been used successfully to depyrogenate small molecule drugs, buffers, electrolytes, antibiotics, and antifungal agents (8). UF is
generally not recommended for endotoxin removal from solutions containing larger molecules such as proteins.
2.4 Charge-Modi«ed Depth Filters
Depth «lters exhibit two primary clari«cation mechanisms because of their structural and chemical composition: size exclusion, either
through sieving or entrapment; and adsorption, either through electrokinetic (positive zeta potential) or hydrophobic interactions.
Size exclusion of par ticles is a function of the tor tuous ¬ow path through the media as well as the depth or length of the ¬ow path in
relation to the size distribution of the contaminate loading, e.g., cellular debris, including LPS from cell walls and hard par ticles. Depth
«ltration e­ciency depends on many factors, including the «lter media characteristics, materials of construction (e.g., cellulose, «lter aids,
binding resins), the ¬uid characteristics (e.g., viscosity, dir t load, cell debris, temperature), as well as the par ticle characteristics (e.g.,
solid/hard, pleomorphic, proteinaceous, colloidal). Electrokinetic adsorption is attributed to the resin binders and «lter aids that impar t a net-
positive charge, positive zeta potential, to the «lter medium. Adsorption is a complex mechanism that will vary based on a combination of
parameters including positive zeta potential, hydrophobic adsorption, par ticle surface charge, pH, and ionic strength of process ¬uids. This
positive zeta potential can remove negatively charged par ticles smaller than the nominal rating of the depth «lter medium. The adsorptive
mechanism results in high removal e­ciencies for «ne par ticles, colloidal and cellular materials, e.g., bacterial endotoxins, nucleic acids, and
removal of negatively charged trace contaminants, whereas the depth medium porosity in¬uences operating parameters such as pressure
differentials, ¬ow rates, dir t load capacity, and throughput.
Most cellulose-based depth «lters contain a «lter aid to enhance par ticle retention and ¬ow characteristics. Filter aids are available in
various par ticle sizes and levels of purity. Common «lter aids include diatomaceous ear th, perlite (volcanic origin), carbon (natural sources),
and silica- and/or metallic-based materials.
The car tridges and capsule con«gurations are constructed of primarily polypropylene and other common elastomers and polymers, e.g.,
nylon, polycarbonate, polysulfone. Depth «lters are available in standard «lter car tridge/capsule con«gurations; lab-scale discs (47 mm/90
mm), ¬at stock sheets, lenticular car tridges (stacked discs), and capsules.
In general, the charge-modi«ed depth «lters showed lower endotoxin breakthrough levels at charge exhaustion as compared to charge-
modi«ed membrane «lters.
Membranes demonstrated total endotoxin breakthrough once the charge capacity of the membrane is saturated. Generally, charge-
modi«ed depth «lter media demonstrate lower endotoxin unit (EU) levels that increase slowly at the point of «rst endotoxin detection as
compared to membranes that exhibit complete breakthrough.
Bene«ts of charge-modi«ed depth «lters include removal of bacterial endotoxin [4–5 log reduction value (LRV)] (9–11), DNA fragments,
host cell protein, reduction of viruses, and economical throughput with low extractable levels. System ¬ow rate determinations are necessary
to optimize residence time to maximize adsorptive capture. This parameter is especially impor tant for the removal of colloids and
endotoxins.
Cellulosic depth «lters commonly contain extractable Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL)-reactive materials that are often determined to be
β-1,3-glucans. β-1,3-Glucans activate an alternative LAL pathway, Factor G. The activation of Factor G by β-1,3-glucans will induce the
proclotting enzyme, causing a non-endotoxin-positive LAL result (or enhanced result). To reduce the risk of β-1,3-glucan extractables from
cellulosic depth «lters, it is impor tant to follow the recommended rinse conditions of the speci«c depth «lter. An alternative to reduce the
effects of β-1,3-glucans is to select LAL reagents tolerant of β-glucans or to add a β-glucan blocking buffer to LAL samples.
To some users, the most impor tant attribute of charge-modi«ed depth «lters is their effectiveness as pre«lters. In more di­cult «ltrations,
such as those containing colloids, bacteria, or endotoxins, the user can realize substantial cost savings.
OFFICIAL
2/13/25, 9:37 PM
USP-NF 〈1228.3〉 Depyrogenation by Filtration


=== PAGE 3 ===
2.5 Activated Carbon Depth Filters
Depth «ltration, using activated carbon as a «lter aid adsorbent, removes color, odor, and bacterial endotoxins and nucleic acids. Activated
carbon is derived from organic materials, e.g., peat, wood, coconut, bone, lignite coal. The microstructure of the carbon contains millions of
pores that create a highly adsorptive material with a vast internal effective surface area as compared to polymeric microporous structures.
These carbon «lter aids are typically activated by steam or chemical treatment such as acid. Although highly effective in reducing endotoxin
(4–5 log reduction) and other undesirable contaminants, active carbon may, because of this highly adsorptive characteristic, remove other
process components and target molecules due to this nonspeci«c adsorption proper ty. The high loading capacity and strong adsorptive
attributes make activated carbon depth «ltration an attractive alternative to conventional «ltration methods or addition of bulk carbon, where
care must be taken to remove «ne carbon par ticulates in the e®uent.
2.6 Membrane Adsorbers
When the target protein in the solution is in the same molecular weight range as that of the endotoxins (10–20 kDa for endotoxin
monomers), the target proteins cannot be separated by UF
. Ion exchange chromatography is the most common depyrogenation method for
proteins; however, it has some drawbacks, which limit its usefulness as a depyrogenation step. This includes handling and usage problems
such as packing, channeling, low ¬ow rates, long regeneration times, compressibility, and limited chemical stability. Charge-modi«ed
membrane adsorbers with ion exchange ligands functionalized on the membrane surface can provide the required performance needed for
depyrogenation from the laboratory up to process scale. Generally, two strategies can be used for removal of endotoxin from solutions with
such membrane adsorber devices. Using the strong basic anion exchanger of quaternary amine (Q) type in a buffer with pH lower than the pI
of the protein, endotoxin will bind to the charged membrane substrate, and protein will pass through the membrane (negative
chromatography). Alternatively, a strong acidic ion exchanger type S also can be used with a buffer pH lower than the pI of the protein. In this
case, the endotoxin will pass through, and the protein will be bound to the charged membrane substrate, which can be subsequently eluted
using appropriate buffers in the next step.
Such membrane adsorbers have been used as validated endotoxin clearance steps in downstream processing of monoclonal antibody
(mAb) or recombinant protein manufacturing. Typical log reduction values (LRVs) repor ted are >4 (12) based on lab scale testing.
Another solution is to use mixed-mode membrane adsorbers exhibiting both anionic and hydrophobic chemistries. Endotoxins
(hydrophobic and negatively charged) tightly bind onto the membrane surfaces. By adjusting the concentration of salt or pH appropriately,
proteins ¬ow through the mixed-mode membrane adsorber by charge repulsion, while endotoxins remain bound. Mixed-mode membrane
adsorbers allow the depyrogenation of protein solution or buffers with higher concentrations of salt (e.g., 100–500 mM) than with the Q
adsorber. Such membrane adsorbers have been used as validated endotoxin clearance steps in downstream processing of mAb or
recombinant protein manufacturing. Typical LRVs repor ted are in the 3–4 range based on lab scale testing.
3. VALIDATION
See Depyrogenation 〈1228〉 for a comprehensive discussion of depyrogenation process validation and the use of endotoxin standards.
REFERENCES
1. Sawada Y
, Fujii R, Igami I, Kawai K, Kamiki T
, Niwa A. Removal of endotoxin from water by micro«ltration through a microporous
polyethylene hollow-«ber membrane. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1986; 51(4):813–820.
2. Bononi I, Balatti V
, Gaeta S, Tognon M. Gram-negative bacterial lipopolysaccharide retention by a positively charged new-generation
«lter. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008;4(20):6470–6472.
3. PDA Technical Repor t No. 7, (TR 7) Depyrogenation: technical repor t. Philadelphia: Parenteral Drug Association; 1985.
4. Zydney AL, Xenopoulos A. Improving dextran tests for ultra«ltration membranes: effect of device format. J Membr Sci. 2007;291(1–
2):180–190.
5. Magalhães PO, Lopes AM, Mazzola PG, Rangel-Yaqui C, Penna TC, Pessoa A Jr. Methods of endotoxin removal from biological
preparations: a review. J Pharm Sci. 2007;10(3):388–404.
Ã. Williams KL. Depyrogenation validation, pryoburden, and endotoxin removal. In: Williams KL, editor. Endotoxins: pyrogens, LAL testing,
and depyrogenation, 3rd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2007:301–328.
7. Yamamoto C, Kim ST
. Endotoxin rejection by ultra«ltration through high-¬ux, hollow «ber «lters. J Biomed Mater Res. 1996;32(3):467–
471.
Ä. Magalhães PO, Pessoa A. Lipopolysaccharide, LPS removal, depyrogenation. In: Encyclopedia of industrial biotechnology. New York:
John Wiley & Sons; 2010.
9. PDA Technical Repor t No. 45, Vol. 62(S-2). Filtration of liquids using cellulose-based depth «lters. Philadelphia: Parenteral Drug
Association; 2008.
10. Hou KC, Zaniewski R. Depyrogenation by endotoxin removal with positively charged depth «lter car tridge. J Pharen Sci Technol.
1990;44(4):204–209.
11. Gerba CP
, Hou K. Endotoxin removal by charge-modi«ed «lters. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1985;50(6):1375–1377.
12. Clutterbuck A, Kenwor thy J, Liddell J. Endotoxin reduction using disposable membrane adsorption technology in cGMP
manufacturing. BioPharm Int. 2007;20(5):24–31.
OFFICIAL
2/13/25, 9:37 PM
USP-NF 〈1228.3〉 Depyrogenation by Filtration


=== PAGE 4 ===
APPENDIX
Additional References
McCullough KZ. Structuring a depyrogenation study. In: McCullough KZ, editor. The bacterial endotoxins test: a practical guide. River Grove,
IL: Davis Healthcare International, LLC: 2011.
Mandaro RM. Chapter 5. Charge-modi«ed depth «lters: cationic-charge-modi«ed nylon «lters. In: Meltzer TH, editor. Filtration in the
pharmaceutical industry. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1986.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<1228.3> DEPYROGENATION BY FIL
TRATION
Leslie Furr
Associate Scienti«c Liaison
GCM2022
General Chapters - Microbiology
2022
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. PF 41(5)
Current DocID: GUID-8736649A-88BB-436E-912D-AAEBED7516E9_1_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M8101_01_01
DOI ref: 5jpo5
OFFICIAL
2/13/25, 9:37 PM
USP-NF 〈1228.3〉 Depyrogenation by Filtration
