--- PAGE 27 ---
21
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Table 6.5.2-1 	
Calculated Final Risk Score Examples 
Excipient Risk 
Score (ERPN) 
ERPN weight
Supply Chain Risk 
Score (SCRPN)
SCRPN weight
Final Risk Score
1.9
2
1.7
1
1.8
3.6
1
4.3
1
4.0
4.7
1
1.3
3
2.2
3.9
3
3.3
2
3.7
2.4
3
2.0
1
2.3
A manufacturing authorization holder also may make this calculation specific to its needs by consider-
ing, for instance, individual scores for each different role in the supply chain. That is, the manufac-
turing authorization holder may calculate a risk score for the original manufacturer of the excipient 
and another risk score for each player in the supply chain. In the calculation in Figure 6.5.2-1, the 
manufacturing authorization holder would use these individual mean risk scores in place of the more 
general supply chain risk score.
6.6	
Implementation of Controls—Risk Mitigation 
When the risk is found to be at an acceptable level, the risk assessment process is concluded. The iden-
tified controls should be documented, and the agreement with the manufacturer or supplier should 
ensure effective maintenance of those controls. This process is illustrated in Figure 6.6-1.
Figure 6.6-1	 Identify Further Mitigation Actions to Reach Acceptable Risk Control, and Communicate
Define Excipient 
Requirements (incl. 
The specification)
Modify 
excipients 
controls
Modify controls 
within Supply 
Chain
Modify Drug 
Product 
Manufacturer 
controls 
(internally)
Re-score Excipient 
risk and supply chain 
risk scores
Analyse impact of 
excipient on each 
Drug Product (Family)
Communicate and 
agree expectations 
and use with 
Supplier
Conclude on 
overall Excipient 
risk control 
acceptability
Yes
Generate Overall 
Risk Score
Are existing 
control levels 
appropriate?
No
Collaboration with Supplier
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 28 ---
22
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
If additional actions are needed, Table 6.6-1 describes factors that should be considered. Depending 
on the specific excipient, other considerations might also need to be taken into account, as appropri-
ate. Specific actions that might lower the residual risk can be found by deconstructing the OverallRPN 
and investigating the risk scores for both the supply chain and the excipient that are driving the overall 
risk score.
Table 6.6-1	 Factors to Consider in Determining if Additional Actions are Needed 
Additional Drug 
Product Manufacturer 
Controls
Controls the manufacturer of the pharmaceutical product can introduce, for example:
–	 Additional receiving inspection or testing
–	 Special storage to avoid certain risks (e.g., degradation)
–	 Additional processing of the excipient (e.g., filtration, irradiation)
Additional Excipient 
Controls
Additional Excipient Supplier Supply Chain Controls:
–	 Change of GMP standard applied
–	 Changes to specifications
–	 Changes to packaging
–	 Change of testing (e.g., every pack or every lot to ensure identity and homogeneity)
–	 Microbiological testing
–	 Regular verification of supplier’s Certificates of Analysis 
–	 Introduction of new testing
Additional Excipient 
Supplier Supply Chain 
Controls
Controls the excipient supplier can introduce, for example:
–	 Increased auditing by excipient user or third party
–	 Changes to the excipient manufacturing process or controls
–	 Higher demand for notification of changes
–	 Increased oversight and control of shipments, tamper-proofing 
Additional Excipient 
Manufacturing 
Controls 
Additional controls the excipient supplier can introduce, for example:
–	 Increased effectiveness of cleaning (microbiological risk reduction)
–	 Sanitization (microbiological risk reduction)
–	 Enhanced filtration of excipient, e.g., Technically Unavoidable Particle Profile 
(TUPPS) risk reduction
–	 Altered processing conditions (by-product reduction)
–	 Exclusion of rework (reduced unknown impurity risks)
–	 Use of dedicated equipment
–	 Introduction or change of in-process controls
The level of existing controls may exceed actual requirements. In this case, a company may consider 
reducing efforts in one area to focus on areas of greater risk, such as increasing audit frequency for 
excipients with high overall risk scores and decreasing audit frequency for excipients with low overall 
risk scores. 
Confirmation that the additional controls have been agreed upon and implemented should be ob-
tained from the excipient manufacturer or supplier and the drug product manufacturer, and should be 
documented, for example, in supply and quality agreements. Once risk control measures are in place, 
the risk assessment should be reviewed and rescored to determine the residual risk acceptability. 
If the OverallRPN is still unacceptable, further mitigation of the residual risks will be required. This 
cycle should be repeated until an acceptable residual risk has been obtained. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 29 ---
23
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Figure 6.6.1-1	 Degree of Risk Mitigation Required Based on the Nature of the Manufacturing Controls Required for the Excipient
6.6.1	 General Considerations on the Appropriate GMP Required to Meet Risk 
Mitigation Level Determined by Risk Assessment 
Figure 6.6.1-1 illustrates the extent and degree of risk mitigation that could be required based on the 
type of drug product and its use. This mitigation is defined by the excipient, how it is made, how it 
is supplied, why it is used, and how it functions in the drug product, as determined in the risk assess-
ment. The degree of mitigation, that is, the reduction in overall risk that is necessary to reach a low 
residual risk level, increases as the different definitions of GMP are applied. The list of QMS standards 
and GMP definitions provided here is illustrative of the principle and is designed to help identify the 
GMP definition that reduces the risk to the desired level.
Once the required risk mitigation has been determined, the overall concept and necessary changes in 
requirements can be discerned, as discussed above in Section 6.5. As risks are mitigated, the overall 
risk assessment would be updated.
6.6.2	 Applicability of GMP Standards
The EC Guidelines indicate the minimum GMP principles the manufacturer should implement in 
its quality and GMP management systems. These principles are embodied in most, if not all, GMP-
related QMS and the standards listed in Table 6.6.2-1. Other standards providing the required degree 
of risk mitigation may also be available. (Table 6.6.2-1 includes comments about the definitions of 
GMP in each.)
High
Low
ISO 9001
EFfCI
US and EC
Food “GMP“
EXCiPACT
NSF/IPEC/
ANSI 363
IPEC-PQG 
GMP
EC GMP 
Part II 
ICH Q7
EC GMP 
Part I
EC GMP 
Annex 1
Degree of Risk Mitigation Needed
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 30 ---
24
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Table 6.6.2-1 	
GMP Standards by Standard Organization
Standard
Comments
EC Food “GMP” (20)
U.S. Food GMP
Where both apply, a prerequisite QMS, in combination with hazard 
analysis and critical control point (HACCP) principles. 
EC GMP Part II (Eudralex Vol. 4, Part II 
(21); ICH Q7 (22))
This is the GMP standard for active pharmaceutical ingredients.
EC GMP Part I (Eudralex, Vol. 4, Part I 
(23))
This is the GMP standard for drug products. 
EC GMP Part I and Annex 1 (Eudralex, 
Vol. 4, Part I (23) and Annex 1 (24))
This is the GMP standard for sterile materials.
EFfCI GMP for Cosmetic Ingredients 
(25)
This annex to ISO 9001 relies on the basic GMP principles in the EC 
Guidelines relating to risk assessment for excipients. The focus is on purity 
and contamination controls in manufacturing operations. Manufacturers 
must apply both ISO 9001 and EFfCI certificates simultaneously.
EXCiPACT™ GMP for Pharmaceutical 
Excipients (13)
This annex to ISO 9001 has been designed for pharmaceutical excipients. 
It is based on the well-known and accepted IPEC-PQG GMP Guide, so it 
fully includes the principles of GMP in the EC Guidelines. Manufacturers 
must apply both ISO 9001 and EXCiPACT™ certificates simultaneously.
IFAC Quality Systems, Food Safety 
and Good Manufacturing Practices 
Guide for Food Additives and GRAS 
Substances (26)
This guide provides guidelines on principles applicable under US 
requirements for food additives and generally recognized as safe (GRAS) 
ingredients, but also is intended to provide a unified approach for use by 
the international food additive industry.
IPEC Japan Self-imposed Standard of 
GMP for Pharmaceutical Excipient (18) 
This guide is based on the Joint IPEC-PQG GMP Guide (2006 version) with 
some modifications in view of the circumstances of Japan.
Joint IPEC-PQG GMP Guide (15)
This is a guide and an audit standard. It was designed around the 
principles in ISO 9001 and ICH Q7 and, therefore, encompasses all GMP 
principles. A manufacturer compliant with this guide would have an 
equivalent level of risk mitigation as EXCiPACT™ and NSF/IPEC/ANSI 363.
ISO 9001 (27)
This establishes a basic QMS that has the capability of delivering consistent 
quality materials. In many instances, the needed GMP details may be 
absent, so the risk mitigations may lack a high degree of assurance.
NSF/IPEC/ANSI 363 (14)
This standard, for all practical purposes, is the same as EXCiPACT™. It is 
designed for manufacturers who do not apply ISO 9001.
USP General Chapter <1078> (17) 
This General Information Chapter discusses Good Manufacturing 
Practices for Bulk Pharmaceutical Excipients 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
