--- PAGE 20 ---
14
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
6.3.1	 Impact of Excipient on Each Type of Drug Product
After identification as described in Section 6.2, the excipient attributes are assessed for correlation to the CQAs of the drug product in which the excipient is to be 
used. The rationale of the impact must be explained. This step must be taken for each drug product or drug product family. Then, the results can be consolidated 
across products.
Initially, all potential risk factors (hazards) are identified and documented as excipient attributes. Then, CQAs are correlated to the pharmaceutical dosage form, as follows: 
+	
Known Impact (documented effect)
-	
No Impact (no indication of impact)
?	
Impact cannot be ruled out, more information may be needed
The information can be compiled in a table, such as that shown in Figure 6.3.1-1. A column marked “Compliance” is included near the CQAs so that compliance 
with, for instance, pharmacopeial specifications, can be ensured as well. This column is useful because, in some cases, an attribute may be part of a specification, 
e.g., a pharmacopeial specification, that the company will claim adherence to, regardless of the actual impact on the drug product CQAs. This column allows the 
assessors to force such excipient attributes further into the assessment and into the excipient specification. 
Figure 6.3.1-1	
Illustration of an Excipient Impact Assessment to Provide Specification Input
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 21 ---
15
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Only excipient attributes with a correlation marked “+” are brought forward as needed into the specifi-
cation for further analysis. The attributes marked “?” should be further investigated to obtain the data 
necessary to determine whether there is potential impact on the drug product. If further data cannot 
be gathered, “?” will be treated as a “+,” taking a worst-case approach.
Excipient attributes and impact assessments are used to carry out a qualitative failure analysis in 
which the failure options and effect of failure (consequences) are described. This analysis is based on 
the knowledge gathered during the development phase of the drug product or from other literature 
and knowledge.
From the failure analysis, the excipient user gains understanding of potential and allowed variation 
in the attributes. With this knowledge, specification limits for each material attribute are proposed to 
mitigate the risk of impact. In this way, the excipient impact assessment is used to justify the excipient 
specification.
An impact assessment is conducted for each drug product in which the excipient is used. If done 
retrospectively, this impact assessment leads to an evaluation of the existing specification. If done 
prospectively, the impact assessment provides input to one or more specifications consistent with drug 
product needs. In most cases, it may be advantageous to have a single specification that applies to the 
excipient’s use in all drug products. 
6.3.2	 Excipient Risk Profile based on Use and Intrinsic Factors
The second part of the excipient analysis is creating a risk profile (or ranking) using a question-based 
risk ranking and filtering system. 
At a minimum, the following factors related to the excipient and its use should be considered in de-
veloping the risk score, as explained further in Table 6.3.2-1:
• 
Excipient attributes and relevant specification
• 
Functionality of the excipient in formulation 
• 
Intended patient intake (consider dose regimen, frequency of dose, strength of formulation) 
• 
Route of administration
• 
Excipient origin and potential for contamination
• 
Excipient complexity (composite)
• 
Prior knowledge of and experience with excipient (e.g., known quality defects)
• 
Standard packaging size of the excipient (consider use in manufacture of drug product)
Table 6.3.2-1 describes different scenarios expressing a low, medium, or high risk for each of the risk 
factors (RFE) listed. This table can be used as a starting point for consideration of (potential) risk fac-
tors, then developed and improved over time to reflect the particular excipient and its use in the final 
drug, as well as the user’s experience with the model. While it includes the risk factors required by the 
EC Guidelines, other relevant risk factors can be added.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 22 ---
16
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Table 6.3.2-1 	
Excipient Risk Calculation Tool
Risk Factor Excipient (RF E)
Low (1)
Medium (3)
High (5)
RF E1: Functionality of Excipient in 
Formulation
Diluent, coloring agent flavor, 
sweetening agent, identity through 
printing with ink, emollient, tonicity 
agent 
Thickener, coating agent, former, 
compression aid, lubricant, glidant 
and/or anticaking agent, humectant, 
suspending/dispersing agent, buffer, 
adhesive, penetrant, disintegrant, 
binder, capsule shell, plasticizers, pH 
modifiers, chelating and/or complexing 
agents, antioxidants, suppository base, 
suspending and/or viscosity-increasing 
agent, stiffening agent, propellant
Antimicrobial preservative, vehicle, 
release modifier, wetting and/or 
solubilizing agent, pH modifier, 
pharmaceutical water 
RF E2: Intended Patient Intake 
(Consider dose regimen, frequency 
of dose, amount of excipient in 
dose form); consult the Inactive 
Ingredients Database (19) 
Expected maximum daily intake 
does not exceed known maximum 
dose of excipient in a drug product 
N.A.
Expected maximum daily intake 
exceeds known maximum dose of 
excipient in a drug product 
RF E3: Route of Administration 
(Risk to the patient)
Topical, oral, vaginal, rectal
Pulmonary/inhalation
Parenteral, ophthalmic, for open 
wounds
RF E4: Potential for Contamination
Excipient is well-defined, not of 
animal origin; manufacturing process 
is well-controlled, resulting in low or 
no potential for contamination by: 
–	 TSE/BSE 
–	 Viral contamination
–	 Microbiological organisms, 
endotoxins, or pyrogens
–	 Impurities resulting from the 
manufacturing process, e.g., 
residual solvents and catalysts 
Impurities from the raw materials, 
e.g., aflatoxins or pesticides
N.A.
Animal origin or circumstances 
indicating a heightened potential for 
contamination by virus, impurities, or 
other unwanted adulterants
RF E5: Excipient Complexity
(Is it a composite or individual 
excipient?) 
Excipient is not a composite 
Excipient is a composite and each 
component of the composite is well 
characterized and supported by 
technical data
Excipient is a composite and 
components are not formally 
managed or traced
RF E6: Prior Knowledge or Experience 
with Excipient (e.g., known quality 
defects)
Material does not cause challenges; 
prior experience with the excipient 
and low or no history of defects
Prior knowledge or experience with 
the excipient is minimal 
History of defects and challenges, or 
no prior knowledge of or experience 
with the excipient
RF E7: Packaging Size
(Consider internal use in 
manufacture of product)
Single-use, ready to be used in 
manufacturing
Excipient must be divided or 
repackaged for manufacturing, but 
transfer of excipient into alternative 
primary packaging does not 
introduce additional risks
Excipient must be divided or 
repackaged in a highly controlled 
environment with high precision 
before use in manufacturing
RF Ex: Add according to specific needs 
for the excipient in final drug product
To be defined
To be defined
To be defined
Each selection will result in a value of 1 (low), 3 (medium), or 5 (high) for risk.
The risk score for the excipient (ERPN) is calculated as the sum of the risk scores for each of the seven 
identified risk factors (RF E)2, divided by the number of risk factors. The resulting ERPN will be in the 
range of 1 (Low) to 5 (High).
Overall Excipient Risk Score (ERPN) =
RF E1 + RF E2 + RF E3 + RF E4 + RF E5 + RF E6 + RF E7
7
2	  Users would adjust the calculation as necessary to reflect additional risk factors that they have identified for 
consideration or to weight the individual risk factors based on the company’s analysis and risk tolerance.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 23 ---
17
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Figure 6.4-1	 Steps in the Supply Chain Risk Analysis
The resulting risk score (ERPN), along with a similar overall score for the supply chain, will be used to 
evaluate the suitability and acceptability of the current excipient setup.
6.4	
Supply Chain Risk Analysis
A supply chain risk score (SCRPN) is created using a risk ranking system similar to that used for evalu-
ating the excipient risk score. The ranking should consider input from the supplier, including knowl-
edge from questionnaires, as well as knowledge gained through previous experience, audits, visits, and 
media coverage, as illustrated in Figure 6.4-1. 
At a minimum, the following risk factors related to the supply chain (RF S) should be considered:
• 
Supply chain complexity—supplier, broker, manufacturer relationships, opportunity for fraud 
(See Section 4.1.)
• 
Prior knowledge of the supply chain—capability
• 
Organizational volatility
• 
Excipient manufacturer performance history—oversight knowledge such as customer 
complaints, changes, audits, trustworthiness, tailgate samples
• 
Packaging suitability—ability to protect excipient from fraud, moisture, heat, and similar 
elements 
• 
QMS standard and certification
Table 6.4-1 describes different scenarios expressing a low, medium, or high risk for each of the risk 
factors (RF S) listed. This table can be used as a starting point for consideration of (potential) risk 
factors, then developed and improved over time to reflect both the particular excipient and its use in 
the final drug, and the user’s experience with the model. While it includes the risk factors required by 
the EC Guidelines, other relevant risk factors can be added.
Generate Overall 
Risk Score
Define Supply 
Chain Risk Factors
Supply Chain 
score (SCRPN)
Knowledge 
about 
Suppliers
Input from 
Suppliers
Supply Chain 
Mapping
High
Medium
Low
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 24 ---
18
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Table 6.4-1	 Supply Chain Risk Calculation Tool
Risk Factor Supply Chain 
(RF S)
Low (1)
Medium (3)
High (5)
RF S1: Supply Chain 
Complexity 
(Consider supplier, broker, 
manufacturer relationships, 
considering the opportunity 
for fraud)
Purchased directly from manufacturer–
low probability of fraud; sourced from 
a region with known and transparent 
controls on counterfeiting and security 
(i.e., US, EU); excipient not repackaged 
or manipulated after manufacturing 
process; transport from supplier is 
through qualified carrier
A least one broker, distributor, or 
intermediate supplier, but there 
is transparency to the original 
manufacturer and location; supplier re-
manipulates (i.e., repackages, relabels) 
under established and understood 
GMP procedures
Supply chain is complex with several 
manipulations or distribution channels; 
repackaging and/or manipulation 
occurs after the manufacturing 
process; region of security concern and 
potential for fraud
RF S2: Prior Knowledge of the 
Manufacturer
(Consider capability)
Prior experience with manufacturer; 
critical attributes monitored and con-
trolled; no excipient nonconformance, 
rejections, or complaints; no evidence 
of variability in final drug product at-
tributes related to excipient
Minimal experience with manufacturer, 
and/or minor delivery issues
No experience with manufacturer, or 
manufacturer has a history of delivery 
issues; evidence of excipient variability; 
previous or outstanding complaints 
and impact on final product attributes
RF S3: Organizational Volatility 
of the Excipient Manufacturer
Stable organization, low turnover in 
key positions
Limited knowledge of organizational 
volatility of supplier or manufacturer
High turnover in key positions 
RF S4: Excipient Manufacturer 
QMS Performance History
(Customer complaint, 
changes, audits, ability to 
trust tailgate samples, etc. — 
oversight knowledge)
QMS works well and has proven 
effective; few or no regulatory 
observations; any findings are Minor; 
prompt audit response, CAPA on target 
per schedule
QMS is defined but there are some 
weaknesses in quality system
Significant quantity and/or severity 
of regulatory observations; adverse 
regulatory status (i.e. consent decree, 
severe or multiple warning letters, or 
official action indicated); area of special 
concern, critical or major findings, past 
due audit response, and/or CAPA items 
outstanding
RF S5: Packaging Suitability 
(Ability to protect excipient 
from damage, e.g., fraud, 
moisture, heat) 
Packaging is qualified and supported 
by scientific technical studies; tamper-
evident packaging used 
Data supporting suitability of the 
packaging is questionable
Packaging suitability is not supported 
by technical evidence; no tamper-
evident seals
RF S6: QMS Standards and 
Certification,
Personnel and Training,
Premises and Equipment, 
Documentation System and 
Records Management,
Materials and Supplier 
Management,
Quality System Elements
Established and implemented QMS 
that is well documented; certifications 
from regulatory bodies or other 
standardization organizations. 
QMS implemented; no certification
Minimal evidence of QMS 
implementation; lacks documented 
supplier qualification program for 
suppliers of excipients, components, 
and finished products (as relevant); lacks 
service-level agreements to enforce 
quality control and related supplier 
programs; lacks transportation provider 
auditing or monitoring program (if 
relevant); lacks a documented process 
or does not enforce the process for 
management of production waste or 
damaged or expired product
RF Sx: Add according to 
specific need for the excipient 
in final drug product
To be defined
To be defined
To be defined
Each selection will result in a value of 1 (low), 3 (medium), or 5 (high) for risk. 
The risk score for the supply chain is calculated as the sum of the risk scores for each of the six identi-
fied risk factors (RF S)3, divided by the number of risk factors. The resulting SCRPN will be in the range 
of 1 (Low) to 5 (High).
Supply Chain Risk (SCRPN) =
RF S1 + RF S2 + RF S3 + RF S4 + RF S5 + RF S6
6
3	  Users would adjust the calculation as necessary to reflect additional risk factors that they have identified for 
consideration or to weight the individual risk factors based on the company’s analysis and risk tolerance.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 25 ---
19
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Figure 6.5-1	 Developing the Matrix of Combined Excipient + Supply Chain Risk Evaluation
The resulting risk score (SCRPN) across the excipient risk factors (RF S) will be used, together with the 
overall score for the excipient described above, to evaluate the suitability and acceptability of the cur-
rent supply chain setup.
6.5	
Risk Evaluation
The excipient risk score and the supply chain risk score are then evaluated together using a risk matrix 
approach (Figure 6.5-1), based on the excipient risk score (ERPN) on one side and the supply chain risk 
score (SCRPN) on the other side, to create an overall risk score. Figure 6.5-1 highlights one section of the 
complete risk model in Figure 6.0-1.
This final evaluation provides an overall view of the risk question “Is the excipient fit for use?” based on 
the strength of the manufacturer’s and supply chain’s GMP (or capability to control risk) and the risk 
related to the excipient’s use in a drug product. The higher the risk related to the excipient’s use and 
function, the greater the need for risk-controlling capability in the supply chain.
Because risk acceptability and the need for risk mitigation can vary significantly from company to 
company, the matrix and the associated cut offs showing risk acceptability should be tailored to the 
individual company’s risk tolerance based on the drug products it manufactures. 
Two options for the matrix are described and illustrated in Section 6.5.1 and Section 6.5.2. To create 
the matrix using either option, the user first must understand all potential values for ERPN and SCRPN. 
When calculating ERPN as described in Section 6.3.2, and SCRPN, as described in Section 6.4, the re-
sult for each will be a number between 1 and 5 where a result of 1 is considered Low, and 5 considered 
High. In most cases, the ERPN will lie somewhere between those two extremes, and will not necessarily 
be an integer. Further the scale is not linear and should not be treated as such. 
6.5.1	 Risk Matrix—Option 1: Calculating Combined Risk Score (OverallRPN) 
In Option 1, the combined risk score (OverallRPN) is calculated by multiplying the ERPN by the SCRPN:
OverallRPN = ERPN * SCRPN
The value of OverallRPN indicates how well the risk is controlled and whether additional action is 
needed, as illustrated in Table 6.5.1-1.
4
10
8
6
6
15
12
9
8
20
16
12
10
25
20
15
Probability
Generate Overall 
Risk Score
Supply Chain  
risk score
Excipient risk 
score
Yes
Risk is acceptable
Are 
existing 
control levels 
appropriate?
No
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 26 ---
20
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Table 6.5.1-1 	
Risk Matrix to Evaluate Combined Risk Score for Excipient and Supply Chain 
Supply Chain Risk
High
5
5
10
15
20
25
4
4
8
12
16
20
3
3
6
9
12
15
2
2
4
6
8
10
Low
1
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
Low
High
Excipient Risk
From this combined risk score, the manufacturing authorization holder can determine whether addi-
tional actions are necessary. Table 6.5.1-2 provides an example of a decision table specifying potential 
actions based on the OverallRPN. Section 6.6 discusses the selection of additional controls, if necessary.
Table 6.5.1-2 	
Decision Table to Determine Risk
OverallRPN > 10
Unacceptable – Residual 
risk is High
Additional actions to mitigate risk must be 
implemented
4 ≤ OverallRPN ≤ 10
As low as acceptable – 
Residual risk is Medium
Additional actions to mitigate risk should be 
considered, and acceptance justified
OverallRPN < 4
Acceptable – Residual 
risk is Low
No additional actions needed to mitigate risk to an 
acceptable level
6.5.2	 Risk Matrix—Option 2: Calculating Final Risk Score 
Option 2 for the risk matrix allows for additional customization by the manufacturing authorization 
holder. For instance, the manufacturing authorization holder may weight the factors according to its 
internal evaluation and controls. In addition, the manufacturing authorization holder may calculate 
and consider additional scores for other supply chain factors. 
The final risk score is calculated by again using ERPN and SCRPN. However, in calculating the final 
risk score, the manufacturing authorization holder can apply different weights to the two factors, 
depending on the manufacturing authorization holder’s needs. For instance, if the manufacturing 
authorization holder has reason to believe that the excipient risk score should be given greater consid-
eration, the excipient risk score could be given double the weight of the supply chain risk score in the 
final calculation. 
The final risk score calculation is shown in Figure 6.5.2-1, where n is the sum of the weights in the 
numerator. If the excipient risk score is given a weight of 2 and the supply chain risk score is given the 
weight of 1, then n = 3.
Table 6.5.2-1 provides examples of the calculation of final risk score, each of which results in a scor-
ing of low, medium, or high. This final risk score guides the manufacturing authorization holder in 
determining whether additional actions are necessary.
Final Risk Score =
[wt (Excipient Risk Score) + wt (Supply Chain Risk Score)]
n
Figure 6.5.2-1	
Calculating a Final Risk Score
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
