--- PAGE 34 ---
28
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
10.0 
Annex I: Real World Examples of Risk Assessments 
The generic model proposed in Section 6.0 was developed based on real-world risk assessment pro-
cesses donated by several marketing authorization holders. Many risk assessment approaches used 
some form of risk ranking and filtering approach—conducting assessments in two separate streams 
that can then be combined in an overall risk score.
One stream would provide a risk profile for the excipient itself, based on its use in the finished product 
and any intrinsic risk factors. The second stream would generate a risk profile for the supply chain, 
including the excipient manufacturer, suppliers, brokers, and any other players, as well as the strength 
of their quality management systems (QMS). The two streams would then be combined into one risk 
evaluation to determine whether the overall risk is at an acceptable level or additional controls are 
needed. 
10.1	 Example 1: Company U 
Company U is a global manufacturer of various pharmaceutical dosage forms. The company estab-
lished a Microsoft® Excel® tool to be used as a corporate standard.
When multiple manufacturing sites use the same excipient provided by the same excipient manufac-
turing site, the risk assessments can be shared across all sites (with appropriate site-specific modifica-
tions to accommodate excipient usage, supply chain complexity, and other factors).
First, basic information about the excipient and the manufacturer is collected. Then, the collected 
information is consolidated to produce an overview.
For each section of the model, the parameters to evaluate are defined (see Figure 10.1-1), each pa-
rameter is described in detail, and possible scenarios are developed. The severity of each parameter is 
assigned a standard value. In conducting the evaluation, Company U determines the actual probability 
of each parameter. 
The analysis is conducted as follows:
• 
Excipient and excipient usage risk score — Each of the identified excipient and excipient use 
risk factors is evaluated based on the actual origin or usage of the excipient and the actual supply 
chain to determine the probability of risk (P). The predefined weight, or severity (S), is used to 
calculate the risk score for each parameter (P × S). Then, the overall excipient risk score is calcu-
lated as the average across the parameters.
• 
Combined material risk score — A combined material risk score is calculated by adding the 
excipient risk score and the excipient usage risk score.
• 
Manufacturer risk score — The list of risk factors to be considered is evaluated based on the 
actual performance and QMS of the manufacturer. The predefined weight (S) is used to calculate 
the risk score of each parameter (P × S). Then, the overall manufacturer risk score is calculated as 
the average across the parameters.
• 
Gap analysis and actions — The combined material risk score and the manufacturer risk score 
are evaluated together using a risk matrix to identify the “gap level,” as illustrated in Table 10.1-1. 
Where a gap exists between the manufacturer risk score and the combined material risk score, the 
gap must be evaluated to determine the appropriate remediation.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 35 ---
29
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Figure 10.1-1 	
Risk Assessment Model for Company U
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 36 ---
30
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Table 10.1-1	
Gap Analysis Matrix Used to Determine Severity of Risk
Excipient & Excipient Usage Risk (Combined Risk)
Manufacturer Risk
Risk Level
Low
Medium
High
High
Medium
Low
10.2	 Example 2: Company V 
Company V is a global manufacturer of pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical solid oral dosage forms 
and lyophilized injectables. To a large extent, its products are manufactured through contract manu-
facturing organizations (CMOs). 
The risk model (Figure 10.2-1) was created to meet the European Commission Guidelines on The 
Formalised Risk Assessment for Ascertaining the Appropriate GMP For Excipients of Medicinal Products 
For Human Use (EC Guidelines), and the risk factors to be considered reflect those in the guidelines 
(1). The model was implemented in a global SOP that applies for all sites manufacturing commercial 
products and, going forward, for new products, including biologics and other type of products.
This model was extended for products during their transfer into commercial production. The quality risk 
assessment tool is applied based on risk ranking and filtering, evaluating the risk factors in two groups:
• 
Multiple criteria analysis
–	 Function and use of excipient (→ Score Excipient)
–	 Manufacturer (→ Score Manufacturer)
–	 Suppliers (→ Score Supplier)
• 
Risk score for each excipient (low, medium, or high) 
–	 Independent risk factors
–	 Risk ranking and weighing
–	 Overall weighing 
The three single scores—Function and Use, Manufacturer, and Suppliers—were combined by multi-
plication into a weighted RPN score. Acceptability was evaluated based on the RPN value, and mitiga-
tion actions were considered according to the overall risk score (low, medium, or high). 
• 
No major issues were found for existing products, though some minor changes in audit strategy 
and other controls were instituted as a result.
• 
One benefit of performing the risk assessment was obtaining the collected knowledge and an 
overview of the supply chains.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 37 ---
31
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Figure 10.2-1	
Risk Assessment Model for Company V
• 
Company V has found that responsibilities for information-gathering need to be changed in the global SOP. Currently, the global support function gathers the 
needed information from different stakeholders. Using one point of contact for each product is under discussion as an alternative.
• 
While the model has been well accepted, it has not yet been used as a living risk assessment as much as would be liked.
• 
The risk assessment is stored in the GMP documentation system. Software automatically triggers formal review and approval cycles globally. More flexibility to revise 
and update the risk assessment would be appreciated, especially in cases where the risk assessment is completed before the drug product is commercially available. The 
company will introduce a new electronic tool to serve this purpose.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 38 ---
32
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Figure 10.3-1	
Risk Assessment Model for Company W
10.3	 Example 3: Company W 
Company W is a global manufacturer of pharmaceuticals and devices, primarily parenteral products.
As part of the material assessment, the company examines the correlation of impact between parameters (attributes) describing the excipient and the CQAs of the 
product in which it is an ingredient. An excipient assessment provides input to material specifications, as illustrated in Figure 10.3-1. In this way, the company 
evaluates the impact of the excipient on the finished drug products. Attributes are derived by ideation from a defined list of potential risk sources. Attributes with 
impact are included on the specification, and limits or other controls are defined after analyzing the possible impacts of variation in the attribute. This method uses 
a qualitative assessment with a simple +/- score for impact combined with text rationales and references describing the underlying science. The impact is evaluated 
considering the amount of material to be used and its function in the formulation. 
The result of the assessment is used to define the excipient’s specification based on the specific use in a specific drug product. An assessment is made for each use in 
a drug product.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 39 ---
33
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
An assessment of the supply chain is carried out in parallel with the material assessment. The supply 
chain—including manufacturer, retailers, brokers, and others—is evaluated using a predefined list of 
risk elements, brainstorming possible relevant issues in the specific supply chain for the particular ex-
cipient. The identified risks are then evaluated qualitatively for impact, likelihood, and controls in place. 
If a risk becomes evident, the company identifies any additional controls that would reduce the risk 
to an acceptable level. 
10.4	 Example 4: Company X
Company X expects its suppliers to comply with the IPEC-PQG Joint Good Manufacturing Practices Guide 
(2), EXCiPACT™ Standard (3), or NSF/IPEC/ANSI 363 (4). The excipient risk management process 
considered input from the manufacturer qualification process, audits, relationships, testing, and outside 
intelligence. The company also worked with its CMOs to align expectations between them and the manu-
facturing authorization holder and rationalized scores. The actual process is owned by the company’s orga-
nizational product quality management unit and follows the model illustrated in Figure 10.4-1.
The product quality manager (PQM) is responsible for pulling together the information and subject 
matter experts from across Company X to provide the data needed to complete the spreadsheet. Much 
of the information comes from the company’s audit team. The model allows for rationalization across 
materials and suppliers to ensure that scoring is consistent and can be readily justified. 
Company X maintains an SOP that describes the overall process, including triggers for revisiting a risk 
assessment. Because the PQMs also are involved in the change control process for company materials, they 
have firsthand knowledge of any changes that would require a review of the excipient risk assessment. As 
part of this process, Company X has already made several revisions to some excipient risk assessments. 
Initially, there was some resistance to the concept and process. Now that the system is in place, however, 
staff have noticed that it is easier to find information without going into several systems or speaking to 
several departments. 
Figure 10.4-1	
Risk Assessment Model for Company X
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 40 ---
34
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
10.5	 Example 5: Company Y 
The model illustrated in Figure 10.5-1 applies to finished products for human use that Company Y 
manufactures for European markets.
Company Y manufacturing sites completed risk ranking of each excipient from each manufacturer 
used at their sites. 
A risk ranking tool is used to evaluate each excipient from each manufacturer. A weight of 1 (low), 
3 (medium), or 10 (high) is assigned for each of six criteria and, from that, an overall risk ranking of 
the excipient (low, medium, or high) is calculated. Where the GMPs used to manufacture excipients 
are found to be inappropriate according to risk ranking, mitigation measures are implemented. A 
risk analysis tool for manufacturer audit frequency is then used to assess the risk and determine audit 
frequency. Based on the outcome, a second risk assessment could be performed to determine if (1) 
additional mitigation measures should be implemented, or (2) use of the excipient from that specific 
manufacturer should be discontinued. If Company Y decides to continue to use the excipient after 
implementing additional mitigation measures to reduce the remaining risk to an acceptable level, the 
company documents this decision in a “statement to maintain business.” 
Company Y periodically reevaluates risk profiles during the review of a manufacturer’s performance. A 
risk assessment is reevaluated in cases of a significant quality event, e.g., significant change by manu-
facturer, serious GMP deficiencies, or loss of GMP certification.
• 
The model is simple to implement.
• 
The result of a risk assessment sometimes varies between sites. However, after implementing a 
control strategy, the sites could reach the same decision to continue use of the excipient from 
that manufacturer.
• 
Use of this model aids Company Y in implementation and modification of control measures to 
reduce risk to an acceptable level.
Figure 10.5-1	
Risk Assessment Model for Company Y
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 41 ---
35
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
Figure 10.6-1	
Risk Assessment Model for Company Z
10.6	 Example 6: Company Z 
Company Z’s model (Figure 10.6-1) was designed as a centralized process focused on highlighting the inherent risks and control strategies associated with an excipient, 
regardless of the manufacturer. The process is also designed to provide the user with the minimum quality standard expected for the manufacture of the excipient and 
its associated key risks. These risk and control strategies provide input for the gap analysis and, subsequently, to the quality risk assessment performed on supplier sites.
Company Z established a corporate procedure that outlines the requirements for the excipient risk assessment process and its linkages to the overarching supplier 
quality management process. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 42 ---
36
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Technical Report No. 54-6
The first part of the “end-to-end process excipient risk assessment” determines the control strategy and 
standards that are established by the centralized excipient risk assessment team. In the second part, the 
quality management group of the global supplier uses the output of the risk assessment to conduct in-
dividual supplier site quality risk assessments. The information from the individual supplier site qual-
ity risk assessments is shared with the formulation sites through a vendor assurance database system, 
highlighting any changes in supplier risk ranking via change control. The excipient risk assessments 
are reviewed periodically and any changes in inherent risk are brought to the attention of the global 
supplier’s quality management team. In addition, any quality event that impacts the excipient quality, 
whether internal or external, results in a review of the initial excipient risk assessment. 
After the need for an excipient risk assessment is identified, the centralized, cross-functional excipient 
risk assessment team performs the assessment, which focuses entirely on inherent risk. Supplier risks are 
not considered at this time. An electronic tool is used to perform the assessment, and the output is used 
to determine the appropriate quality level for the excipient and any relevant excipient control strategy. 
Each supplier quality manager from Company Z’s global supplier quality team then performs a gap 
analysis of the excipient supplier quality standard against an assessment of defined standards and ex-
cipient control strategies for supplied excipients. This identifies any gaps for the supplier. All gaps are 
challenged to ensure their validity and valid gaps are used as input, along with other supplier quality 
management intelligence, in performing the supplier site quality risk assessment. This final assessment 
generates a supplier risk ranking (low, medium, or high) which, in turn, determines the quality over-
sight to be applied.
The maintenance of the excipient risk assessment is managed under the periodic review process out-
lined in the corporate standard on excipient risk management. Quality events that impact excipient 
quality trigger an ad hoc excipient risk assessment review.
Company Z implemented this process in March 2016 in line with the EC Guidelines.
• 
A key benefit of conducting the assessment is consistency in managing excipients and suppliers. 
The centralized approach provided a concise framework for consistent input into the initial steps 
of the process. The implementation formalized the process and improved the documentation of 
information, supporting existing supplier risk assessment processes.
• 
Grouping excipient grades into categories aligned with the route of administration, origin, and 
function has reduced the number of assessments required. 
• 
Conducting a formalized assessment process provides clarity to sourcing partners, both internal 
and external. 
• 
The risk assessment acts as an effective standard for comparing and assessing supply chain risks.
11.0 
References (for Annex 1)
1.	
European Commission. Guidelines of 19 March 2015 on the Formalised Risk Assessment for Ascertaining the Appropriate 
Good Manufacturing Practice for Excipients of Medicinal Products for Human Use. European Commission: Brussels, 2015.
2.	
The International Pharmaceutical Excipients Council & The Pharmaceutical Quality Group. The Joint IPEC–PQG 
Good Manufacturing Practices Guide for Pharmaceutical Excipients [2017–updated version]; IPEC/PQG: Washington, 
D.C., 2017.
3.	
EXCiPACT asbl. EXCiPACT: Annex to ISO/IEC 17021-1:2015 Additional Requirements for Conformity Assessment 
Requirements for Certification Bodies and Auditors Revision 2017; EXCiPACT: Ann Arbor, Mich., 2017.
4.	
American National Standards Institute. NSF/IPEC/ANSI 363 - 2016 Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for 
Pharmaceutical Excipients. NSF International: Ann Arbor, Mich., 2016.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 43 ---
37
Technical Report No. 54-6
© 2019 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. / IPEC Federation asbl
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
• Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an 
Authorized User 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
• Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other than 
an Authorized User 
• Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available 
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
• Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic 
Publication 
• Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA Electronic 
Publication 
• Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication 
or its content 
• Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or 
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose 
• Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any 
text or graphics 
• Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information 
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material 
To License or purchase Reprints
• Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a fee.  
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact: 
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, 
ext. 133. Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, 
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
• Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.  
To order reprints, please contact:  
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150, 
Bethesda, MD 20814.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 44 ---
Technical Report No. 54-6
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside 
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are 
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. 
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the 
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a 
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s 
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Biotechnology Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality 
Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and deter-
mines whether to publish or not publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged 
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be 
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org. 
This document was approved by the IPEC Federation Board members. The process for this TR did not follow our 
standard process as it is not specified for collaborative guides.
PDA Officers and Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Rebecca Devine, PhD, Regulatory Consultant
Chair-Elect: Jette Christensen, PhD, Novo Nordisk
Treasurer: Michael Sadowski, Baxter Healthcare
Secretary: Steven Lynn, Lynn Consulting
Imm. Past Chair: Martin VanTrieste
President: Richard Johnson
Directors 
Masahiro Akimoto, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Factory, Inc.
Barbara M. Allen, PhD, Eli Lilly
Michael Blackton, Adaptimmune
Joyce Bloomfield
Bettine Boltres, PhD, West
Veronique Davoust, Pfizer
Ghada Haddad, Merck
Stephan Krause, PhD, AstraZeneca Biologics
Mary Oates, Lachman Consultant Services, Inc.
Emma Ramnarine, Genentech/Roche
Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Melissa Seymour, Biogen
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Ruth Miller, JD, Director of  Regulatory Affairs
Tina Morris, PhD, VP, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer
Sanctioning Advisory Board: RAQAB
Jacqueline Veivia-Panter, Hitachi Chemical (Chair)
Jeff Broadfoot, Emergent BioSolutions Inc. 
(Immediate Past Chair)
Anette Yan Marcussen, NNE (Vice Chair)
Karin Baer, Boeringer Ingelheim
Cylia Chen-Ooi, Amgen
Marcello Colao, GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals
Robert Darius, Sanofi-Aventis
Mirko Gabriele, Patheon Italia SpA
Aaron Goerke, PhD, Roche
Tor Gråberg, AstraZeneca
Dipti Gulati, PJI Biotech
Jane Halpern, PhD, Consultant
Frithjof Holtz, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany
Beth Kirschenheiter, ICU Medical
Steven Lynn, Lynn Consulting
Demetra Macheras, AbbVie, Inc.
Luciana Mansolelli, Novartis
Shin-ichiro Mohri, Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd.
Catriona Murphy, Eli Lilly and Company
Scott Nickerson, Moderna
Lorianne Richter, ConcordiaValsource
Janeen Skutnik-Wilkinson, Biogen
Eva Urban, CSL Behring
Gopi Vudathala, PhD, Intarcia Therapeutics
Martin Wisher, PhD, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, 
Germany
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 45 ---
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
Rue Marie de Bourgogne 52
B-1000 Brussels 
Brussels Capital Region, Belgium
Tel: +32 2 213 74 40
E-mail: info@ipec-federation.org
Web site: www.ipec-federation.org
Registered office:
Rue du Luxembourg 16B, B-1000 
Brussels, Belgium
VAT: BE0823931361
RPM Brussels Capital Region
IBAN: BE73363068125160
000546-CV
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
