Technical Report No. 13-2
1.0  Introduction
Environmental monitoring (EM) is used to evaluate the effectiveness of contamination controls used 
in the manufacture of pharmaceutical products. EM programs need to be designed and implemented 
based on the needs of the specific facility and processes involved. PDA Technical Report No. 13 (Re-
vised 2014): Fundamentals of an Environmental Monitoring Program (TR 13) focuses on the environ-
mental requirements for sterile product manufacturing (1). This addendum will provide elements 
to consider when designing a risk-based EM program to support the manufacture of low bioburden 
products using low bioburden processes. 
Regulations and guidance are readily available for EM requirements supporting sterile, nonsterile, 
and advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMP) manufacturing processes (2–6). Guidance for 
EM supporting the manufacture of low bioburden products is very limited. Where it is, the docu-
ments often cite resources intended for aseptic processes and then recommend establishing a risk-
based approach to designing an EM program to support low bioburden processes (7, 8). This is 
largely due to the fact that most manufacturing operations where low bioburden control is required 
combine elements of both sterile and nonsterile processing. However, no specific guidance identifies 
the elements to which these sterile and nonsterile guidelines should be applied. 
This document provides a means of determining the critical aspects, assessing the associated risks, 
and designing the appropriate EM program for areas where bioburden control of manufacturing pro-
cesses is required. It can be applied across many types of manufacturing operations used to produce 
pharmaceutical products including biologics, small molecules, ATMPs, and others. This document 
should be viewed as technical guidance and is not intended to establish any voluntary or mandatory 
standards.
1.1	
Purpose
This addendum complements the existing PDA TR-13 and is not meant to change or modify its 
content. The addendum provides recommendations for the development of an environmental 
control and monitoring program for classified areas and the associated GMP processes used for 
manufacturing operations requiring bioburden control in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical 
industries. The content includes a review of regulatory requirements and the development of risk 
assessments based on the criticality and complexity of processes, as well as industry examples of these 
risk-based approaches.
Risk assessment tools such as Failure Mode Effects Analysis (FMEA), Hazard Analysis and Critical 
Control Points (HACCP), or hybrid approaches can be used for these evaluations. This addendum 
presents a hybrid approach that is intended to help analyze operational risk in order to develop ap-
propriate levels of EM required to monitor operations. When implementing these tools in the design 
of any EM program, the resulting program should fit the intended purpose. It should not unneces-
sarily impede the operation or introduce additional risk to the process.
1.2	
Scope
TR-13-2 focuses on environmental controls and monitoring programs for classified areas where 
manufacturing processes are required to ensure a low bioburden level of the material being produced. 
Although a comprehensive EM program addresses both viable and nonviable aspects of the facil-
ity, this addendum concentrates primarily on the viable aspects as these parameters have a greater 
potential to impact product and process quality related to bioburden. This document is not intended 
to address EM programs for traditional aseptic or sterile manufacturing, which are covered in TR-13, 
nor does it address traditional nonsterile dosage forms.


2.0  Glossary
The terms and definitions contained in this glossary are specific to the content of this technical 
report. Although some of these definitions will match those terms as defined in PDA TR-13 and/
or other PDA technical reports (noted for each definition), others have been intentionally altered or 
developed to address the specific content and intent of this addendum and the attributes unique to 
facilities used to manufacture low bioburden products.
Adverse Trend
EM data (including microbial and particulate) 
that is consistently increasing in one direction. 
Adverse trends are system- or area-specific, should 
be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and should 
consider factors such as contamination recovery 
rate, excursion rate, and individual results.
Airborne Particulate Count (Total 
Particulate Count)
The total number of particles of a specific size 
per unit volume of air (1).
Airborne Viable Particulate Count 
(Total Airborne Microbial Count)
The recovered number of colony-forming units 
per unit volume of air (1).
Bioburden
The total number of microorganisms per unit of 
material prior to sterilization (1). 
Bioburden Reduction Step
A process utilizing a method that has been 
demonstrated to lower the bioburden level in a 
given sample.
Processing Area
The area in which processing occurs, with the 
appropriate environmental (e.g., gowning, clean-
ing/disinfection, training) and engineering (e.g., 
HVAC, facility design, material/personnel flows, 
differential pressures) controls in place to reduce 
the risk of microbial or particulate contamination. 
Classified Area
An area typically classified according to ISO 
standards.
Cleaning
Chemical or physical means used to remove soil 
and/or microorganisms from surfaces (1).
Cleanroom
A room designed, maintained, and controlled to 
prevent particle and microbiological contamina-
tion of a drug product. A cleanroom is assigned 
and reproducibly meets an appropriate air 
cleanliness classification (1).
Critical Operations Monitoring
Monitoring performed throughout the duration 
of a process using methods designed to monitor 
the environmental quality of the process and to 
capture all interventions, transient events, and 
any system deterioration. The design and degree 
of the monitoring performed should be based 
on the risk to the process or product being 
monitored (e.g., closed vs. open systems, use 
of biological safety cabinet, unidirectional flow 
hood, or other containment systems).
Disinfection
The chemical or physical inactivation of a 
bioburden on inanimate surfaces. Typically, this 
requires a minimum three-log (3-log) reduction 
of vegetative microorganisms and a two-log (2-
log) reduction of bacterial spores to be achieved 
in validation (9).
Environmental Control Parameters
Conditions and corresponding measurements 
as associated with facilities and equipment used 
in the control of a manufacturing area that 
may impact the identity, strength, quality, or 
purity of a product. Among such parameters are 
airflow rates and patterns, pressure differentials, 
materials and personnel flow, temperature, and 
relative humidity, as well as nonviable and vi-
able particulates (1). 
Environmental Monitoring
Dynamic (Operational) Monitoring
The condition where production opera-
tions are actively occurring as defined by the 
individual firm. Personnel may or may not be 
present at this time.
Routine Monitoring – Frequency-Based/
Predetermined/Nonbatch-related
Monitoring of a facility at a predetermined 
frequency, as defined by an approved proce-
dure, to provide an overall assessment of the 
state of control of the facility.
Batch-related – In-Process or During-
Process Monitoring
Monitoring performed during predetermined 
steps of the production process, as defined by 


Technical Report No. 13-2
an approved batch record and/or approved 
procedures or protocols. This can be per-
formed either in the presence or absence of 
the product. 
Continuous
Batch-related monitoring, as defined by an 
approved batch record, to ensure that a state 
of control is maintained during processing 
and that any aberrant events are detected. 
Frequency of monitoring is determined by a 
risk assessment.
Closed System
A process system with equipment designed 
and operated such that the product is not ex-
posed to the room environment at any point 
in the process. For most biological operations, 
the system or fluid pathway must remain 
free of extraneous contamination. Examples 
include, but are not limited to, a cell culture 
bioreactor or cell therapy bag assembly.
Functionally Closed System
A process system that may be routinely opened 
(e.g., to install a filter or make a connection), 
but is returned to a closed state during process-
ing. In biological operations, for example, a 
functionally closed system is often employed 
when a low level of extraneous contamination 
may be permissible (such as purification skids 
used in cell-culture operations).
Open System
A process system that exposes the product 
to the room environment. In this type of 
system, the room environment is controlled 
to minimize the risk of extraneous product 
contamination. Examples include, but are not 
limited to, processing steps, such as media 
preparation or supplementation, or inoculum 
preparation.
Low Bioburden Product
Product manufactured within a controlled and 
monitored environment in which the final drug 
product or process intermediate, as applicable, 
requires bioburden control, but is not required 
to be sterile (e.g., biological drug substance 
produced by mammalian cell culture).
Nonviable
A term used in reference to particulates that are 
not capable of living, growing, or developing 
and functioning successfully (“unable to divide” 
or “not capable of reproducing”) (1).
Process Control Parameters
Conditions and corresponding measurements 
associated with the manufacturing process 
that may affect the identity, strength, quality, 
potency, and purity of a product. Examples 
of parameters of concern include bioburden, 
process rate, weight, volume, temperature, and 
pressure (1).
Risk Analysis
The estimation of the risk associated with the 
identified hazards (1). The following are com-
monly used tools that can be used to perform 
risk analysis (10, 11).
• FMEA – Failure Mode Effects Analysis
• HACCP – Hazard Analysis and Critical 
Control Points
Sanitization
Reduction of microbial contaminants to safe 
levels as judged by public health requirements 
for the specific country (1).
Sterilization
Validated process used to render product free 
from viable microorganisms (1). 


3.0  Low Bioburden Products and Processes versus Traditional 
Sterile and Nonsterile Products and Processes
Sterile drug manufacturing is designed to produce a final sterile product through sterilizing process 
steps and subsequent manufacturing processes and controls. In contrast, manufacturing processes that 
require bioburden control are designed to limit the introduction of microorganisms into the process. 
Based on the physical properties of the materials being manufactured or, in some cases, regulatory 
requirements, mitigative steps designed as bioburden control mechanisms, such as the use of anti-
biotics, preservatives, solvents, low or high pH, sterile filtration and heat, may not be possible. In 
many cases, the process streams for these processes support the proliferation of any microorganisms 
present, often requiring control mechanisms during manufacturing operations to prevent or reduce 
microbial growth. Specific process steps taken if microorganisms are present, such as purification and 
ultrafiltration, often reduce bioburden levels although, in general, they are not specifically designed 
to do so. Due to the inherent susceptibility of the manufacturing process in these cases, an added 
focus must be placed on minimizing the ingress and proliferation of microorganisms and their me-
tabolites that can affect product quality, safety, and stability. 
Control of the process and processing environment is a major component of reducing the potential 
for product stream bioburden. Elements of control include the design of the facilities, utilities, and 
processing equipment (closed/open), as well as personnel and procedural measures. EM is used as a 
tool to measure the efficacy of these controls in a manufacturing facility. 
The use of a local unidirectional airflow hood (UDF) for specific open manufacturing steps is a com-
mon practice where bioburden control is desired. These units are designed to produce a localized EU 
Grade A/ISO 5 environment. In this application, the units are not being used to provide protection 
for a sterile manufacturing-related operation but rather a nonsterile manufacturing operation as part 
of a bioburden control program. In such cases, based on their use and a thorough risk assessment, 
the placement of the UDF in Grade C environments is often acceptable. The level of gowning as-
sociated with their use should also be evaluated and requirements set based on the operation being 
performed and the level of control required. 
The implementation and utilization of a quality risk management program provides scientific ratio-
nale for the manufacturing controls and EM program developed for these types of manufacturing 
processes (10, 12). Quality risk management is predicated on understanding the specific risk factors 
of the environment and the process used to manufacture the product. 
Once the manufacturing process and the potential contributors to the level of bioburden (e.g., 
environmental factors, facility and/or equipment design) have been identified and characterized, a 
thorough and well-documented risk assessment should be conducted to identify the points of po-
tential microbial ingress. The manufacturer may incorporate specific components of a regulation or 
guidance document into the risk assessment as it applies to a particular process or step; this addition 
may vary depending on the intent of the risk assessment. Upon completion of the risk assessment, 
supporting programs can be developed to mitigate the risks identified. While all risks may need to be 
monitored for a period of time, any risk that cannot be mitigated should continue to be monitored. 
When a manufacturing area has been classified in line with a regulatory or industry classification 
scheme, the EM program is often expected to meet the applicable requirements regardless of how the 
area is used. For example, if an area is classified as EU Grade A, the EM program and other support-
ing programs (e.g., gowning, cleaning, and sanitization) must reflect the requirements contained 
in the corresponding regulatory document. In many cases, these guidance documents are designed 
specifically to address the manufacture of sterile medicinal products, not nonsterile manufacturing 
operations designed to control but not eliminate the bioburden load present.
Consider the scenario of an aseptic transfer of materials in the UDF to minimize the introduction 
of additional bioburden. This is a nonsterile manufacturing step. A risk assessment may demonstrate 


Technical Report No. 13-2
that only certain aspects of the EU Grade A classification requirements are pertinent to the process. 
Monitoring performed during the manufacturing process should be aligned with the risk assess-
ment and reflect the monitoring needed to support the process. For example, in a situation where 
the concern is focused on the addition of bioburden (microorganisms) to the manufacturing opera-
tion the risk assessment may conclude that the need to perform total particulate monitoring during 
the manufacturing operation should be reduced or eliminated. In that case, the total particulate 
monitoring would still be performed at a set frequency to ensure the UDF is continuing to oper-
ate appropriately but not during the actual manufacturing step. Similarly, the surrounding room 
environment should be determined based on the assessment of the manufacturing process and the 
control needed. For traditional nonsterile operations, for example, the EU Grade C requirements 
may be more appropriate based on the operation being performed. An alternative could be to classify 
the area according to ISO 14644 (e.g., ISO 5, 7, 8), as appropriate for the specific process and area 
(13). This approach must be documented in the site risk assessment. The supporting EM and other 
control programs should be designed to monitor the room or facility to the levels needed for the 
specific processes being performed. 
An additional example where the use of a risk assessment may be of value is in the use of a UDF 
where preparation of the inoculum used for seeding of a bioreactor is being performed. In this exam-
ple, during mammalian cell culture preparation, a designated room is used to prepare the inoculum 
for seeding the bioreactor. In the scale-up process, aseptic techniques are used to transfer the contents 
of a thawed cryovial to a sterile T-flask (or similar container). This activity is performed in a UDF to 
protect the process from the introduction of microorganisms, as microbial contamination would be 
the largest concern. The UDF is classified as EU Grade A because an aseptic technique must be per-
formed in order to exclude the introduction of extraneous contaminants. This process takes less than 
two minutes to execute. Based on the air quality criteria described in EudraLex, Volume 4, Annex 1: 
Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, both continuous nonviable particulate counts and active 
airborne viable monitoring would be required during the manufacturing process based on the UDF 
classification as Grade A (2). This would present some challenges if applied. Annex 1 has gener-
ally been interpreted to expect a sample size of one cubic meter of air for both types of monitoring, 
which takes between 5 and 35 minutes to collect depending on the type of equipment used. Con-
sidering that the scale-up process takes only two minutes to execute, the requirements for the sample 
volumes would be difficult to satisfy; however, if the process only takes two minutes, the monitoring 
would encompass the entire process and meet the intent of the regulation. In this case, a risk as-
sessment should be completed to evaluate the process and monitoring requirements. If the primary 
concern is the introduction of viable organisms, the risk assessment may conclude that performing 
in-process total particulate counts not only provides little value but increases the risk to the operation 
based on the distraction it creates for the operator (assuming the use of manually operated particu-
late counters) and should not be conducted during the process while viable monitoring is of greater 
importance. As presented in the aseptic transfer example above, total particulate monitoring would 
be expected at an established frequency to ensure the biological safety cabinet is performing properly. 
A number of well-known risk assessment tools are available, such as flow charts, check sheets, 
FMEA, and HACCP. In order to perform a successful risk assessment, the following must be in-
cluded to ensure that all aspects of the process are appropriately addressed:
• Knowledgeable representation from the functional areas involved in the process (e.g., validation, 
manufacturing, quality, facilities, microbiology)
• Defined risk questions
• Detailed process map
• Facility map, including personnel and material movements
• Production batch records and standard operating procedures
