4 General principles applying to biological evaluation of medical devices
4.1
The biological evaluation of any material or medical device intended for use in humans shall form
part of a structured biological evaluation plan within a risk management process in accordance with
ISO 14971:2007, Annex I, as given in Figure 1 of this document. This risk management process involves
identification of biological hazards, estimation of the associated biological risks, and determination of
their acceptability. Annex B provides guidance on this process. The biological evaluation shall be planned,
carried out, and documented by knowledgeable and experienced professionals.
The risk management plan should identify aspects of the biological evaluation requiring specific
technical competencies and shall identify the person(s) responsible for the biological evaluation.
The evaluation shall include documented, informed consideration of advantages/disadvantages and
relevance of:
a) medical device configuration (e.g. size, geometry, surface properties) and a listing of a medical
device’s materials of construction (qualitative) and where necessary, the proportion and amount
(mass) of each material in the medical device (quantitative);
b) the physical and chemical characteristics of the various materials of construction and their
composition;
5
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith8ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
NOTE Where this information is already documented within the risk management for the medical
device, it can be included by reference.
c) any history of clinical use or human exposure data;
NOTE Previous regulatory approval history can be relevant.
d) any existing toxicology and other biological safety data on product and component materials,
breakdown products and metabolites;
e) test procedures.
Evaluation can include both a review of relevant existing preclinical and clinical data and actual
testing. Such an evaluation might result in the conclusion that no testing is needed if the material has
a demonstrable safe history of use in a specified role and physical form that is equivalent to that of the
medical device under design. The type of information that can be useful to demonstrate equivalence is
included in Annex B. Testing is usually not necessary when sufficient information is already available to
perform a risk assessment of the material and/or the medical device (see Annex C).
4.2
In the selection of materials to be used in the medical device manufacture, the first consideration
shall be fitness for purpose with regard to characteristics and properties of the material, which include
chemical, toxicological, physical, electrical, morphological and mechanical properties.
4.3
The following shall be taken into account for their relevance to the overall biological evaluation of
the medical device:
a) the material(s) of construction (i.e. all direct and indirect tissue contacting materials);
b) intended additives, process contaminants and residues (for example, testing for ethylene oxide
sterilization residuals shall be conducted in accordance with ISO 10993-7);
c) packaging materials that directly or indirectly contact the medical device can transfer chemicals to
the medical device and then indirectly to the patient or clinician;
d) leachable substances (see ISO 10993-17 and ISO 10993-18);
e) degradation products (see ISO 10993-9, for general principles and 10993-13, 10993-14 and 10993-
15 for degradation products from polymers, ceramics and metals, respectively);
f) other components and their interactions in the final product;
g) the performance and characteristics of the final product;
h) physical characteristics of the final product, including but not limited to, porosity, particle size,
shape and surface morphology.
Description of medical device chemical constituents and consideration of material characterization
including chemical characterization (see ISO 10993-18) shall precede any biological testing (see
Figure 1). Chemical characterization with an appropriate toxicological threshold can be used to
determine if further testing is needed (see Annex B, ISO 10993-17 and ISO 10993-18).
Physical effects of the medical device shall be considered if they impact the biocompatibility.
NOTE See ISO/TR 10993-19 for information.
Medical devices that contain, generate, or are composed of nanomaterials can pose specific challenges
to the biological evaluation due to their potentially unique properties (see ISO/TR 10993-22).
Both local and systemic effects shall be considered for risk evaluation.
4.4
The biological evaluation shall commence with categorization of medical devices (see Clause 6).
A6 ssessment of the information already availa--b``,,l,e,`, ,,t,,h`,` ,e`,,n,,, ``e`,`n-`-`a,,`b,,`l,`e,,`s-- -a gap analysis to facilitate the selection
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT © ISO 2018 – All rights reserved
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
of appropriate tests. The rigour necessary in the biological evaluation is principally determined by the
nature, degree, frequency and duration of the exposure and the hazards identified for the medical device
or material. Testing is usually not necessary when sufficient information is already available to perform a
risk assessment of the material and/or the medical device (see Annex C). For example, biological testing is
usually not necessary, if material characterization (e.g. physical and chemical) demonstrates equivalence
to a previously assessed medical device or material with established safety (see ISO 10993-18 and ISO/
TR 10993-19).
The interpretation of the data shall take into account the chemical composition of the materials,
including the conditions of exposure as well as the nature, degree, frequency and duration of exposure
of the body to the medical device or its constituents.
4.5
All known possible biological hazards shall be taken into account for every material and final
product, but this does not imply that testing for all possible hazards will be necessary or practical (see
Clauses 5 and 6). Test results cannot guarantee freedom from potential biological hazards, thus biological
investigations shall be followed by careful observations for unexpected adverse reactions or events in
humans during clinical use of the medical device.
The range of possible biological hazards is wide and can include short-term effects such as acute
toxicity, irritation to the skin, eye and mucosal surfaces, haemolysis and thrombogenicity, as well as
long-term or specific toxic effects such as subchronic and chronic toxic effects, sensitization resulting
in allergy, genotoxicity, carcinogenicity (tumorigenicity) and effects on reproduction or development,
i 4 n .6 cl uding teratogenicity. in vitro in vivo
If testing is needed, selection of any or tests (see Annex A) shall be based on
iInn tveintrdoed use.
in vivo
in vivo test methods, which are appropriately validated, reasonably and practically ianv vaiitlraoble, reliable
and reproducible, shall be considered foinr vuisveo in preference to tests (see ISO 10993-2). Whenever
tests are indicated by findings of the initial risk assessment, use of appropriate screening,
if available, shall be considered before tests are commenced. A rationale for the testing strategy,
as well as for test selection, shall be provided. Test data, complete to the extent that an independent
analysis could be made, shall be evaluated by competent, informed professionals, and shall be retained.
In certain circumstances, such as for specific medical devices, or biological endpoint assessments, if a
non-standardized, non-validated test is necessary, additional information regarding the rationale for
the study design and data interpretation should be provided.
4.7
The biological safety of a medical device shall be evaluated by the manufacturer over the whole
life-cycle of a medical device.
4.8
For re-usable medical devices, biological safety shall be evaluated for the maximum number of
validated processing cycles by the manufacturer.
7
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith8ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
Figure 1 — Summary of the systematic approach to a biological evaluation of medical devices as
part of a risk management process
8
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT © ISO 2018 – All rights reserved
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
4.9
The biological risk assessment of materials or final products shall be re-evaluated if any of the
following occur:
a) any change in the source or in the specification of the materials used in the manufacture of the
product;
b) any change in the formulation, processing, primary packaging or sterilization of the product;
c) any change in the manufacturer's instructions or expectations concerning storage, e.g. changes in
shelf life and/or transport;
d) any change in the intended use of the product;
e) any evidence that the product can produce adverse biological effects when used in humans.
4.10
The biological evaluation shall take into account preclinical tests, clinical investigations, post-
market experience from similar medical devices or materials, and other relevant information (see
Annex B).
4.11
This document shall not be used to mandate re-testing of historical products assessed previously
using the appropriate edition of this document at the time of the assessment. Nevertheless, compliance
to this new edition shall be shown, by providing a justification for omission of further testing. Where
recommendations for endpoint assessment per Annex A are different from prior published versions
of this document, a history of safe clinical use can be used to document why additional testing on a
commercially-marketed medical device is not needed. However, if any of the changes described in
Clause 4.9 occur, an evaluation of the biologic risks related to the change shall be performed using the
current version of this standard.
5 Categorization of medical devices
5.1 General
Medical devices shall be categorized according to the nature and duration of body contact as specified
in 5.2 and 5.3. The categorization of medical devices facilitates selection of appropriate data sets (see
informative Annex A).
The evaluation of any medical device that does not fall into one of the categories specified shall follow
the general principles contained in this document. Certain medical devices might fall into more than
one body contact or duration category, in which case evaluation appropriate to each category shall be
carried out.
EXAMPLE For medical devices that include both an implanted component, and a delivery system that is used
only during a surgical procedure to place the medical device, the implant should be assessed separately from the
delivery system.
EXAMPLE For gas pathway device components with only indirect contact, device specific standards should
be used to determine the relevant type of biocompatibility evaluations [see ISO 18562 (all parts)].
5.2 Categorization by nature of body contact
5.2.1 Non-contacting medical devices
in vitro
These include medical devices (or components) that have neither direct nor indirect contact with the
body and where biocompatibility information would not be necessary. Diagnostic software, an
diagnostic device and a blood-collection tube are examples of non-contact devices.
9
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith8ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
5.2.2 Surface-contacting medical devices
These include medical devices in contact with the following.
a) Skin
— Medical devices that contact intact skin surfaces only.
EXAMPLES Electrodes, external prostheses, fixation tapes, compression bandages and monitors of
various types.
NOTE Some medical devices used in either sterile or non-sterile environments include components
that can come into contact with a user’s ungloved hands such as human interfaces for electronic
equipment (e.g. computer keyboards, dials or buttons, touch screens, SD cards, USB sticks); housings
for electronic monitors or programmers that can come into contact with any intact skin (e.g. electronic
devices like cell phones, tablets); or components that can come into contact with a user’s gloved hand
(e.g. catheter handles). If these types of components can be shown to be made from materials in common
use for other consumer products with a similar nature of contact, no further biological evaluation is
needed.
b) Mucosal membranes
— Medical devices that contact intact mucosal membranes.
EXAMPLES Contact lenses, urinary catheters, intravaginal and intra-intestinal devices (stomach
tubes, sigmoidoscopes, colonoscopes, gastroscopes), endotracheal tubes, bronchoscopes, some dental
prostheses and orthodontic devices.
c) Breached or compromised surfaces
— Medical devices that contact breached or otherwise compromised body surfaces.
EXAMPLES Dressings or healing devices and occlusive patches for ulcers, burns and granulation
tissue.
5.2.3 Externally communicating medical devices
Externally communicating medical devices shall be categorized according to their contact with the
following application sites.
a) Blood path, indirect
— Medical devices or components that do not necessarily directly contact the blood path directly
but serve as conduits to deliver fluids into the vascular system.
EXAMPLES Solution administration sets, extension sets, transfer sets and blood administration
sets.
b) Tissue/bone/dentin
— Medical devices that contact tissue, bone or pulp/dentin systems.
EXAMPLES Laparoscopes, arthroscopes, draining systems, dental filling materials and skin staples.
— Medical devices or components that do not necessarily directly contact tissue or bone but serve
as conduits to delivery fluids to the tissue or bone.
EXAMPLES Tubing used for irrigation and medical device components that have fluid contact that
can also contact the patient.
c) Circulating blood
— Medical devices that contact circulating blood.
10
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT © ISO 2018 – All rights reserved
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
EXAMPLES Intravascular catheters, temporary pacemaker electrodes, oxygenators, extracorporeal
oxygenator tubing and accessories, dialysers, dialysis tubing and accessories, haemoadsorbents and
immunoadsorbents.
5.2.4 Implant medical devices
Implant medical devices shall be categorized according to their contact with the following
application sites.
a) Tissue/bone
— Medical devices principally contacting bone.
EXAMPLES Orthopaedic pins, plates, replacement joints, bone prostheses, bone cements and intra-
osseous devices.
— Medical devices principally contacting tissue and tissue fluid.
EXAMPLES Pacemakers, drug supply devices, neuromuscular sensors and simulators, replacement
tendons, breast implants, artificial larynxes, subperiosteal implants, ligation clips and intrauterine
devices that do not achieve their primary function by chemical activity.
b) Blood
— Medical devices principally contacting circulating blood in the cardiovascular system.
EXAMPLES Pacemaker electrodes, artificial arteriovenous fistulae, heart valves, vascular grafts,
internal drug-delivery catheters and ventricular assist devices.
NOTE Most tissues contain circulating blood; however, this category is not intended to encompass
devices implanted into tissue that contain transitory released blood (e.g. a hernia repair graft).
5.3 Categorization by duration of contact
5.3.1 Contact duration categories
Medical devices shall be categorized according to the anticipated duration of contact as follows.
a) Limited exposure (A) – medical devices whose cumulative sum of single, multiple or repeated
duration of contact is up to 24 h.
b) Prolonged exposure (B) – medical devices whose cumulative sum of single, multiple or repeated
contact time is likely to exceed 24 h but not exceed 30 d.
c) Long-term exposure (C) – medical devices whose cumulative sum of single, multiple or repeated
contact time exceeds 30 d.
5.3.2 Transitory-contacting medical devices
Some medical devices with limited exposure (A) have very brief/transitory contact with the body (e.g.
lancets, hypodermic needles, capillary tubes that are used for less than one minute). These generally
would not require testing to address biocompatibility. However, for products made with materials
such as coatings or lubricants that could be left in contact with body tissues after the medical device is
removed, it is possible that a more detailed biocompatibility assessment will be necessary. Cumulative
use should also be considered.
5.3.3 Medical devices with multiple contact duration categories
If a material or medical device can be placed in more than one duration category, the more rigorous
testing and/or evaluation considerations shall apply. With expected or intended multiple exposures to a
device, the decision into which category a medical device is placed shall take into account the potential
11
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith8ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
cinu msituulative effect, bearing in mind the period of time over which these exposures occur. If a medical
device is intended to change dinu rsiintug its lifetime, such as those that are polymerized and/or degraded
, the evaluation shall consider all the different device states. For example, for an absorbable
glue intended to polymerize , the different device states would include starting components,
intermediate reaction products, the fully polymerized material and degradation products.
6 Biological evaluation process
6.1 Physical and chemical information for biological risk analysis
Figure 1 indicates how the general steps in the physical and/or chemical characterization process link
to the overall biological evaluation decision points.
Gathering physical and chemical information on the medical device or component is a crucial first step
in the biological evaluation and its associated process of material characterization. These data should
be sufficient to answer the first two rows of questions in the Figure 1 flow chart. The extent of physical
and/or chemical characterization required depends on what is known about the material formulation,
what nonclinical and clinical safety and toxicological data exist, and on the nature and duration of body
contact with the medical device. At a minimum, the characterization shall address the constituent
chemicals of the medical device and possible residual process aids or additives used in its manufacture.
In addition, it is possible that some physical characterization information will be needed for implanted
medical devices or medical devices in contact with blood. Material characterization, if performed, shall
be conducted in accordance with ISO 10993-18. For nanomaterials see ISO/TR 10993-22.
If the combination of all materials, chemicals and processes has an established history of safe use in
the intended application, and the physical properties have not changed, then it is possible that further
characterization and additional data sets (e.g. chemical analysis of extracts or biological testing) will
not be necessary. In this case the rationale shall be documented.
The identity and quantity of any novel materials and chemicals present should be established or
measured.
For device extractables and leachables that have sufficient toxicological data relevant to the expected
exposure (quantity, route and frequency), further testing need not be required. For medical devices
that have known leachable chemical mixtures, potential interactions between the leachables should be
considered.
Where the potential for degradation exists under the conditions of manufacture, sterilization,
transport, storage, and use of the medical device, the presence and nature of degradation products
shall be characterized in accordance with ISO 10993-9, ISO 10993-13, ISO 10993-14, and ISO 10993-15,
as applicable.
For materials and/or medical devices that can release wear particles, the potential release of
nanoparticles should be considered as described in ISO/TR 10993-22.
6.2 Gap analysis and selection of biological endpoints for assessment
Assess available information and compare to the data set(s) needed to assess the biological safety of the
medical device (see Clause 4, Annexes A and C). Identify additional reasonably and practicably obtained
data or testing needed to complete the data sets required to perform the risk assessment.
Characterize the data gap and determine its significance both to the assessment of the biological
endpoint (Annex A) and to the overall biological risk assessment. Identify options for data sets that
would address the data gap.
For example, pharmacopeial plastics’ testing is typically conducted on raw materials, whereas ISO
10993 evaluates the medical device in its final stage. Therefore, data from such pharmacopeial testing
is not sufficient for the final medical device without appropriate justification.
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
12
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT © ISO 2018 – All rights reserved
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
The results of the risk analysis of identified chemicals can lead to the conclusion that additional material
characterization is necessary. Appropriate extraction testing, can be used to estimate the degree
of clinical exposure to the chemical constituent (see ISO 10993-18). The acceptability of the level of
estimated leachables shall be established by comparing the amount of each compound extracted from
the medical device to its respective relevant toxicological threshold as developed in accordance with
ISO 10993-17.
NOTE For example, when the margin of safety is not considered adequate if the entire amount of a particular
chemical is leached out during use, appropriate extraction testing can be used.
in vivo
Protection of humans is the prinim viavroy goal of this document; a secondary goal is to ensure animal welfare
and to minimize the number and exposure of the test animals. ISO 10993-2 applies to any testing
being considered. Additional testing shall not be carried out where
1) results are available from relevant studies that have been carried out previously, or
2) the existing non-clinical and clinical data, including history of safe use, meet the requirements of
biological evaluation and therefore further animal testing would be unethical. In assessing the
relevance of data on prior use of a material to the biological evaluation, the level of confidence in the
historical data should be taken into account. ISO 10993-18:2005, Annex C, gives some informative
principles for judging chemical equivalence.
6.3 Biological testing
6.3.1 General
In addition to the general principles given in Clause 4, the following shall apply when biological testing
of medical devices is considered necessary as part of the overall risk management process.
a) Testing shall be performed on the final medical device, or representative samples from the
final device or materials processed in the same manner as the final medical device (including
sterilization, if needed).
b) The choice of test procedures shall take into account:
1) the nature, degree, duration, frequency and conditions of exposure to or contact of humans
with the medical device in the normal intended use;
2) the chemical and physical nature of the final medical device;
3) the toxicological activity of the chemicals in the formulation of the final medical device;
4) that certain biological tests (i.e. those designed to assess systemic effects) are not
justifiable where the presence of leachable chemicals has been excluded (in accordance with
ISO 10993-18), or where chemicals have a known and acceptable toxicity profile, allowing the
safe use by evaluation in accordance with ISO 10993-17 and risk assessment in accordance
with ISO 14971;
5) the ratio of device surface area to recipient body size and mass (e.g. device miniaturization for
implantation testing in animal models);
6) the existing information based on the literature, previous experience and non-clinical tests;
7) the sensitivity and specificity of the test being considered in relation to the impact of the
resulting data set on the biological evaluation;
8) that ISO 10993-2:2006, 4.4, requires that any pain, suffering, distress or lasting harm to the
animals used shall be minimized.
c) If extracts of the medical devices are prepared, the solvents and conditions of extraction used
should be appropriate to the nature and use of the final product, as well as to the predictability
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`--- 13
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith8ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
(such as test purpose, rationale, sensitivity, specificity, etc.) of the test method, and shall be
prepared in accordance with ISO 10993-12. Whenever possible, the extraction conditions selected
should represent at a minimum, an exaggeration of use conditions.
d) Positive and negative controls should be used where appropriate.
The test methods used in the biological evaluation tests shall be sensitive, precise and accurate. When
biological testing is conducted, it shall be carried out in accordance with good laboratory practices.
NOTE ISO/IEC 17025 or equivalent.
The test methods should be reproducible (intralaboratory) as well as repeatable (interlaboratory)
and robust.
6.3.2 Testing for evaluation
Testing for the evaluations specified in 6.3.2.1 to 6.3.2.15 shall be considered and carried out where
necessary to complete the data sets needed for the biological evaluation of the particular medical
device. Where the existing data are adequate, additional testing is not required (see Annexes A and C).
Due to the diversity of medical devices, it is recognized that testing will not be necessary or practicable
for all endpoints identified in a category (see ISO 14971) for a given medical device. It is indispensable
for evaluations that each medical device be considered on its own merits. Nanomaterials can pose
specific challenges (e.g. assay interference) when applying test systems commonly used for medical
device evaluation and when interpreting test results (see ISO/TR 10993-22).
Additional endpoints not indicated in the table can be necessary (e.g. reproductive toxicity,
developmental toxicity, degradation and toxicokinetics).
6.3.2.1 Cytotoxicity
Cytotoxicity tests employing cell culture techniques can be used to determine the cell death (e.g. cell
lysis), the inhibition of cell growth, colony formation, and other effects on cells caused by medical
devices, materials and/or their extracts. If testing is performed, it shall be conducted in accordance
with ISO 10993-5.
6.3.2.2 Sensitization
Sensitization (e.g. delayed-type hypersensitivity) tests can be used to estimate the potential for contact
sensitization by medical devices, materials and/or their extracts, using an appropriate model. If testing
is performed, it shall be conducted in accordance with ISO 10993-10.
These tests are important because repeat exposure or contact to even very small amounts of potential
leachables can result in sensitization, which can lead to allergic reactions.
6.3.2.3 Irritation (including intracutaneous reactivity)
Irritation tests can be used to estimate the irritation potential of medical devices, materials and/or
their extracts, using an appropriate site for application such as skin, eye and mucous membrane in a
suitable model. The test(s) performed shall be appropriate for the route (skin, eye, mucosa) and duration
of exposure or contact, and shall be conducted in accordance with ISO 10993-10.
The intracutaneous reactivity test can be used to assess the localized reaction of tissue to medical
device extracts. This test is applicable where the determination of irritation by dermal or mucosal tests
is inappropriate (e.g. where medical devices are implanted or have blood contact). This test might also
be useful where extractables are hydrophobic (see ISO 10993-10).
14
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT © ISO 2018 – All rights reserved
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
6.3.2.4 Haemocompatibility
Haemocompatibility tests can be used to evaluate, using an appropriate model or system, the effects of
blood-contacting medical devices or materials on blood or blood components.
in vitro
One haemocompatibility test, haemolysis, determines the degree of red cell lysis and the release of
haemoglobin caused by medical devices, materials, and/or their extracts .
Other specific haemocompatibility tests can also be designed to simulate the geometry, contact
conditions and flow dynamics of the medical device or material during clinical applications and
determine blood/material/device interactions.
Any testing performed shall be conducted in accordance with ISO 10993-4.
6.3.2.5 Material-mediated pyrogenicity
Pyrogenicity tests as part of a biological evaluation are intended to detect material-mediated pyrogenic
reactions of extracts of medical devices or materials. No single test can differentiate pyrogenic reactions
that are material-mediated from those due to endotoxin contamination (see ISO 10993-11:2017,
Annex G). Material-mediated pyrogenicity is rare. It has been observed in medical devices containing
biologically-derived materials.
6.3.2.6 Acute systemic toxicity
Acute systemic toxicity tests can be used where contact allows potential absorption of toxic leachables
and degradation products, to estimate the potential harmful effects of either single or multiple
exposures, during a period of less than 24 h, to medical devices, materials and/or their extracts in an
animal model. These tests shall be appropriate for the route of exposure, and any testing performed
shall be conducted in accordance with ISO 10993-11.
If feasible, acute systemic toxicity tests can be combined with subacute and subchronic toxicity and
implantation test protocols.
Where an evaluation of systemic toxicity is specified in Table A.1, biological testing or the risk
assessment shall include assessment of the potential for biological responses in tissues throughout the
body (e.g. per ISO 10993-11:2017, Annex E), including the organ systems relevant to the clinical use of
the medical device.
6.3.2.7 Subacute and subchronic toxicity
Subacute and subchronic toxicity tests can be carried out to determine the effects of either single or
multiple exposures or contact to medical devices, materials and/or their extracts for a period not less
than 24 h to a period not greater than 10 % of the total life-span of the test animal (e.g. up to 13 weeks
in rats).
These tests shall be waived if available data for the chronic toxicity of the relevant materials are
sufficient to allow the subacute and subchronic toxicity to be evaluated. The reason for waiving of the
tests shall be included in the overall biological evaluation report. These tests shall be appropriate for
the route and duration of contact.
Subacute and subchronic toxicity tests, if performed, shall be conducted in accordance with
ISO 10993-11.
If feasible, subacute and subchronic systemic toxicity test protocols can be expanded to include
implantation test protocols to evaluate subacute and subchronic systemic and local effects.
6.3.2.8 Chronic toxicity
Chronic toxicity tests can be used to determine the effects of either single or multiple exposures to
medical devices, materials and/or their extracts during a major period of the life-span of the test animal
--``,,,,`,, ,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`--- 15
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith8ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
(e.g. usually 6 months in rats). These tests shall be appropriate for the route and duration of exposure
or contact, and if performed, shall be conducted in accordance with ISO 10993-11.
If feasible, chronic systemic toxicity test protocol can be expanded to include an implantation test
protocol to evaluate both chronic systemic and local effects.
6.3.2.9 Implantation effects
Implantation tests can be used to assess the local pathological effects on living tissue, at both the gross
level and microscopic level, of a sample of a material or final product that is surgically implanted or
placed in an implant site or tissue appropriate to the intended application (e.g. special dental usage
tests). These tests shall be appropriate for the route and duration of contact, and if performed, shall be
conducted in accordance with ISO 10993-6.
If feasible, implantation test protocols can be expanded to evaluate both local and systemic effects
to meet acute, subacute, subchronic, and chronic toxicity testing requirements (see ISO 10993-6). If
applicable and feasible, evaluation of haemocompatibility aspects can be included (see ISO 10993-4).
When appropriately designed simulated use animal studies are planned, it is anticipated that these
studies will be used to address a range of endpoints including both physical and biological risk (i.e.
toxicological hazard and/or toxicological risk). For instance, chronic/subchronic/subacute and acute
systemic toxicity endpoints can be built into a single study. One can consider an experimental design
where a clinically relevant quantity of material is implanted in the relevant organ or tissue to assess
local effects, and an exaggeration of the anticipated clinical exposure/dose is implanted possibly at a
remote location so the systemic exposure provides a suitable measure of exaggeration.
6.3.2.10 Genotoxicity
Genotoxicity tests can be iuns evidt rtoo assess the potential for gene mutations, changes in chromosome
structure and number, and other DNA or gene toxicities caused by medical devices, materials and/or
their extracts. A battery of tests is initially used. If testing is performed, it shall be conducted in
accordance with ISO 10993-3.
NOTE Addiinti ovnitarlo information is given in ISO/TR 10993-33.
If any of the tests are positive, follow-up can include a chemical identification of impurities,
extractable or leachable chemicals or additional genotoxicity testing. Acceptance of the genotoxicity
risk shall be based on the results of a risk assessment, including, for example patient exposure, weight
of evidence (WOE) and mode of action (MOA) information, if available.
6.3.2.11 Carcinogenicity
ISO 10993-3 discusses the strategy for evaluating carcinogenicity of medical devices, materials and/
or their extracts over a period of the major portion of life-span of the test animal. Carcinogenicity may
be addressed with a risk assessment including chemical identification of impurities, extractable or
leachable chemicals, patient exposure to these chemicals, weight of evidence (WOE) and mode of action
(MOA) information, if available. Carcinogenicity information should be appropriate for the route and
duration of exposure or contact, and can be available from the toxicity literature. In the absence of
any significant cancer risk, it is rare for carcinogenicity tests to be considered appropriate for medical
devices. However, if it is determined that carcinogenicity testing of the final medical device is needed,
it is possible that lifetime studies or transgenic models will be appropriate. It is also possible that these
tests can be designed to examine both chronic toxicity and tumorigenicity in a single experimental
study, as described in OECD Guideline 453.
6.3.2.12 Reproductive and developmental toxicity
Reproductive and developmental toxicity tests referenced in ISO 10993-3 can be used to evaluate
the potential effects of medical devices, materials and/or their extracts on reproductive function,
embryonic development (teratogenicity), and prenatal and early postnatal development. These
16
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT © ISO 2018 – All rights reserved
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
endpoints may be addressed with a risk assessment including chemical identification of impurities,
extractable or leachable chemicals, patient exposure to these chemicals, weight of evidence (WOE)
and mode of action (MOA) information, if available. Reproductive toxicity evaluations shall only be
conducted when the medical device has potential impact on the reproductive potential of the subject.
In addition, developmental toxicity evaluations should be considered for medical devices or their
materials used during pregnancy.
Reproductive and developmental toxicity should be addressed for novel materials, materials with a
known reproductive or developmental toxicity, medical devices with relevant target populations (e.g.
pregnant women), and/or medical devices where there is the potential for local presence of medical
device materials in the reproductive organs.
6.3.2.13 Degradation
Degradation information shall be provided for any medical devices, medical device components or
materials remaining within the tissue, that have the potential for degradation within the human body.
Degradation tests shall be considered if
a) the medical device is designed to be absorbable, or
b) an informed consideration of the finished medical device composition indicates that toxic
degradation products might be released during body contact.
Parameters that affect the rate and extent of degradation shall be described and documented.in vitro
The mechanisms of deignr avdivaotion should be described. These mechanisms should be simulated to
determine the rates of degradation and release of potentially toxic chemicals to estimate the exposure.
IInt isv iavloso possible that tests will be required to assines vsi tdreogrinad vaitvioon of a material.
in vitro
degradation tests might not be necessary if an / comparison for the absorbable
medical device has been previously demonstrated and degradation studies show that only the
probable products of degradation are present in the predicted quantities, and produced at a rate similar
to those that have a history of safe clinical use. When particulate degradation products are generated,
tests might not be necessary if they are present in a physical state, i.e. size distribution and shape,
similar to those with a history of safe clinical use or sufficient degradation data already exist relevant
to the substances and degradation products generated in the intended use already exists.
A generailn f rvaitmroework for degradation tests is given in ISO 10993-9.
Specific degradation tests for polymers, ceramics and metals are described in ISO 10993-13,
ISO 10993-14 and ISO 10993-15 respectively.
When particulate degradation products are present in the form of nanomaterials, tests should be
designed considering ISO/TR 10993-22.
6.3.2.14 Toxicokinetic studies
The purpose of conducting toxicokinetic studies is to evaluate the absorption, distribution, metabolism
and excretion (iAn DvMivEo) of a chemical.
The need for toxicokinetic studies, to determine the processes of absorption, distributioinn,
vmitertoabolism and elimination of leachables and degradation products of medical devices, materials and/
or their extracts (see 6.3.2.13 and ISO 10993-16), shall be considered in the light of results from the
degradation studies.
When deciding whether or not to conduct toxicokinetic studies as part of the biological evaluation of
a medical device, the final product and its chemical constituents, including potential and designed
degradation products and leachables in combination with the intended use of the medical device, shall
all be taken into account (see 6.3.2.13).
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
17
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith8ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
in vitro
Where appropriate, theoretical degradation processes shall be investigated prior to toxicokinetic
studies by means of experiments (e.g. tissue, homogenates or cells), not only for animal welfare
reasons as given in ISO 10993-2, but also to determine probable rather than possible degradation
products.
Toxicokinetic studies shall be considered if
a) the medical device is designed to be absorbable, or
b) the medical device is a long-term contact implant, and degradation or significant corrosion is
known or likely, and/or migration of leachables from the medical device occurs, or
c) the medical device is likely or known to release substantial quantities of potentially toxic or
reactive degradation products and leachables into the body during clinical use, or
d) substantial quantities of nano-objects are likely or known to be released from a medical device into
the body during clinical use, or
e) drug and device combination products.
Toxicokinetic studies are not required if the achieved or expected rates of release of degradation
products and leachables from a particular medical device or material have been judged to provide safe
levels of clinical exposure with historical experience, or if sufficient toxicological data or toxicokinetic
data relevant to the degradation products and leachables already exist.
The release of leachables and degradation products from metals, alloys and ceramics is usually too low
to justify toxicokinetic studies, unless the material is designed to degrade.
Toxicokinetic studies for degradation products and extractables/leachables, if performed, shall be
conducted in accordance with ISO 10993-16.
Specific considerations for toxicokinetics studies with nanomaterials are given in ISO/TR 10993-22
6.3.2.15 Immunotoxicology
While not specifically addressed in Annex A, ISO/TS 10993-20 provides an overview of immunotoxicology
with particular reference to the potential immunotoxicity of medical devices. Immunotoxicity testing
shall be considered based on the chemical nature of the materials of manufacture and data from
sources that are suggestive of immunotoxicological effects or if the immunogenic potential of any of the
chemicals is unknown. If immunotoxicity testing is performed, it shall be conducted in accordance with
ISO/TS 10993-20.
Specific considerations for immunotoxicity testing of nanomaterials are provided in ISO/TR 10993-22.
7 Interpretation of biological evaluation data and overall biological risk
assessment
Expert assessors who have the necessary knowledge and experience shall determine and document:
a) the strategy and planned content for the biological evaluation of the medical device;
b) the criteria for determining the acceptability of the material for the intended purpose, in line with
the risk management plan;
c) the adequacy of the material characterization;
d) the rationale for selection and/or waiving of tests;
e) the interpretation of existing data and results of testing;
f) the nee-d-`` ,,f,,o`,,r,, ,`a,`,n`,,y,,, ``a`,`d-`-d`,,i`,t,`i,`o,,`n---al data to complete the biological evaluation;
18
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT © ISO 2018 – All rights reserved
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
g) overall biological safety conclusions for the medical device.
Informative Annex A gives the general endpoints that should be considered for each device contact type
and duration category in a biological risk assessment.
19
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith8ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:57 MDT
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 10993-1:2018(E)
