=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial Prior to 2013
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-481C30EA-8A49-4A77-9E81-D0CD7C533498_1_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M98810_01_01
DOI Ref:
h4bsj
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈71〉 STERILITY TESTS
⧫
Por tions of this general chapter have been harmonized with the corresponding texts of the European Pharmacopeia and/or the Japanese
Pharmacopeia. Those por tions that are not harmonized are marked with symbols (⧫
) to specify this fact.
These Pharmacopeial procedures are not by themselves designed to ensure that a batch of product is sterile or has been sterilized. This is
accomplished primarily by validation of the sterilization process or of the aseptic processing procedures.
The test is applied to substances, preparations, or ar ticles which, according to the Pharmacopeia, are required to be sterile. However, a
satisfactory result only indicates that no contaminating microorganism has been found in the sample examined under the conditions of the test.
PRECAUTIONS AGAINST MICROBIAL CONTAMINATION
The test for sterility is carried out under aseptic conditions. In order to achieve such conditions, the test environment has to be adapted to
the way in which the sterility test is performed. The precautions taken to avoid contamination are such that they do not affect any
microorganisms that are to be revealed in the test. The working conditions in which the tests are performed are monitored regularly by
appropriate sampling of the working area and by carrying out appropriate controls.
CUL
TURE MEDIA AND INCUBATION TEMPERATURES
Media for the test may be prepared as described below or equivalent commercial media may be used provided that they comply with the
requirements of the Growth Promotion Test of Aerobes, Anaerobes, and Fungi.
The following culture media have been found to be suitable for the test for sterility. Fluid Thioglycollate Medium is primarily intended for the
culture of anaerobic bacteria. However, it will also detect aerobic bacteria. Soybean–Casein Digest Medium is suitable for the culture of both
fungi and aerobic bacteria.
Fluid Thioglycollate Medium
l-Cystine
0.5 g
Sodium Chloride
2.5 g
Dextrose Monohydrate/Anhydrous
5.5/5.0 g
Agar
0.75 g
Yeast Extract (water-soluble)
5.0 g
Pancreatic Digest of Casein
15.0 g
Sodium Thioglycollate
0.5 g
 
or Thioglycolic Acid
0.3 mL
Resazurin Sodium Solution (1 in 1000), freshly prepared
1.0 mL
Puri«ed Water
1000 mL
pH after sterilization: 7.1±0.2.
Mix the l-cystine, agar, sodium chloride, dextrose, yeast extract, and pancreatic digest of casein with the puri«ed water, and heat until
solution is effected. Dissolve the sodium thioglycollate or thioglycolic acid in the solution and, if necessary, add 1 N sodium hydroxide so
that, after sterilization, the solution will have a pH of 7.1 ± 0.2. If «ltration is necessary, heat the solution again without boiling, and «lter while
hot through moistened «lter paper. Add the resazurin sodium solution, mix, and place the medium in suitable vessels that provide a ratio of
surface to depth of medium such that not more than the upper half of the medium has undergone a color change indicative of oxygen uptake
at the end of the incubation period. Sterilize using a validated process. If the medium is stored, store at a temperature between 2° and 25° in
a sterile, air tight container. If more than the upper one-third of the medium has acquired a pink color, the medium may be restored once by
⧫
⧫
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:14 PM
USP-NF 〈71〉 Sterility Tests


=== PAGE 2 ===
heating the containers in a water-bath or in free-¬owing steam until the pink color disappears and by cooling quickly, taking care to prevent
the introduction of nonsterile air into the container. Do not use the medium for a longer storage period than has been validated.
Fluid Thioglycollate Medium is to be incubated at 30°–35°. For products containing a mercurial preservative that cannot be tested by the
membrane «ltration method, Fluid Thioglycollate Medium incubated at 20°–25° may be used instead of Soybean–Casein Digest Medium
provided that it has been validated as described in Growth Promotion Test of Aerobes, Anaerobes, and Fungi. Where prescribed or justi«ed and
authorized, the following alternative thioglycollate medium might be used. Prepare a mixture having the same composition as that of the
Fluid Thioglycollate Medium, but omitting the agar and the resazurin sodium solution. Sterilize as directed above. The pH after sterilization is
7.1 ± 0.2. Heat in a water bath prior to use and incubate at 30°–35° under anaerobic conditions.
Soybean–Casein Digest Medium
Pancreatic Digest of Casein
17.0 g
Papaic Digest of Soybean Meal
3.0 g
Sodium Chloride
5.0 g
Dibasic Potassium Phosphate
2.5 g
Dextrose Monohydrate/Anhydrous
2.5/2.3 g
Puri«ed Water
1000 mL
pH after sterilization: 7.3±0.2.
Dissolve the solids in the Puri«ed Water, heating slightly to effect a solution. Cool the solution to room temperature, and adjust the pH with
1 N sodium hydroxide so that, after sterilization, it will have a pH of 7.3 ± 0.2. Filter, if necessary to clarify, dispense into suitable containers,
and sterilize using a validated procedure. Store at a temperature between 2° and 25° in a sterile well-closed container, unless it is intended
for immediate use. Do not use the medium for a longer storage period than has been validated.
Soybean–Casein Digest Medium is to be incubated at 22.5 ± 2.5°.
⧫
Media for Penicillins or Cephalosporins
Where sterility test media are to be used in the Direct Inoculation of the Culture Medium method under Test for Sterility of the Product to be
Examined, modify the preparation of Fluid Thioglycollate Medium and the Soybean–Casein Digest Medium as follows. To the containers of
each medium, transfer aseptically a quantity of β-lactamase su­cient to inactivate the amount of antibiotic in the specimen under test.
Determine the quantity of β-lactamase required to inactivate the antibiotic by using a β-lactamase preparation that has been assayed
previously for its penicillin- or cephalosporin-inactivating power. [Note—Supplemented β-lactamase media can also be used in the membrane
«ltration test.]
Alternatively (in an area completely separate from that used for sterility testing), con«rm that an appropriate amount of β-lactamase is
incorporated into the medium, following either method under Method Suitability Test, using less than 100 colony-forming units (cfu) of
Staphylococcus aureus (see Table 1) as the challenge. Typical microbial growth of the inoculated culture must be observed as a con«rmation
that the β-lactamase concentration is appropriate.
T
able 1. Strains of the Test Microorganisms Suitable for Use in the Growth Promotion Test and the Method Suitability Test
Aerobic bacteria
Staphylococcus aureus
ATCC 6538, CIP 4.83, NCTC 10788, NCIMB 9518, NBRC 13276
Bacillus subtilis
ATCC 6633, CIP 52.62, NCIMB 8054, NBRC 3134
Pseudomonas aeruginosa⧫1
ATCC 9027, NCIMB 8626, CIP 82.118, NBRC 13275
Anaerobic bacterium
Clostridium sporogenes⧫2
ATCC 19404, CIP 79.3, NCTC 532 or ATCC 11437, NBRC 14293
Fungi
Candida albicans
ATCC 10231, IP 48.72, NCPF 3179, NBRC 1594
⧫
⧫
⧫
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:14 PM
USP-NF 〈71〉 Sterility Tests


=== PAGE 3 ===
Aspergillus brasiliensis
(Aspergillus Niger)
ATCC 16404, IP 1431.83, IMI 149007, NBRC 9455
⧫1
An alternative microorganism is Kocuria rhizophila (Micrococcus luteus) ATCC 9341.
⧫2
An alternative to Clostridium sporogenes, when a nonspore-forming microorganism is desired, is Bacteroides vulgatus (ATCC 8482).
The media used comply with the following tests, carried out before, or in parallel, with the test on the product to be examined.
Sterility
Incubate por tions of the media for 14 days. No growth of microorganisms occurs.
Growth Promotion Test of Aerobes, Anaerobes, and Fungi
Test each lot of ready-prepared medium and each batch of medium prepared either from dehydrated medium or from ingredients. Suitable
strains of microorganisms are indicated in Table 1.
Inoculate por tions of Fluid Thioglycollate Medium with a small number (not more than 100 cfu) of the following microorganisms, using a
separate por tion of medium for each of the following species of microorganism: Clostridium sporogenes, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and
Staphylococcus aureus. ⧫
Inoculate por tions of alternative thioglycollate medium with a small number (not more than 100 cfu) of Clostridium
sporogenes.
 Inoculate por tions of Soybean–Casein Digest Medium with a small number (not more than 100 cfu) of the following
microorganisms, using a separate por tion of medium for each of the following species of microorganism: Aspergillus brasiliensis, Bacillus
subtilis, and Candida albicans. Incubate for not more than 3 days in the case of bacteria and not more than 5 days in the case of fungi. Seed
lot culture maintenance techniques (seed-lot systems) are used so that the viable microorganisms used for inoculation are not more than
«ve passages removed from the original master seed-lot.
The media are suitable if a clearly visible growth of the microorganisms occurs.
⧫
DILUTING AND RINSING FLUIDS FOR MEMBRANE FIL
TRATION
Fluid A
preparation
Dissolve 1 g of peptic digest of animal tissue in water to make 1 L, «lter or centrifuge to clarify, if necessary, and adjust to a pH of 7.1 ±
0.2. Dispense into containers, and sterilize using a validated process.
preparation for penicillins or cephalosporins
Aseptically add to the above Preparation, if necessary, a quantity of sterile β-lactamase su­cient to inactivate any residual antibiotic
activity on the membranes after the solution of the test specimen has been «ltered (see Media for Penicillins or Cephalosporins).
Fluid D
To each L of Fluid A add 1 mL of polysorbate 80, adjust to a pH of 7.1 ± 0.2, dispense into containers, and sterilize using a validated
process. Use this ¬uid for ar ticles containing lecithin or oil, or for devices labeled as “sterile pathway.
”
Fluid K
Dissolve 5.0 g of peptic digest of animal tissue, 3.0 g of beef extract, and 10.0 g of polysorbate 80 in water to make 1 L. Adjust the pH to
obtain, after sterilization, a pH of 6.9 ± 0.2. Dispense into containers, and sterilize using a validated process.
METHOD SUITABILITY TEST
Carry out a test as described below under Test for Sterility of the Product to be Examined using exactly the same methods, except for the
following modi«cations.
Membrane Filtration
After transferring the content of the container or containers to be tested to the membrane, add an inoculum of a small number of viable
microorganisms (not more than 100 cfu) to the «nal por tion of sterile diluent used to rinse the «lter.
Direct Inoculation
After transferring the contents of the container or containers to be tested (for catgut and other surgical sutures for veterinary use: strands)
to the culture medium, add an inoculum of a small number of viable microorganisms (not more than 100 cfu) to the medium.
In both cases use the same microorganisms as those described above under Growth Promotion Test of Aerobes, Anaerobes, and Fungi.
Perform a growth promotion test as a positive control. Incubate all the containers containing medium for not more than 5 days.
If clearly visible growth of microorganisms is obtained after the incubation, visually comparable to that in the control vessel without
product, either the product possesses no antimicrobial activity under the conditions of the test or such activity has been satisfactorily
eliminated. The test for sterility may then be carried out without fur ther modi«cation.
If clearly visible growth is not obtained in the presence of the product to be tested, visually comparable to that in the control vessels
without product, the product possesses antimicrobial activity that has not been satisfactorily eliminated under the conditions of the test.
Modify the conditions in order to eliminate the antimicrobial activity, and repeat the Method Suitability Test.
⧫
⧫
⧫
⧫
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:14 PM
USP-NF 〈71〉 Sterility Tests


=== PAGE 4 ===
This method suitability is performed (a) when the test for sterility has to be carried out on a new product; and (b) whenever there is a
change in the experimental conditions of the test. The method suitability may be performed simultaneously with the Test for Sterility of the
Product to be Examined.
TEST FOR STERILITY OF THE PRODUCT TO BE EXAMINED
⧫
Number of Ar ticles to Be Tested
Unless otherwise speci«ed elsewhere in this chapter or in the individual monograph, test the number of ar ticles speci«ed in Table 3. If the
contents of each ar ticle are of su­cient quantity (see Table 2), they may be divided so that equal appropriate por tions are added to each of
the speci«ed media. [Note—Perform sterility testing employing two or more of the speci«ed media.] If each ar ticle does not contain su­cient
quantities for each medium, use twice the number of ar ticles indicated in Table 3.
T
able 2. Minimum Quantity to be Used for Each Medium
Quantity per Container
Minimum Quantity to be Used
(unless otherwise justi«ed and authorized)
Liquids
Less than 1 mL
The whole contents of each container
1–40 mL
Half the contents of each container, but not less than 1 mL
Greater than 40 mL, and not greater than 100 mL
20 mL
Greater than 100 mL
10% of the contents of the container, but not less than 20 mL
Antibiotic liquids
1 mL
Insoluble preparations, creams, and ointments to be suspended or
emulsi«ed
Use the contents of each container to provide not less than 200 mg
Solids
Less than 50 mg
The whole contents of each container
50 mg or more, but less than 300 mg
Half the contents of each container, but not less than 50 mg
300 mg–5 g
150 mg
Greater than 5 g
500 mg
Catgut and other surgical sutures for veterinary use
3 sections of a strand (each 30-cm long)
⧫
Surgical dressing/cotton/gauze (in packages)
100 mg per package
Sutures and other individually packaged single-use material
The whole device
Other medical devices
The whole device, cut into pieces or disassembled
T
able 3. Minimum Number of Ar ticles to be Tested in Relation to the Number of Ar ticles in the Batch
Number of Items in the Batch
*
Minimum Number of Items to be Tested for Each
Medium (unless otherwise justi«ed and authorized)
**
Parenteral preparations
Not more than 100 containers
10% or 4 containers, whichever is the greater
More than 100 but not more than 500 containers
10 containers
More than 500 containers
2% or 20 containers, whichever is less
⧫
⧫
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:14 PM
USP-NF 〈71〉 Sterility Tests


=== PAGE 5 ===
Number of Items in the Batch
*
Minimum Number of Items to be Tested for Each
Medium (unless otherwise justi«ed and authorized)
**
⧫
For large-volume parenterals
2% or 10 containers, whichever is less
Antibiotic solids
Pharmacy bulk packages (<5 g)
20 containers
Pharmacy bulk packages (≥5 g)
6 containers
Bulks and blends
See Bulk solid products
Ophthalmic and other noninjectable preparations
Not more than 200 containers
5% or 2 containers, whichever is the greater
More than 200 containers
10 containers
If the product is presented in the form of single-dose containers,
apply the scheme shown above for preparations for parenteral use.
Catgut and other surgical sutures for veterinary use
2% or 5 packages, whichever is the greater, up to a maximum total
of 20 packages
⧫
Not more than 100 ar ticles
10% or 4 ar ticles, whichever is greater
More than 100, but not more than 500 ar ticles
10 ar ticles
More than 500 ar ticles
2% or 20 ar ticles, whichever is less
Bulk solid products
Up to 4 containers
Each container
More than 4 containers, but not more than 50 containers
20% or 4 containers, whichever is greater
More than 50 containers
2% or 10 containers, whichever is greater
*
If the batch size is unknown, use the maximum number of items prescribed.
**
If the contents of one container are enough to inoculate the two media, this column gives the number of containers needed for both the
media together.
The test may be carried out using the technique of Membrane Filtration or by Direct Inoculation of the Culture Medium with the product to be
examined. Appropriate negative controls are included. The technique of membrane «ltration is used whenever the nature of the product
permits; that is, for «lterable aqueous preparations, for alcoholic or oily preparations, and for preparations miscible with, or soluble in,
aqueous or oily solvents, provided these solvents do not have an antimicrobial effect in the conditions of the test.
Membrane Filtration
Use membrane «lters having a nominal pore size not greater than 0.45 µm, in which the effectiveness to retain microorganisms has been
established. Cellulose nitrate «lters, for example, are used for aqueous, oily, and weakly alcoholic solutions; and cellulose acetate «lters, for
example, are used for strongly alcoholic solutions. Specially adapted «lters may be needed for cer tain products (e.g., for antibiotics).
The technique described below assumes that membranes about 50 mm in diameter will be used. If «lters of a different diameter are used,
the volumes of the dilutions and the washings should be adjusted accordingly. The «ltration apparatus and membrane are sterilized by
appropriate means. The apparatus is designed so that the solution to be examined can be introduced and «ltered under aseptic conditions: it
permits the aseptic removal of the membrane for transfer to the medium, or it is suitable for carrying out the incubation after adding the
medium to the apparatus itself.
aqueous solutions
If appropriate, transfer a small quantity of a suitable, sterile diluent such as ⧫
Fluid A (see Diluting and Rinsing Fluids for Membrane
Filtration)
 onto the membrane in the apparatus and «lter. The diluent may contain suitable neutralizing substances and/or appropriate
inactivating substances, for example, in the case of antibiotics.
⧫
⧫
⧫
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:14 PM
USP-NF 〈71〉 Sterility Tests


=== PAGE 6 ===
Transfer the contents of the container or containers to be tested to the membrane or membranes, if necessary, after diluting to the
volume used in the Method Suitability Test with the chosen sterile diluent, but using not less than the quantities of the product to be
examined prescribed in Tables 2 and 3. Filter immediately. If the product has antimicrobial proper ties, wash the membrane not less than
three times by «ltering through it each time the volume of the chosen sterile diluent used in the Method Suitability Test. Do not exceed a
washing cycle of «ve times 100 mL per «lter, even if during method suitability it has been demonstrated that such a cycle does not fully
eliminate the antimicrobial activity. Transfer the whole membrane to the culture medium or cut it aseptically into two equal par ts, and
transfer one half to each of two suitable media. Use the same volume of each medium as in the Method Suitability Test. Alternatively,
transfer the medium onto the membrane in the apparatus. Incubate the media for not less than 14 days.
soluble solids
Use for each medium not less than the quantity prescribed in Tables 2 and 3 of the product dissolved in a suitable solvent, such as the
solvent provided with the preparation, Sterile Water for Injection, sterile saline, or a suitable sterile solution such as ⧫
Fluid A (Diluting and
Rinsing Fluids for Membrane Filtration),
 and proceed with the test as described above for Aqueous Solutions using a membrane appropriate
to the chosen solvent.
oils and oil
y solutions
Use for each medium not less than the quantity of the product prescribed in Tables 2 and 3. Oils and oily solutions of su­ciently low
viscosity may be «ltered without dilution through a dry membrane. Viscous oils may be diluted as necessary with a suitable sterile diluent
such as isopropyl myristate shown not to have antimicrobial activity in the conditions of the test. Allow the oil to penetrate the membrane
by its own weight, and then «lter, applying the pressure or suction gradually. Wash the membrane at least three times by «ltering through it
each time about 100 mL of a suitable sterile solution such as ⧫
Fluid A (see Diluting and Rinsing Fluids for Membrane Filtration)
 containing a
suitable emulsifying agent at a concentration shown to be appropriate in the Method Suitability Test, for example polysorbate 80 at a
concentration of 10 g per L ⧫
(Fluid K)
. Transfer the membrane or membranes to the culture medium or media, or vice versa, as described
above for Aqueous Solutions, and incubate at the same temperatures and for the same times.
ointments and creams
Use for each medium not less than the quantities of the product prescribed in Tables 2 and 3. Ointments in a fatty base and emulsions of
the water-in-oil type may be diluted to 1% in isopropyl myristate as described above, by heating, if necessary, to not more than 40°. In
exceptional cases it may be necessary to heat to not more than 44°. Filter as rapidly as possible, and proceed as described above for Oils
and Oily Solutions.
⧫
prefilled syringes
For pre«lled syringes without attached sterile needles, expel the contents of each syringe into one or two separate membrane «lter
funnels or into separate pooling vessels prior to transfer. If a separate sterile needle is attached, directly expel the syringe contents as
indicated above, and proceed as directed for Aqueous Solutions. Test the sterility of the needle, using Direct Inoculation under Method
Suitability Test.
solids for injection other than antibiotics
Constitute the test ar ticles as directed on the label, and proceed as directed for Aqueous Solutions or Oils and Oily Solutions, whichever
applies. [Note—If necessary, excess diluent can be added to aid in the constitution and «ltration of the constituted test ar ticle.]
antibiotic solids for injection
Pharmacy Bulk Packages, <5 g—From each of 20 containers, aseptically transfer about 300 mg of solids, into a sterile 500-mL conical ¬ask,
dissolve in about 200 mL of Fluid A (see Diluting and Rinsing Fluids for Membrane Filtration), and mix; or constitute, as directed in the
labeling, each of 20 containers and transfer a quantity of liquid or suspension, equivalent to about 300 mg of solids, into a sterile 500-mL
conical ¬ask, dissolve in about 200 mL of Fluid A, and mix. Proceed as directed for Aqueous Solutions or Oils and Oily Solutions, whichever
applies.
Pharmacy Bulk Packages, ≥5 g—From each of 6 containers, aseptically transfer about 1 g of solids into a sterile 500-mL conical ¬ask,
dissolve in about 200 mL of Fluid A, and mix; or constitute, as directed in the labeling, each of 6 containers and transfer a quantity of liquid,
equivalent to about 1 g of solids, into a sterile 500-mL conical ¬ask, dissolve in about 200 mL of Fluid A, and mix. Proceed as directed for
Aqueous Solutions.
antibiotic solids, bulks, and blends
Aseptically remove a su­cient quantity of solids from the appropriate amount of containers (see Table 2), mix to obtain a composite,
equivalent to about 6 g of solids, and transfer to a sterile 500-mL conical ¬ask. Dissolve in about 200 mL of Fluid A, and mix. Proceed as
directed for Aqueous Solutions.
sterile aerosol products
For ¬uid products in pressurized aerosol form, freeze the containers in an alcohol-dry ice mixture at least at –20° for about 1 hour. If
feasible, allow the propellant to escape before aseptically opening the container, and transfer the contents to a sterile pooling vessel. Add
⧫
⧫
⧫
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:14 PM
USP-NF 〈71〉 Sterility Tests


=== PAGE 7 ===
100 mL of Fluid D to the pooling vessel, and mix gently. Proceed as directed for Aqueous Solutions or Oils and Oily Solutions, whichever
applies.
devices with pathways labeled sterile
Aseptically pass not less than 10 pathway volumes of Fluid D through each device tested. Collect the ¬uids in an appropriate sterile
vessel, and proceed as directed for Aqueous Solutions or Oils and Oily Solutions, whichever applies.
In the case of sterile, empty syringes, draw sterile diluent into the barrel through the sterile needle, if attached, or through a sterile needle
attached for the purpose of the test, and express the contents into a sterile pooling vessel. Proceed as directed above.
Direct Inoculation of the Culture Medium
Transfer the quantity of the preparation to be examined prescribed in Tables 2 and 3 directly into the culture medium so that the volume of
the product is not more than 10% of the volume of the medium, unless otherwise prescribed.
If the product to be examined has antimicrobial activity, carry out the test after neutralizing this with a suitable neutralizing substance or by
dilution in a su­cient quantity of culture medium. When it is necessary to use a large volume of the product, it may be preferable to use a
concentrated culture medium prepared in such a way that it takes into account the subsequent dilution. Where appropriate, the concentrated
medium may be added directly to the product in its container.
oil
y liquids
Use media to which have been added a suitable emulsifying agent at a concentration shown to be appropriate in the Method Suitability
Test, for example polysorbate 80 at a concentration of 10 g per L.
ointments and creams
Prepare by diluting to about 1 in 10 by emulsifying with the chosen emulsifying agent in a suitable sterile diluent such as ⧫
Fluid A (see
Diluting and Rinsing Fluids for Membrane Filtration).
 Transfer the diluted product to a medium not containing an emulsifying agent.
Incubate the inoculated media for not less than 14 days. Observe the cultures several times during the incubation period. Shake cultures
containing oily products gently each day. However, when Fluid Thioglycollate Medium is used for the detection of anaerobic microorganisms,
keep shaking or mixing to a minimum in order to maintain anaerobic conditions.
catgut and other surgical sutures for veterinarian use
Use for each medium not less than the quantities of the product prescribed in Tables 2 and 3. Open the sealed package using aseptic
precautions, and remove three sections of the strand for each culture medium. Carry out the test on three sections, each 30-cm long, which
have been cut off from the beginning, the center, and the end of the strand. Use whole strands from freshly opened cassette packs. Transfer
each section of the strand to the selected medium. Use su­cient medium to cover adequately the material to be tested (20 mL to 150 mL).
⧫
solids
Transfer a quantity of the product in the form of a dry solid (or prepare a suspension of the product by adding sterile diluent to the
immediate container), corresponding to not less than the quantity indicated in Tables 2 and 3. Transfer the material so obtained to 200 mL
of Fluid Thioglycollate Medium, and mix. Similarly, transfer the same quantity to 200 mL of Soybean–Casein Digest Medium, and mix.
Proceed as directed above.
purified cotton, gauze, surgical dressings, and related articles
From each package of cotton, rolled gauze bandage, or large surgical dressings being tested, aseptically remove two or more por tions of
100- to 500-mg each from the innermost par t of the sample. From individually packaged, single-use materials, aseptically remove the entire
ar ticle. Immerse the por tions or ar ticle in each medium, and proceed as directed above.
sterile devices
Ar ticles can be immersed intact or disassembled. To ensure that device pathways are also in contact with the media, immerse the
appropriate number of units per medium in a volume of medium su­cient to immerse the device completely, and proceed as directed
above. For extremely large devices, immerse those por tions of the device that are to come into contact with the patient in a volume of
medium su­cient to achieve complete immersion of those por tions.
For catheters where the inside lumen and outside are required to be sterile, either cut them into pieces such that the medium is in contact
with the entire lumen or «ll the lumen with medium, and then immerse the intact unit.
OBSERVATION AND INTERPRETATION OF RESUL
TS
At intervals during the incubation period and at its conclusion, examine the media for macroscopic evidence of microbial growth. If the
material being tested renders the medium turbid so that the presence or absence of microbial growth cannot be readily determined by visual
examination, 14 days after the beginning of incubation transfer por tions (each not less than 1 mL) of the medium to fresh vessels of the
same medium, and then incubate the original and transfer vessels for not less than 4 days.
If no evidence of microbial growth is found, the product to be examined complies with the test for sterility. If evidence of microbial growth
is found, the product to be examined does not comply with the test for sterility, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the test was invalid
⧫
⧫
⧫
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:14 PM
USP-NF 〈71〉 Sterility Tests


=== PAGE 8 ===
for causes unrelated to the product to be examined. The test may be considered invalid only if one or more of the following conditions are
ful«lled:
1. The data of the microbiological monitoring of the sterility testing facility show a fault.
2. A review of the testing procedure used during the test in question reveals a fault.
3. Microbial growth is found in the negative controls.
4. After determination of the identity of the microorganisms isolated from the test, the growth of this species (or these species) may be
ascribed unequivocally to faults with respect to the material and or the technique used in conducting the sterility test procedure.
If the test is declared to be invalid, it is repeated with the same number of units as in the original test. If no evidence of microbial growth is
found in the repeat test, the product examined complies with the test for sterility. If microbial growth is found in the repeat test, the product
examined does not comply with the test for sterility.
APPLICATION OF THE TEST TO P
ARENTERAL PREP
ARATIONS, OPHTHALMIC, AND OTHER NONINJECTABLE
PREP
ARATIONS REQUIRED TO COMPL
Y WITH THE TEST FOR STERILITY
When using the technique of membrane «ltration, use, whenever possible, the whole contents of the container, but not less than the
quantities indicated in Table 2, diluting where necessary to about 100 mL with a suitable sterile solution, such as ⧫
Fluid A (see Diluting and
Rinsing Fluids for Membrane Filtration).
When using the technique of direct inoculation of media, use the quantities shown in Table 2, unless otherwise justi«ed and authorized.
The tests for bacterial and fungal sterility are carried out on the same sample of the product to be examined. When the volume or the
quantity in a single container is insu­cient to carry out the tests, the contents of two or more containers are used to inoculate the different
media.
MINIMUM NUMBER OF ITEMS TO BE TESTED
The minimum number of items to be tested in relation to the size of the batch is given in Table 3.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<71> STERILITY TESTS
Leslie Furr
Associate Scienti«c Liaison
GCM2022
General Chapters - Microbiology
2022
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. Information currently unavailable
Current DocID: GUID-481C30EA-8A49-4A77-9E81-D0CD7C533498_1_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M98810_01_01
DOI ref: h4bsj
⧫
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:14 PM
USP-NF 〈71〉 Sterility Tests
