=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-May-2018
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-3AA39816-D359-4A92-B754-14C1C64FC86E_2_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7415_02_01
DOI Ref:
al4d6
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈1229.6〉 LIQUID-PHASE STERILIZATION
INTRODUCTION
Microorganisms are subject to destruction in a variety of ways. Aside from the classical methods of steam, dry heat, and radiation,
destructive sterilization may also occur by immersion in a chemical solution. This is termed liquid-phase sterilization (1). A number of
chemical agents, such as aldehydes, acids, bases, and strong oxidants in solution, under the appropriate conditions, are capable of
destroying bacteria and fungi, including both vegetative cells and spores in a quantitative fashion (2,3). Objects to be sterilized are immersed
in the solution of the chemical agent, after which the agent must be removed in a manner that preserves the sterilized object from
recontamination. Removal of the chemical sterilant from the exposed surfaces that have been sterilized must be accomplished in a manner
that maintains the sterility of the item postprocessing. Recontamination falls outside the scope of usual consideration for sterilization
processes. However, in liquid chemical sterilization it is customary to include the agent’s removal (whether this is accomplished by physical
or chemical means) in the overall process, together with any needed additional steps to avoid recontamination.
A substantial number of liquids in aqueous solution are capable of sterilizing ar ticles during immersion. Examples include the following:
Aldehydes—glutaraldehyde, formaldehyde
Acids—peracetic acid, nitric acid, sulfuric acid
Bases—sodium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide
Oxygenating compounds—hydrogen peroxide, ozone, chlorine dioxide
Halides—sodium hypochlorite, chlorine
As is the case for gas sterilization, the effectiveness of chemical sterilants varies with concentration and temperature. Other factors that
affect antimicrobial activity include pH, extent of mixing (if present), and presence of cellular or other debris. Because of the limited number
of variables, process control for sterilization by liquids is relatively simple.
Because there are no widely accepted biological indicators for sterilization by liquids, the use of a common mesophilic sporeformer such
as Bacillus atrophaeus or B. subtilis is commonplace because these are the likely worst-case bioburden isolates.
The agents used for sterilization by liquids vary with respect to sterilant stability, effective pH range, concentration, temperature, contact
time required, and potential interaction with the materials. When selecting the most appropriate sterilant, manufacturers must consider its
effect on the materials, package components, and equipment, as is the case with all other sterilizing processes. The variety of agents,
process diversity, and potential applications preclude a material-by-material review of these agents in this chapter. Manufacturers should
note that these agents are highly toxic, and appropriate safety measures should be practiced at all times during cycle development,
validation, and routine operation.
VALIDATION OF STERILIZATION BY LIQUIDS
Experimental evidence has shown that «rst-order kinetics is appropriate for microbial destruction, which makes validation a simple
exercise. The validation of sterilization by liquids can be accomplished using either the half-cycle approach or the bracketing method.
Half-Cycle Approach
The half-cycle approach described below is a modi«cation of the method described in Gaseous Sterilization 〈1229.7〉 (see Figure 1). It is a
method that requires the destruction of a resistant microorganism at de«ned lethal conditions. In routine operation, the process dwell period
is arbitrarily doubled and suppor ts a theoretical reduction of the biological indicator (and thus the bioburden) to a probability of a nonsterile
unit of at least 10
–6
 for a full cycle.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:44 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.6〉 Liquid-Phase Sterilization


=== PAGE 2 ===
Figure 1. Half-cycle sterilization validation.
The half-cycle method originally was used for ethylene oxide sterilization when the relationship between the microorganisms and the
delivered process parameters was less cer tain.
Bracketing Approach
In this method (see Figure 2), analysts evaluate conditions of concentration and temperature that bracket the de«ned process condition to
suppor t both over- and under-treatment of the materials and bioburden, respectively. Users can establish the death rate for the microbial
population for each of the conditions that bracket the routine process.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:44 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.6〉 Liquid-Phase Sterilization


=== PAGE 3 ===
Figure 2. Bracketing method.
Regardless of the approach used, in order to complete the cycle development and validation manufacturers must identify a rapid
neutralization method that inactivates the chemical agent to allow microbial quanti«cation after fractional kill exposure. The exposure
periods may need to be brief because many of these agents have rapid kill rates.
Equipment Quali«cation
Equipment quali«cation is a prede«ned program that examines the equipment to con«rm that it has been properly installed and operates
as intended before the sterilization process. This activity for sterilization by liquid chemicals is simple, because the equipment used is rarely
complex. Temperature control and agitation/recirculation rates are the essential considerations.
Component and Load De«nition
Sterilization by liquids is a surface phenomenon, and all surfaces of the materials must be immersed in the sterilant. Treatment uniformity
can be ensured by recirculation or mixing of the sterilant during the process. Penetration into needle lumens, closely «tted par ts, and porous
materials should be con«rmed. The use of a maximum load per de«ned vessel or container represents the worst case because it provides
the maximum surface area to be sterilized.
Biological Indicators
The common indicator organisms for chemical sterilization are B. atrophaeus ATCC 9372 or B. subtilis ATCC 6633. The spore challenge is
inoculated directly onto the items. End users should determine the populations of inoculated items. Manufacturers should place indicators
within loads at locations believed to be hardest for the agent to reach, on the basis of visual examination.
Process Con«rmation/Microbiological Challenge
The core of the validation activity is con«rmation of acceptable process parameters and inactivation of the microbial challenge. The end
user should expect a linear death curve for the spore challenge and require total death of the challenge. The end user can consider
adjustment in chemical sterilant concentration, process time, agitation, and other factors. Proof of cycle e­cacy is provided in replicate
studies in which the biological indicators are killed, and physical measurements are taken as documentation.
Agent Neutralization/Removal
After exposure, the sterilizing agent must be adequately removed from the items or neutralized before fur ther processing. This segment of
the process uses chemical neutralization or physical removal and must be executed in a manner that preserves the sterility of the items.
Aseptic processing with appropriate capability demonstration should be provided. Process simulation beginning with the completion of
sterilization through placement into a sealed sterile container is expected. See Sterility Assurance 〈1211〉 for additional information.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:44 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.6〉 Liquid-Phase Sterilization


=== PAGE 4 ===
Routine Process Control
Liquid-phase sterilization must be subject to controls that maintain the validated state. The practices outlined in Sterilization of Compendial
Ar ticles 〈1229〉 address the general requirements for all sterilization systems. Sterilization is accomplished by means of a number of related
practices that are essential for continued use of the process over an extended period of time, including calibration, chemical and physical
measurements, ongoing process control, change control, preventive maintenance, periodic reassessment, and training.
REFERENCES
1. Agalloco J. Gas, liquid, and vapor sterilization. In: Nema S, Ludwig J, eds. Pharmaceutical Dosage Forms: Parenteral Medications. 3rd
ed. New York: Informa USA; 2010.
2. Favero MS and Bond WW. Chemical disinfection of medical and surgical materials. In: Block SS, ed. Disinfection, Sterilization, and
Preservation. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 2001.
3. Block SS. Peroxygen compounds. In: Block SS, ed. Disinfection, Sterilization, and Preservation. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
and Wilkins; 2001.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<1229.6> LIQUID-PHASE STERILIZATION
Huiping Tu
Director, Biologics
GCM2022
General Chapters - Microbiology
2022
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. PF 39(4)
Current DocID: GUID-3AA39816-D359-4A92-B754-14C1C64FC86E_2_en-US
Previous DocID: GUID-3AA39816-D359-4A92-B754-14C1C64FC86E_1_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7415_02_01
DOI ref: al4d6
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:44 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.6〉 Liquid-Phase Sterilization
