01/2021:20919
2.9.19. PARTICULATE
CONTAMINATION: SUB-VISIBLE
PARTICLES(9)
Particulate contamination of injections and infusions consists
of mobile, undissolved particles, other than gas bubbles,
that are unintentionally present. ◊Particulate contamination
may originate from various sources and is to be minimised,
independent of its type. The level of particulate contamination
in parenteral preparations must be controlled.◊
For the determination of particulate contamination,
2 procedures, Method 1 (light obscuration particle count test)
and Method 2 (microscopic particle count test), are speciﬁed
hereinafter. When examining injections and infusions for
sub-visible particles, Method 1 is preferably applied. However,
it may be necessary to test some preparations by the light
obscuration particle count test followed by the microscopic
particle count test to reach a conclusion on conformance to
the requirements.
Not all parenteral preparations can be examined for sub-visible
particles by one or both of these methods. When Method 1
is not applicable, e.g. in case of preparations having reduced
clarity or increased viscosity, the test is carried out according
to Method 2. Emulsions, colloids, and liposomal preparations
are examples. Similarly, products that produce air or gas
bubbles when drawn into the sensor may also require ◊speciﬁc
precautions during sample preparation and/or◊microscopic
particle count testing. If the viscosity of the preparation to be
tested is sufﬁciently high so as to preclude its examination by
either test method, a quantitative dilution with an appropriate
◊particle-free◊diluent may be made to decrease viscosity, as
necessary, to allow the analysis to be performed.
The results obtained in examining a discrete unit or group
of units for particulate contamination cannot be extrapolated
with certainty to other units that remain untested. Thus,
statistically sound sampling plans must be developed if valid
inferences are to be drawn from observed data to characterise
the level of particulate contamination in a large group of units.
METHOD 1. LIGHT OBSCURATION PARTICLE COUNT
TEST
Use a suitable apparatus based on the principle of light
blockage which allows an automatic determination of the size
of particles and the number of particles according to size.
The apparatus is calibrated using suitable certiﬁed reference
materials consisting of dispersions of spherical particles of
known sizes between 10 μm and 25 μm. These standard
particles are dispersed in particle-free water R. Care must be
taken to avoid aggregation of particles during dispersion.
General precautions
The test is carried out under conditions limiting particulate
contamination, preferably in a laminar-ﬂow cabinet.
(9)
This chapter has undergone pharmacopoeial harmonisation. See chapter 5.8. Pharmacopoeial harmonisation.
382
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
2.9.19. Particulate contamination: sub-visible particles
Very carefully wash the glassware and ﬁltration equipment
used, except for the membrane ﬁlters, with a warm detergent
solution and rinse with abundant amounts of water to remove
all traces of detergent. Immediately before use, rinse the
equipment from top to bottom, outside and then inside, with
particle-free water R.
Take care not to introduce air bubbles into the preparation to
be examined, especially when fractions of the preparation are
being transferred to the container in which the determination
is to be carried out.
In order to check that the environment is suitable for the
test, that the glassware is properly cleaned and that the water
to be used is particle-free, the following test is carried out:
determine the particulate contamination of 5 samples of
particle-free water R, each of 5 mL, according to the method
described below. If the number of particles of 10 μm or greater
size exceeds 25 for the combined 25 mL, the precautions taken
for the test are not sufﬁcient. The preparatory steps must
be repeated until the environment, glassware and water are
suitable for the test.
Method
Mix the contents of the sample by slowly inverting the
container 20 times successively. If necessary, cautiously
remove the sealing closure. Clean the outer surfaces of the
container opening using a jet of particle-free water R and
remove the closure, avoiding any contamination of the
contents. Eliminate gas bubbles by appropriate measures such
as allowing the sample to stand for 2 min or sonicating.
For large-volume parenterals, single units are tested. For
small-volume parenterals less than 25 mL in volume, the
contents of 10 or more units are combined in a cleaned
container to obtain a volume of not less than 25 mL; where
justiﬁed and authorised, the test solution may be prepared by
mixing the contents of a suitable number of vials and diluting
to 25 mL with particle-free water R or with an appropriate
solvent without contamination of particles when particle-free
water R is not suitable. Small-volume parenterals having a
volume of 25 mL or more may be tested individually.
Powders for parenteral administration are reconstituted with
particle-free water R or with an appropriate solvent without
contamination of particles when particle-free water R is not
suitable.
The number of test specimens must be adequate to provide a
statistically sound assessment. For large-volume parenterals
or for small-volume parenterals having a volume of 25 mL
or more, fewer than 10 units may be tested, based on an
appropriate sampling plan.
Remove 4 portions, each of not less than 5 mL, and count
the number of particles equal to or greater than 10 μm and
25 μm. Disregard the result obtained for the ﬁrst portion, and
calculate the mean number of particles for the preparation to
be examined.
◊Alternative method
This method is intended to improve the applicability of the
test to biological preparations. However, it can be used for
any type of preparation.
Clean the outer surfaces of the container(s) using a jet of
particle-free water R, avoiding any contamination of the
contents. Samples are tested under in-use conditions, as
directed in the instructions for use (e.g. expelled syringe
contents).
For parenteral preparations that have a sufﬁcient volume
(i.e. a volume large enough to permit testing), testing of
individual units is often preferred.
If the volume is not sufﬁcient, take a suitable number of units,
mix each one carefully and thoroughly and then combine the
contents in a separate container to obtain the volume required
for a single test, depending on the instrument capability and
the properties of the sample.
Powders for parenteral administration are reconstituted with
particle-free water R or with an appropriate particle-free
solvent when particle-free water R is not suitable.
Eliminate gas bubbles by appropriate measures such as
allowing the sample to stand, applying a gentle vacuum or
sonicating. Sonication of preparations containing proteins
is not recommended.
The number of test specimens must be adequate to provide a
statistically sound assessment. For large- and small-volume
parenterals, an adequate volume of sample must be provided
for analysis; however, single units may be tested based on a
statistically sound sampling plan.
Remove 4 approximately equal portions, typically 5 mL each,
and count the number of particles equal to or greater than
10 μm and 25 μm. Disregard the result obtained for the ﬁrst
portion, and calculate the mean number of particles for the
preparation to be examined. Volumes smaller than 5 mL can
also be tested, provided that this amount is appropriately
justiﬁed. In general, for parenteral preparations that do not
have a sufﬁcient volume (e.g. less than 25 mL), performing
the test using a volume of 1 mL to 5 mL may be acceptable if
permitted by the instrument.◊
Evaluation
For preparations supplied in containers with a nominal
volume of more than 100 mL, apply the criteria of test 1.A.
For preparations supplied in containers with a nominal
volume of less than 100 mL, apply the criteria of test 1.B.
♦For preparations supplied in containers with a nominal
volume of 100 mL, apply the criteria of test 1.B.♦
If the average number of particles exceeds the limits, test the
preparation by the microscopic particle count test.
Test 1.A – Solutions for infusion or solutions for injection
supplied in containers with a nominal content of more than
100 mL
The preparation complies with the test if the average number
of particles present in the units tested does not exceed 25 per
millilitre equal to or greater than 10 μm and does not exceed
3 per millilitre equal to or greater than 25 μm.
Test 1.B – Solutions for infusion or solutions for injection
supplied in containers with a nominal content of less than
100 mL
The preparation complies with the test if the average number
of particles present in the units tested does not exceed 6000 per
container equal to or greater than 10 μm and does not exceed
600 per container equal to or greater than 25 μm.
METHOD 2. MICROSCOPIC PARTICLE COUNT TEST
Use a suitable binocular microscope, ﬁlter assembly for
retaining particulate contamination and membrane ﬁlter for
examination.
The microscope is equipped with an ocular micrometer
calibrated with an objective micrometer, a mechanical stage
capable of holding and traversing the entire ﬁltration area
of the membrane ﬁlter, 2 suitable illuminators to provide
episcopic illumination in addition to oblique illumination,
and is adjusted to 100 ± 10 magniﬁcations.
The ocular micrometer is a circular diameter graticule (see
Figure 2.9.19.-1.) and consists of a large circle divided by
crosshairs into quadrants, transparent and black reference
circles 10 μm and 25 μm in diameter at 100 magniﬁcations,
and a linear scale graduated in 10 μm increments. It is
calibrated using a stage micrometer that is certiﬁed by either a
domestic or an international standard institution. A relative
error of the linear scale of the graticule within ± 2 per cent is
acceptable. The large circle is designated the graticule ﬁeld
of view (GFOV).
2 illuminators are required. One is an episcopic brightﬁeld
illuminator internal to the microscope, the other is an external,
focusable auxiliary illuminator adjustable to give reﬂected
oblique illumination at an angle of 10-20°.
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
383
2.9.19. Particulate contamination: sub-visible particles
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
The ﬁlter assembly for retaining particulate contamination
consists of a ﬁlter holder made of glass or other suitable
material, and is equipped with a vacuum source and a suitable
membrane ﬁlter.
The membrane ﬁlter is of suitable size, black or dark grey
in colour, non-gridded or gridded, and 1.0 μm or ﬁner in
nominal pore size.
Figure 2.9.19.-1. – Circular diameter graticule
General precautions
The test is carried out under conditions limiting particulate
contamination, preferably in a laminar-ﬂow cabinet.
Very carefully wash the glassware and ﬁlter assembly used,
except for the membrane ﬁlter, with a warm detergent solution
and rinse with abundant amounts of water to remove all traces
of detergent. Immediately before use, rinse both sides of
the membrane ﬁlter and the equipment from top to bottom,
outside and then inside, with particle-free water R.
In order to check that the environment is suitable for the
test, that the glassware and the membrane ﬁlter are properly
cleaned and that the water to be used is particle-free, the
following test is carried out: determine the particulate
contamination of a 50 mL volume of particle-free water R
according to the method described below. If more than
20 particles 10 μm or larger in size or if more than 5 particles
25 μm or larger in size are present within the ﬁltration area,
the precautions taken for the test are not sufﬁcient. The
preparatory steps must be repeated until the environment,
glassware, membrane ﬁlter and water are suitable for the test.
Method
Mix the contents of the samples by slowly inverting the
container 20 times successively. If necessary, cautiously
remove the sealing closure. Clean the outer surfaces of the
container opening using a jet of particle-free water R and
remove the closure, avoiding any contamination of the
contents.
For large-volume parenterals, single units are tested. For
small-volume parenterals less than 25 mL in volume, the
contents of 10 or more units are combined in a cleaned
container; where justiﬁed and authorised, the test solution
may be prepared by mixing the contents of a suitable number
of vials and diluting to 25 mL with particle-free water R or
with an appropriate solvent without contamination of particles
when particle-free water R is not suitable. Small-volume
parenterals having a volume of 25 mL or more may be tested
individually.
Powders for parenteral administration are constituted with
particle-free water R or with an appropriate solvent without
contamination of particles when particle-free water R is not
suitable.
The number of test specimens must be adequate to provide a
statistically sound assessment. For large-volume parenterals
or for small-volume parenterals having a volume of 25 mL
or more, fewer than 10 units may be tested, based on an
appropriate sampling plan.
Wet the inside of the ﬁlter holder ﬁtted with the membrane
ﬁlter with several millilitres of particle-free water R. Transfer
to the ﬁltration funnel the total volume of a solution pool or
of a single unit, and apply vacuum. If needed, add stepwise
a portion of the solution until the entire volume is ﬁltered.
After the last addition of solution, begin rinsing the inner
walls of the ﬁlter holder by using a jet of particle-free water R.
Maintain the vacuum until the surface of the membrane ﬁlter
is free from liquid. Place the ﬁlter in a Petri dish and allow the
ﬁlter to air-dry with the cover slightly ajar. After the ﬁlter has
been dried, place the Petri dish on the stage of the microscope,
scan the entire membrane ﬁlter under the reﬂected light from
the illuminating device, and count the number of particles
that are equal to or greater than 10 μm and the number of
particles that are equal to or greater than 25 μm. Alternatively,
partial ﬁlter count and determination of the total ﬁlter count
by calculation is allowed. Calculate the mean number of
particles for the preparation to be examined.
The particle sizing process with the use of the circular diameter
graticule is carried out by transforming mentally the image of
each particle into a circle and then comparing it to the 10 μm
and 25 μm graticule reference circles. Thereby the particles
are not moved from their initial locations within the graticule
ﬁeld of view and are not superimposed on the reference
circles for comparison. The inner diameter of the transparent
graticule reference circles is used to size white and transparent
particles, while dark particles are sized by using the outer
diameter of the black opaque graticule reference circles.
In performing the microscopic particle count test do not
attempt to size or enumerate amorphous, semi-liquid, or
otherwise morphologically indistinct materials that have the
appearance of a stain or discolouration on the membrane
ﬁlter. These materials show little or no surface relief and
present a gelatinous or ﬁlm-like appearance. In such cases
the interpretation of enumeration may be aided by testing a
sample of the solution by the light obscuration particle count
test.
◊Alternative method
This method is intended to improve the applicability of the
test to biological preparations. However, it can be used for
any type of preparation.
Clean the outer surfaces of the container(s) using a jet of
particle-free water R, avoiding any contamination of the
contents. Samples are tested under in-use conditions, as
directed in the instructions for use (e.g. expelled syringe
contents).
For parenteral preparations that have a sufﬁcient volume
(i.e. a volume large enough to permit testing), testing of
individual units is often preferred.
If the volume is not sufﬁcient, take a suitable number of units,
mix each one carefully and thoroughly and then combine the
contents in a separate container to obtain the volume required
for a single test, depending on the instrument capability and
the properties of the sample.
Powders for parenteral administration are reconstituted with
particle-free water R or with an appropriate particle-free
solvent when particle-free water R is not suitable.
The number of test specimens must be adequate to provide a
statistically sound assessment. For large- and small-volume
parenterals, an adequate volume of sample must be provided
for analysis; however, single units may be tested based on a
statistically sound sampling plan.
Continue as described under Method 2 above, starting from
“Wet the inside...”.◊
384
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 11.0
2.9.22. Softening time determination of lipophilic suppositories
Evaluation
For preparations supplied in containers with a nominal
volume of more than 100 mL, apply the criteria of test 2.A.
For preparations supplied in containers with a nominal
volume of less than 100 mL, apply the criteria of test 2.B.
♦For preparations supplied in containers with a nominal
volume of 100 mL, apply the criteria of test 2.B.♦
Test 2.A – Solutions for infusion or solutions for injection
supplied in containers with a nominal content of more than
100 mL
The preparation complies with the test if the average number
of particles present in the units tested does not exceed 12 per
millilitre equal to or greater than 10 μm and does not exceed
2 per millilitre equal to or greater than 25 μm.
Test 2.B – Solutions for infusion or solutions for injection
supplied in containers with a nominal content of less than
100 mL
The preparation complies with the test if the average number
of particles present in the units tested does not exceed 3000 per
container equal to or greater than 10 μm and does not exceed
300 per container equal to or greater than 25 μm.
