[PAGE 17]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
• Evaluate any unexpected observations and additional data not specified in the 
protocol. 
 
• Summarize and discuss all manufacturing nonconformances such as deviations, 
aberrant test results, or other information that has bearing on the validity of the 
process. 
   
• Describe in sufficient detail any corrective actions or changes that should be made to 
existing procedures and controls. 
 
• State a clear conclusion as to whether the data indicates the process met the 
conditions established in the protocol and whether the process is considered to be in a 
state of control.  If not, the report should state what should be accomplished before 
such a conclusion can be reached.  This conclusion should be based on a documented 
justification for the approval of the process, and release of lots produced by it to the 
market in consideration of the entire compilation of knowledge and information 
gained from the design stage through the process qualification stage. 
 
• Include all appropriate department and quality unit review and approvals. 
 
D. 
Stage 3 ― Continued Process Verification 
 
The goal of the third validation stage is continual assurance that the process remains in a state of 
control (the validated state) during commercial manufacture.  A system or systems for detecting 
unplanned departures from the process as designed is essential to accomplish this goal.   
Adherence to the CGMP requirements, specifically, the collection and evaluation of information 
and data about the performance of the process, will allow detection of undesired process 
variability.  Evaluating the performance of the process identifies problems and determines 
whether action must be taken to correct, anticipate, and prevent problems so that the process 
remains in control (§ 211.180(e)). 
 
An ongoing program to collect and analyze product and process data that relate to product 
quality must be established (§ 211.180(e)).  The data collected should include relevant process 
trends and quality of incoming materials or components, in-process material, and finished 
products.  The data should be statistically trended and reviewed by trained personnel.  The 
information collected should verify that the quality attributes are being appropriately controlled 
throughout the process. 
 
We recommend that a statistician or person with adequate training in statistical process control 
techniques develop the data collection plan and statistical methods and procedures used in 
measuring and evaluating process stability and process capability.18  Procedures should describe 
 
18 Some references that may be useful include the following: ASTM E2281-03 “Standard Practice for Process and 
Measurement Capability Indices,” ASTM E2500-07 “Standard Guide for Specification, Design, and Verification of 
Pharmaceutical and Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing Systems and Equipment,” and ASTM E2709-09 “Standard 
Practice for Demonstrating Capability to Comply with a Lot Acceptance Procedure.”   This is not a complete list of 
all useful references on this topic.  Many industry standards, books, and guides on these topics are available. 
 
14



[PAGE 18]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                                                                                                                            
how trending and calculations are to be performed and should guard against overreaction to 
individual events as well as against failure to detect unintended process variability.  Production 
data should be collected to evaluate process stability and capability.  The quality unit should 
review this information.  If properly carried out, these efforts can identify variability in the 
process and/or signal potential process improvements. 
 
Good process design and development should anticipate significant sources of variability and 
establish appropriate detection, control, and/or mitigation strategies, as well as appropriate alert 
and action limits.  However, a process is likely to encounter sources of variation that were not 
previously detected or to which the process was not previously exposed.  Many tools and 
techniques, some statistical and others more qualitative, can be used to detect variation, 
characterize it, and determine the root cause.  We recommend that the manufacturer use 
quantitative, statistical methods whenever appropriate and feasible.  Scrutiny of intra-batch as 
well as inter-batch variation is part of a comprehensive continued process verification program 
under § 211.180(e).  
 
We recommend continued monitoring and sampling of process parameters and quality attributes 
at the level established during the process qualification stage until sufficient data are available to 
generate significant variability estimates.  These estimates can provide the basis for establishing 
levels and frequency of routine sampling and monitoring for the particular product and process.  
Monitoring can then be adjusted to a statistically appropriate and representative level.  Process 
variability should be periodically assessed and monitoring adjusted accordingly.    
   
Variation can also be detected by the timely assessment of defect complaints, out-of-
specification findings, process deviation reports, process yield variations, batch records, 
incoming raw material records, and adverse event reports.  Production line operators and quality 
unit staff should be encouraged to provide feedback on process performance.  We recommend 
that the quality unit meet periodically with production staff to evaluate data, discuss possible 
trends or undesirable process variation, and coordinate any correction or follow-up actions by 
production.   
 
Data gathered during this stage might suggest ways to improve and/or optimize the process by 
altering some aspect of the process or product, such as the operating conditions (ranges and set-
points), process controls, component, or in-process material characteristics.  A description of the 
planned change, a well-justified rationale for the change, an implementation plan, and quality 
unit approval before implementation must be documented (§ 211.100).  Depending on how the 
proposed change might affect product quality, additional process design and process 
qualification activities could be warranted.19   
 
Maintenance of the facility, utilities, and equipment is another important aspect of ensuring that a 
process remains in control.  Once established, qualification status must be maintained through 
routine monitoring, maintenance, and calibration procedures and schedules (21 CFR part 211, 
 
 
19  Certain manufacturing changes may call for formal notification to the Agency before implementation, as directed 
by existing regulations (see, e.g., 21 CFR 314.70 and 601.12).  
 
 
15



[PAGE 19]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
subparts C and D).  The equipment and facility qualification data should be assessed periodically 
to determine whether re-qualification should be performed and the extent of that re-qualification.  
Maintenance and calibration frequency should be adjusted based on feedback from these 
activities. 
 
 
V. 
CONCURRENT RELEASE OF PPQ BATCHES 
 
In most cases, the PPQ study needs to be completed successfully and a high degree of assurance 
in the process achieved before commercial distribution of a product.  In special situations, the 
PPQ protocol can be designed to release a PPQ batch for distribution before complete execution 
of the protocol steps and activities, i.e., concurrent release.  FDA expects that concurrent release 
will be used rarely.   
 
Concurrent release might be appropriate for processes used infrequently for various reasons, 
such as to manufacture drugs for which there is limited demand (e.g., orphan drugs, minor use 
and minor species veterinary drugs) or which have short half lives (e.g., radiopharmaceuticals, 
including positron emission tomography drugs).  Concurrent release might also be appropriate 
for drugs that are medically necessary and are being manufactured in coordination with the 
Agency to alleviate a short supply. 
 
Conclusions about a commercial manufacturing process can only be made after the PPQ protocol 
is fully executed and the data are fully evaluated.  If Stage 2 qualification is not successful (i.e., 
does not demonstrate that the process as designed is capable of reproducible performance at 
commercial scale), then additional design studies and qualification may be necessary.  The new 
product and process understanding obtained from the unsuccessful qualification study(ies) can 
have negative implications if any lot was already distributed.  Full execution of Stages 1 and 2 of 
process validation is intended to preclude or minimize that outcome.   
 
Circumstances and rationale for concurrent release should be fully described in the PPQ 
protocol.  Even when process performance assessment based on the PPQ protocol is still 
outstanding, any lot released concurrently must comply with all CGMPs, regulatory approval 
requirements, and PPQ protocol lot release criteria.  Lot release under a PPQ protocol is based 
upon meeting confidence levels appropriate for each quality attribute of the drug.      
 
When warranted and used, concurrent release should be accompanied by a system for careful 
oversight of the distributed batch to facilitate rapid customer feedback.  For example, customer 
complaints and defect reports should be rapidly assessed to determine root cause and whether the 
process should be improved or changed.  Concurrently released lots must also be assessed in 
light of any negative PPQ study finding or conclusions and appropriate corrective action must be 
taken (§§ 211.100(a), 211.180(e), and 211.192).  We recommend that each batch in a concurrent 
release program be evaluated for inclusion in the stability program.  It is important that stability 
test data be promptly evaluated to ensure rapid detection and correction of any problems. 
 
 
 
16



