[PAGE 20]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
VI. 
DOCUMENTATION 
 
Documentation at each stage of the process validation lifecycle is essential for effective 
communication in complex, lengthy, and multidisciplinary projects.  Documentation is important 
so that knowledge gained about a product and process is accessible and comprehensible to others 
involved in each stage of the lifecycle.   Information transparency and accessibility are 
fundamental tenets of the scientific method.  They are also essential to enabling organizational 
units responsible and accountable for the process to make informed, science-based decisions that 
ultimately support the release of a product to commerce. 
 
The degree and type of documentation required by CGMP vary during the validation lifecycle.  
Documentation requirements are greatest during Stage 2, process qualification, and Stage 3, 
continued process verification.   Studies during these stages must conform to CGMPs and must 
be approved by the quality unit in accordance with the regulations (see §§ 211.22 and 211.100).  
Viral and impurity clearance studies, even when performed at small scale, also require quality 
unit oversight. 
 
CGMP documents for commercial manufacturing (i.e., the initial commercial master batch 
production and control record (§ 211.186) and supporting procedures) are key outputs of Stage 1, 
process design.  We recommend that firms diagram the process flow for the full-scale process.   
Process flow diagrams should describe each unit operation, its placement in the overall process, 
monitoring and control points, and the component, as well as other processing material inputs 
(e.g., processing aids) and expected outputs (i.e., in-process materials and finished product).  It is 
also useful to generate and preserve process flow diagrams of the various scales as the process 
design progresses to facilitate comparison and decision making about their comparability. 
 
 
VII. 
ANALYTICAL METHODOLOGY 
 
Process knowledge depends on accurate and precise measuring techniques used to test and 
examine the quality of drug components, in-process materials, and finished products.  Validated 
analytical methods are not necessarily required during product- and process-development 
activities or when used in characterization studies.  Nevertheless, analytical methods should be 
scientifically sound (e.g., specific, sensitive, and accurate) and provide results that are reliable. 
There should be assurance of proper equipment function for laboratory experiments.  Procedures 
for analytical method and equipment maintenance, documentation practices, and calibration 
practices supporting process-development efforts should be documented or described.  New 
analytical technology and modifications to existing technology are continually being developed 
and can be used to characterize the process or the product.  Use of these methods is particularly 
appropriate when they reduce risk by providing greater understanding or control of product 
quality. However, analytical methods supporting commercial batch release must follow CGMPs 
in parts 210 and 211.  Clinical supply production should follow the CGMPs appropriate for the 
particular phase of clinical studies.  
 
 
17



[PAGE 21]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
GLOSSARY 
 
Capability of a process:  Ability of a process to produce a product that will fulfill the 
requirements of that product. The concept of process capability can also be defined in statistical 
terms. (ISO 9000:2005) 
 
Commercial manufacturing process:  The manufacturing process resulting in commercial 
product (i.e., drug that is marketed, distributed, and sold or intended to be sold).  For the 
purposes of this guidance, the term commercial manufacturing process does not include clinical 
trial or treatment IND material. 
 
Concurrent release:  Releasing for distribution a lot of finished product, manufactured 
following a qualification protocol, that meets the lot release criteria established in the protocol, 
but before the entire study protocol has been executed. 
 
Continued process verification:  Assuring that during routine production the process remains in 
a state of control. 
 
Performance indicators:  Measurable values used to quantify quality objectives to reflect the 
performance of an organization, process or system, also known as performance metrics in some 
regions. (ICH Q10) 
 
Process design:  Defining the commercial manufacturing process based on knowledge gained 
through development and scale-up activities. 
 
Process qualification:  Confirming that the manufacturing process as designed is capable of 
reproducible commercial manufacturing. 
 
Process validation:  The collection and evaluation of data, from the process design stage 
through commercial production, which establishes scientific evidence that a process is capable of 
consistently delivering quality products.   
 
Quality:  The degree to which a set of inherent properties of a product, system, or process fulfils 
requirements. (ICH Q9) 
 
State of control:  A condition in which the set of controls consistently provides assurance of 
continued process performance and product quality. (ICH Q10) 
 
 
 
 
18



[PAGE 22]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
 
19
REFERENCES 
 
FDA, (CBER), Validation of Procedures for Processing of Human Tissues Intended for 
Transplantation, guidance for industry, May 2002.  
 
FDA, (CDER), Investigating Out-of-Specification (OOS) Test Results for Pharmaceutical 
Production, guidance for industry, October 2006. 
 
FDA, (CDER, CVM, and ORA), PAT — A Framework for Innovative Pharmaceutical 
Development, Manufacturing, and Quality Assurance, guidance for industry, September 
2004. 
 
FDA, (CDER, CBER, CVM, and ORA), Quality Systems Approach to Pharmaceutical Current 
Good Manufacturing Practice Regulations, guidance for industry, September 2006. 
 
FDA/Global Harmonization Task Force (GHTF; medical devices), Quality Management Systems 
– Process Validation, edition 2, guidance, January 2004.  
 
FDA/ICH, (CDER and CBER), Q7 Good Manufacturing Practice for Active Pharmaceutical 
Ingredients, guidance for industry, August 2001. 
 
FDA/ICH, (CDER and CBER), Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical Development, guidance for industry, 
November 2009. 
 
FDA/ICH, (CDER and CBER), Q9 Quality Risk Management, guidance for industry, June 2006. 
 
FDA/ICH (CDER and CBER) Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System, guidance for industry, April 
2009.  
 
ASTM E2474-06 Standard Practice for Pharmaceutical Process Design Utilizing Process 
Analytical Technology.  
 
ASTM E2476-09 Standard Guide for Risk Assessment and Risk Control as it Impacts the 
Design, Development, and Operation of PAT Processes for Pharmaceutical Manufacture. 
 
ASTM E2281-03 Standard Practice for Process and Measurement Capability Indices.   
 
ASTM E2500-07 Standard Guide for Specification, Design, and Verification of Pharmaceutical 
and Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing Systems and Equipment.  
 
ASTM E2709-10 Standard Practice for Demonstrating Capability to Comply with a Lot 
Acceptance Procedure. 

