[PAGE 4]

Guidance for Industry1 
 
Process Validation: General Principles and Practices 
 
 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It 
does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  
You can use an alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes 
and regulations.  If you want to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for 
implementing this guidance.  If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the appropriate 
number listed on the title page of this guidance.  
 
 
 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
 
This guidance outlines the general principles and approaches that FDA considers appropriate 
elements of process validation for the manufacture of human and animal drug and biological 
products, including active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs or drug substances), collectively 
referred to in this guidance as drugs or products.  This guidance incorporates principles and 
approaches that all manufacturers can use to validate manufacturing processes. 
 
This guidance aligns process validation activities with a product lifecycle concept and with 
existing FDA guidance, including the FDA/International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) 
guidances for industry, Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical Development, Q9 Quality Risk Management, and 
Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System.2  Although this guidance does not repeat the concepts and 
principles explained in those guidances, FDA encourages the use of modern pharmaceutical 
development concepts, quality risk management, and quality systems at all stages of the 
manufacturing process lifecycle. 
 
                                                 
1 This guidance has been prepared by the Division of Manufacturing and Product Quality, Center for Drug 
Evaluation and Research (CDER), in cooperation with CDER’s Office of Pharmaceutical Sciences, the Center for 
Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), the Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA) and the Center for Veterinary 
Medicine (CVM) at the Food and Drug Administration.  
   
2 To make sure you have the most recent version of a guidance, check the CDER guidance page at 
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm, the CBER guidance 
page at 
http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm, or 
the CVM guidance page at 
http://www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/GuidanceComplianceEnforcement/GuidanceforIndustry/default.htm 
.     
 



[PAGE 5]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
The lifecycle concept links product and process development, qualification of the commercial 
manufacturing process,3  and maintenance of the process in a state of control during routine 
commercial production.  This guidance supports process improvement and innovation through 
sound science.  
 
This guidance covers the following categories of drugs: 
• Human drugs  
• Veterinary drugs  
• Biological and biotechnology products 
• Finished products and active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs or drug substances)4 
• The drug constituent of a combination (drug and medical device) product 
 
This guidance does not cover the following types of products: 
• Type A medicated articles and medicated feed 
• Medical devices5 
• Dietary supplements 
• Human tissues intended for transplantation regulated under section 361 of the Public Health 
Service Act6  
 
This guidance does not specify what information should be included as part of a regulatory submission.  
Interested persons can refer to the appropriate guidance or contact the appropriate Center in determining 
the type of information to include in a submission. 
 
 
This guidance also does not specifically discuss the validation of automated process control systems 
(i.e., computer hardware and software interfaces), which are commonly integrated into modern drug 
manufacturing equipment.  This guidance is relevant, however, to the validation of processes that 
include automated equipment in processing. 
 
 
3 In this guidance, the term commercial manufacturing process refers to the manufacturing process resulting in 
commercial product (i.e., drug that is marketed, distributed, and sold or intended to be sold).  For the purposes of 
this guidance, the term commercial manufacturing process does not include clinical trial or treatment IND material.  
   
4 Separate current good manufacturing practice (CGMP) regulations for drug components such as APIs (drug 
substances) and intermediates have not published as of the date of this guidance, but these components are subject to 
the  statutory CGMP requirements of section 501(a)(2)(B) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the Act) 
(21 U.S.C. 351(a)(2)(B)).  Process validation for APIs is discussed in the FDA/ICH guidance for industry, Q7 Good 
Manufacturing Practice Guidance for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (ICH Q7), available on the Internet at  
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm.  Section XII of ICH 
Q7 describes in detail the principles for validating API processes. 
 
5 Guidance on process validation for medical devices is provided in a separate document, Quality Management 
Systems – Process Validation, edition 2,   See infra note 6. 
 
6 See the FDA guidance for industry, Validation of Procedures for Processing of Human Tissues Intended for 
Transplantation, available on the Internet at 
http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm.  
 
2



[PAGE 6]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
FDA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable 
responsibilities.  Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should 
be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are 
cited.  The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or 
recommended, but not required.  
 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
 
In the Federal Register of May 11, 1987 (52 FR 17638), FDA issued a notice announcing the 
availability of a guidance entitled Guideline on General Principles of Process Validation (the 
1987 guidance).7  Since then, we have obtained additional experience through our regulatory 
oversight that allows us to update our recommendations to industry on this topic.  This revised 
guidance conveys FDA’s current thinking on process validation and is consistent with basic 
principles first introduced in the 1987 guidance.  The revised guidance also provides 
recommendations that reflect some of the goals of FDA’s initiative entitled “Pharmaceutical 
CGMPs for the 21st Century ― A Risk-Based Approach,” particularly with regard to the use of 
technological advances in pharmaceutical manufacturing, as well as implementation of modern 
risk management and quality system tools and concepts.8  This revised guidance replaces the 
1987 guidance.  
 
FDA has the authority and responsibility to inspect and evaluate process validation performed by 
manufacturers.  The CGMP regulations for validating pharmaceutical (drug) manufacturing 
require that drug products be produced with a high degree of assurance of meeting all the 
attributes they are intended to possess (21 CFR 211.100(a) and 211.110(a)).   
 
A. 
Process Validation and Drug Quality 
 
Effective process validation contributes significantly to assuring drug quality.  The basic 
principle of quality assurance is that a drug should be produced that is fit for its intended use.  
This principle incorporates the understanding that the following conditions exist: 
 
 
• Quality, safety, and efficacy are designed or built into the product. 
 
• Quality cannot be adequately assured merely by in-process and finished-product 
inspection or testing. 
 
7 The 1987 guidance was prepared by a working group that included representation from the Center for Devices and 
Radiological Health (CDRH).  Since that time, CDRH elected to reference a process validation guidance prepared in 
cooperation with the Global Harmonization Task Force (GHTF).  The principles and recommendations in that 
document, Quality Management Systems – Process Validation, edition 2 (available on the Internet at 
http://www.ghtf.org/sg3/sg3-final.html) are also useful to consider for drug manufacturing processes.  
  
8 See “Pharmaceutical cGMPS for the 21st Century — A Risk-Based Approach: Second Progress Report and 
Implementation Plan,” available at 
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/Manufacturing/QuestionsandAnswersonCurrentGoodMan
ufacturingPracticescGMPforDrugs/ucm071836.htm. 
 
 
 
3



[PAGE 7]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
  
• Each step of a manufacturing process is controlled to assure that the finished product 
meets all quality attributes including specifications. 
 
B. 
Approach to Process Validation 
 
For purposes of this guidance, process validation is defined as the collection and evaluation of 
data, from the process design stage through commercial production, which establishes scientific 
evidence that a process is capable of consistently delivering quality product.  Process validation 
involves a series of activities taking place over the lifecycle of the product and process. This 
guidance describes process validation activities in three stages.  
 
• Stage 1 – Process Design:  The commercial manufacturing process is defined during this 
stage based on knowledge gained through development and scale-up activities. 
 
• Stage 2 – Process Qualification: During this stage, the process design is evaluated to 
determine if the process is capable of reproducible commercial manufacturing. 
 
• Stage 3 – Continued Process Verification: Ongoing assurance is gained during routine 
production that the process remains in a state of control. 
 
This guidance describes activities typical of each stage, but in practice, some activities might 
occur in multiple stages. 
 
Before any batch from the process is commercially distributed for use by consumers, a 
manufacturer should have gained a high degree of assurance in the performance of the 
manufacturing process such that it will consistently produce APIs and drug products meeting 
those attributes relating to identity, strength, quality, purity, and potency.  The assurance should 
be obtained from objective information and data from laboratory-, pilot-, and/or commercial-
scale studies.  Information and data should demonstrate that the commercial manufacturing 
process is capable of consistently producing acceptable quality products within commercial 
manufacturing conditions.    
 
A successful validation program depends upon information and knowledge from product and 
process development.  This knowledge and understanding is the basis for establishing an 
approach to control of the manufacturing process that results in products with the desired quality 
attributes.   Manufacturers should: 
   
• Understand the sources of variation  
• Detect the presence and degree of variation  
• Understand the impact of variation on the process and ultimately on product attributes 
• Control the variation in a manner commensurate with the risk it represents to the process 
and product   
 
Each manufacturer should judge whether it has gained sufficient understanding to provide a high 
degree of assurance in its manufacturing process to justify commercial distribution of the 
 
4



