[PAGE 8]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
product.  Focusing exclusively on qualification efforts without also understanding the 
manufacturing process and associated variations may not lead to adequate assurance of quality.  
After establishing and confirming the process, manufacturers must maintain the process in a state 
of control over the life of the process, even as materials, equipment, production environment, 
personnel, and manufacturing procedures change.9   
 
Manufacturers should use ongoing programs to collect and analyze product and process data to 
evaluate the state of control of the process.  These programs may identify process or product 
problems or opportunities for process improvements that can be evaluated and implemented 
through some of the activities described in Stages 1 and 2. 
 
Manufacturers of legacy products can take advantage of the knowledge gained from the original 
process development and qualification work as well as manufacturing experience to continually 
improve their processes.  Implementation of the recommendations in this guidance for legacy 
products and processes would likely begin with the activities described in Stage 3.  
 
 
III. 
STATUTORY AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCESS 
VALIDATION 
 
Process validation for drugs (finished pharmaceuticals and components) is a legally enforceable 
requirement under section 501(a)(2)(B) of the Act (21 U.S.C. 351(a)(2)(B)), which states the 
following: 
 
A drug . . . shall be deemed to be adulterated . . . if . . . the methods used in, or the 
facilities or controls used for, its manufacture, processing, packing, or holding do not 
conform to or are not operated or administered in conformity with current good 
manufacturing practice to assure that such drug meets the requirements of this Act as to 
safety and has the identity and strength, and meets the quality and purity characteristics, 
which it purports or is represented to possess. 
 
FDA regulations describing current good manufacturing practice (CGMP) for finished 
pharmaceuticals are provided in 21 CFR parts 210 and 211.   
 
The CGMP regulations require that manufacturing processes be designed and controlled to 
assure that in-process materials and the finished product meet predetermined quality 
requirements and do so consistently and reliably.  Process validation is required, in both general 
and specific terms, by the CGMP regulations in parts 210 and 211.  The foundation for process 
validation is provided in § 211.100(a), which states that “[t]here shall be written procedures for 
production and process control designed to assure that the drug products have the identity, 
strength, quality, and purity they purport or are represented to possess...” (emphasis added).  This 
regulation requires manufacturers to design a process, including operations and controls, which 
results in a product meeting these attributes. 
 
9 The statute and regulations described in section III of this guidance explain the requirement that the methods and 
facilities used for the manufacturing of drugs be operated and administered under control sufficient to assure that the 
identity, strength, purity, and quality of a drug are as they purport or are represented to possess. 
 
 
5



[PAGE 9]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
 
Other CGMP regulations define the various aspects of validation.  For example, § 211.110(a), 
Sampling and testing of in-process materials and drug products, requires that control procedures 
“. . . be established to monitor the output and to validate the performance of those manufacturing 
processes that may be responsible for causing variability in the characteristics of in-process 
material and the drug product” (emphasis added).  Under this regulation, even well-designed 
processes must include in-process control procedures to assure final product quality.  In addition, 
the CGMP regulations regarding sampling set forth a number of requirements for validation: 
samples must represent the batch under analysis (§ 211.160(b)(3)); the sampling plan must result 
in statistical confidence (§ 211.165(c) and (d)); and the batch must meet its predetermined 
specifications (§ 211.165(a)).   
 
In addition to sampling requirements, the CGMP regulations also provide norms for establishing 
in-process specifications as an aspect of process validation.  Section 211.110(b) establishes two 
principles to follow when establishing in-process specifications.  The first principle is that “. . . 
in-process specifications for such characteristics [of in-process material and the drug product] 
shall be consistent with drug product final specifications . . . .”  Accordingly, in-process material 
should be controlled to assure that the final drug product will meet its quality requirements.  The 
second principle in this regulation further requires that in-process specifications “. . . shall be 
derived from previous acceptable process average and process variability estimates where 
possible and determined by the application of suitable statistical procedures where appropriate.”   
This requirement, in part, establishes the need for manufacturers to analyze process performance 
and control batch-to-batch variability.10 
 
The CGMP regulations also describe and define activities connected with process design, 
development, and maintenance.  Section 211.180(e) requires that information and data about 
product quality and manufacturing experience be periodically reviewed to determine whether 
any changes to the established process are warranted.  Ongoing feedback about product quality 
and process performance is an essential feature of process maintenance. 
 
In addition, the CGMP regulations require that facilities in which drugs are manufactured be of 
suitable size, construction, and location to facilitate proper operations (§ 211.42).  Equipment 
must be of appropriate design, adequate size, and suitably located to facilitate operations for its 
intended use (§ 211.63).  Automated, mechanical, and electronic equipment must be calibrated, 
inspected, or checked according to a written program designed to assure proper performance 
(§ 211.68). 
 
In summary, the CGMP regulations require that manufacturing processes be designed and 
controlled to assure that in-process materials and the finished product meet predetermined 
quality requirements and do so consistently and reliably.   
 
 
10 The Agency further explains this principle in the preamble to the final rule on “Current Good Manufacturing 
Practice in Manufacture, Processing, Packing, or Holding”  (43 FR 45013 at 45052, September 29, 1978) (available 
on the Internet at http://www.fda.gov/cder/dmpq/preamble.txt). 
    
 
 
6



[PAGE 10]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
 
IV. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
In the following sections, we describe general considerations for process validation, the 
recommended stages of process validation, and specific activities for each stage in the product 
lifecycle. 
 
A. 
General Considerations for Process Validation 
 
In all stages of the product lifecycle, good project management and good archiving that capture 
scientific knowledge will make the process validation program more effective and efficient.  The 
following practices should ensure uniform collection and assessment of information about the 
process and enhance the accessibility of such information later in the product lifecycle. 
• We recommend an integrated team approach11 to process validation that includes 
expertise from a variety of disciplines (e.g., process engineering, industrial pharmacy, 
analytical chemistry, microbiology, statistics, manufacturing, and quality assurance).  
Project plans, along with the full support of senior management, are essential elements 
for success. 
• Throughout the product lifecycle, various studies can be initiated to discover, observe, 
correlate, or confirm information about the product and process.  All studies should be 
planned and conducted according to sound scientific principles, appropriately 
documented, and approved in accordance with the established procedure appropriate for 
the stage of the lifecycle. 
• The terms attribute(s) (e.g., quality, product, component) and parameter(s) (e.g., process, 
operating, and equipment) are not categorized with respect to criticality in this guidance.   
With a lifecycle approach to process validation that employs risk based decision making 
throughout that lifecycle, the perception of criticality as a continuum rather than a binary 
state is more useful. All attributes and parameters should be evaluated in terms of their 
roles in the process and impact on the product or in-process material, and reevaluated as 
new information becomes available.  The degree of control over those attributes or 
parameters should be commensurate with their risk to the process and process output.  In 
other words, a higher degree of control is appropriate for attributes or parameters that 
pose a higher risk.  The Agency recognizes that terminology usage can vary and expects 
that each manufacturer will communicate the meaning and intent of its terminology and 
categorization to the Agency.     
• Many products are single-source or involve complicated manufacturing processes.  
Homogeneity within a batch and consistency between batches are goals of process 
validation activities.  Validation offers assurance that a process is reasonably protected 
against sources of variability that could affect production output, cause supply problems, 
and negatively affect public health. 
   
 
11 This concept is discussed in more detail in FDA’s guidance for industry, Quality Systems Approach to 
Pharmaceutical Current Good Manufacturing Practice Regulations, available at  
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm. 
 
7



