[PAGE 13]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
process control than non-PAT systems.  In the case of a strategy using PAT, the approach to 
process qualification will differ from that used in other process designs.  Further information on 
PAT processes can be found in FDA’s guidance for industry on PAT ― A Framework for 
Innovative Pharmaceutical Development, Manufacturing, and Quality Assurance.14 
  
The planned commercial production and control records, which contain the operational limits 
and overall strategy for process control, should be carried forward to the next stage for 
confirmation. 
 
C. 
Stage 2 ― Process Qualification 
 
During the process qualification (PQ) stage of process validation, the process design is evaluated 
to determine if it is capable of reproducible commercial manufacture.  This stage has two 
elements: (1) design of the facility and qualification of the equipment and utilities and (2) 
process performance qualification (PPQ).  During Stage 2, CGMP-compliant procedures must be 
followed.  Successful completion of Stage 2 is necessary before commercial distribution.15  
Products manufactured during this stage, if acceptable, can be released for distribution. 
  
1. 
Design of a Facility and Qualification of Utilities and Equipment 
 
Proper design of a manufacturing facility is required under part 211, subpart C, of the CGMP 
regulations on Buildings and Facilities.  It is essential that activities performed to assure proper 
facility design and commissioning precede PPQ.  Here, the term qualification refers to activities 
undertaken to demonstrate that utilities and equipment are suitable for their intended use and 
perform properly.  These activities necessarily precede manufacturing products at the 
commercial scale. 
 
Qualification of utilities and equipment generally includes the following activities: 
 
• Selecting utilities and equipment construction materials, operating principles, and 
performance characteristics based on whether they are appropriate for their specific uses. 
 
• Verifying that utility systems and equipment are built and installed in compliance with 
the design specifications (e.g., built as designed with proper materials, capacity, and 
functions, and properly connected and calibrated). 
 
• Verifying that utility systems and equipment operate in accordance with the process 
requirements in all anticipated operating ranges.  This should include challenging the 
equipment or system functions while under load comparable to that expected during 
 
14  Available at http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm.  
Other references that may be useful include ASTM E2474-06 “Standard Practice for Pharmaceutical Process Design 
Utilizing Process Analytical Technology” and ASTM E2476-09 “Standard Guide for Risk Assessment and Risk 
Control as it Impacts the Design, Development, and Operation of PAT Processes for Pharmaceutical Manufacture.” 
 
15 As discussed in section III of this guidance, process validation (including process qualification) is legally 
enforceable under section 501(a)(2)(B) of the Act.  FDA regulations require that process validation procedures be 
established and followed (§ 211.100) before a batch can be distributed (§§ 211.22 and 211.165). 
 
10



[PAGE 14]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
routine production.  It should also include the performance of interventions, stoppage, 
and start-up as is expected during routine production.  Operating ranges should be shown 
capable of being held as long as would be necessary during routine production. 
 
Qualification of utilities and equipment can be covered under individual plans or as part of an 
overall project plan.  The plan should consider the requirements of use and can incorporate risk 
management to prioritize certain activities and to identify a level of effort in both the 
performance and documentation of qualification activities.  The plan should identify the 
following items: 
1. the studies or tests to use, 
2. the criteria appropriate to assess outcomes,  
3. the timing of qualification activities,  
4. the responsibilities of relevant departments and the quality unit, and   
5. the procedures for documenting and approving the qualification.    
The project plan should also include the firm’s requirements for the evaluation of changes.  
Qualification activities should be documented and summarized in a report with conclusions that 
address criteria in the plan.  The quality control unit must review and approve the qualification 
plan and report (§ 211.22).  
 
2. 
Process Performance Qualification 
 
The process performance qualification (PPQ) is the second element of Stage 2, process 
qualification.  The PPQ combines the actual facility, utilities, equipment (each now qualified), 
and the trained personnel with the commercial manufacturing process, control procedures, and 
components to produce commercial batches.  A successful PPQ will confirm the process design 
and demonstrate that the commercial manufacturing process performs as expected.   
 
Success at this stage signals an important milestone in the product lifecycle.  A manufacturer 
must successfully complete PPQ before commencing commercial distribution of the drug 
product.16  The decision to begin commercial distribution should be supported by data from 
commercial-scale batches.  Data from laboratory and pilot studies can provide additional 
assurance that the commercial manufacturing process performs as expected. 
 
The approach to PPQ should be based on sound science and the manufacturer’s overall level of 
product and process understanding and demonstrable control.  The cumulative data from all 
relevant studies (e.g., designed experiments; laboratory, pilot, and commercial batches) should 
be used to establish the manufacturing conditions in the PPQ.  To understand the commercial 
process sufficiently, the manufacturer will need to consider the effects of scale.   However, it is 
not typically necessary to explore the entire operating range at commercial scale if assurance can 
be provided by process design data.  Previous credible experience with sufficiently similar 
products and processes can also be helpful.  In addition, we strongly recommend firms employ 
 
16 See section III of this guidance, Statutory and Regulatory Requirements for Process Validation. 
 
 
 
11



[PAGE 15]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
objective measures (e.g., statistical metrics) wherever feasible and meaningful to achieve 
adequate assurance.  
 
In most cases, PPQ will have a higher level of sampling, additional testing, and greater scrutiny 
of process performance than would be typical of routine commercial production.  The level of 
monitoring and testing should be sufficient to confirm uniform product quality throughout the 
batch.  The increased level of scrutiny, testing, and sampling should continue through the process 
verification stage as appropriate, to establish levels and frequency of routine sampling and 
monitoring for the particular product and process.  Considerations for the duration of the 
heightened sampling and monitoring period could include, but are not limited to, volume of 
production, process complexity, level of process understanding, and experience with similar 
products and processes. 
 
The extent to which some materials, such as column resins or molecular filtration media, can be 
re-used without adversely affecting product quality can be assessed in relevant laboratory 
studies.  The usable lifetimes of such materials should be confirmed by an ongoing PPQ protocol 
during commercial manufacture. 
 
A manufacturing process that uses PAT may warrant a different PPQ approach.  PAT processes 
are designed to measure in real time the attributes of an in-process material and then adjust the 
process in a timely control loop so the process maintains the desired quality of the output 
material.  The process design stage and the process qualification stage should focus on the 
measurement system and control loop for the measured attribute.  Regardless, the goal of 
validating any manufacturing process is the same:  to establish scientific evidence that the 
process is reproducible and will consistently deliver quality products. 
 
3. 
PPQ Protocol 
 
A written protocol that specifies the manufacturing conditions, controls, testing, and expected 
outcomes is essential for this stage of process validation.  We recommend that the protocol 
discuss the following elements:   
 
• The manufacturing conditions, including operating parameters, processing limits, and 
component (raw material) inputs. 
 
• The data to be collected and when and how it will be evaluated. 
 
• Tests to be performed (in-process, release, characterization) and acceptance criteria 
for each significant processing step. 
 
• The sampling plan, including sampling points, number of samples, and the frequency 
of sampling for each unit operation and attribute.  The number of samples should be 
adequate to provide sufficient statistical confidence of quality both within a batch and 
between batches.   The confidence level selected can be based on risk analysis as it 
relates to the particular attribute under examination.  Sampling during this stage 
should be more extensive than is typical during routine production. 
 
12



[PAGE 16]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
 
• Criteria and process performance indicators that allow for a science- and risk-based 
decision about the ability of the process to consistently produce quality products.  The 
criteria should include: 
 
— A description of the statistical methods to be used in analyzing all collected data 
(e.g., statistical metrics defining both intra-batch and inter-batch variability). 
 
— Provision for addressing deviations from expected conditions and handling of 
nonconforming data.  Data should not be excluded from further consideration in 
terms of PPQ without a documented, science-based justification.17 
 
• Design of facilities and the qualification of utilities and equipment, personnel training 
and qualification, and verification of material sources (components and 
container/closures), if not previously accomplished. 
 
• Status of the validation of analytical methods used in measuring the process, in-
process materials, and the product. 
 
• Review and approval of the protocol by appropriate departments and the quality unit. 
 
4. 
PPQ Protocol Execution and Report 
 
Execution of the PPQ protocol should not begin until the protocol has been reviewed and 
approved by all appropriate departments, including the quality unit.  Any departures from the 
protocol must be made according to established procedure or provisions in the protocol.  Such 
departures must be justified and approved by all appropriate departments and the quality unit 
before implementation (§ 211.100). 
 
The commercial manufacturing process and routine procedures must be followed during PPQ 
protocol execution (§§ 211.100(b) and 211.110(a)).  The PPQ lots should be manufactured under 
normal conditions by the personnel routinely expected to perform each step of each unit 
operation in the process.  Normal operating conditions should include the utility systems (e.g., air 
handling and water purification), material, personnel, environment, and manufacturing 
procedures. 
 
A report documenting and assessing adherence to the written PPQ protocol should be prepared in 
a timely manner after the completion of the protocol.  This report should: 
 
• Discuss and cross-reference all aspects of the protocol. 
 
• Summarize data collected and analyze the data, as specified by the protocol. 
 
 
17 For additional guidance regarding out-of-specification results, see FDA’s Guidance for Industry, Investigating 
Out-of-Specification (OOS)Test Results for Pharmaceutical Production, available at 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm070287.pdf. 
 
13



