[PAGE 11]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
B. 
Stage 1 ― Process Design 
 
Process design is the activity of defining the commercial manufacturing process that will be 
reflected in planned master production and control records.  The goal of this stage is to design a 
process suitable for routine commercial manufacturing that can consistently deliver a product 
that meets its quality attributes.    
 
1. 
Building and Capturing Process Knowledge and Understanding 
 
Generally, early process design experiments do not need to be performed under the CGMP 
conditions required for drugs intended for commercial distribution that are manufactured during 
Stage 2 (process qualification) and Stage 3 (continued process verification).  They should, 
however, be conducted in accordance with sound scientific methods and principles, including 
good documentation practices.  This recommendation is consistent with ICH Q10 
Pharmaceutical Quality System.12   Decisions and justification of the controls should be 
sufficiently documented and internally reviewed to verify and preserve their value for use or 
adaptation later in the lifecycle of the process and product.  
 
Although often performed at small-scale laboratories, most viral inactivation and impurity 
clearance studies cannot be considered early process design experiments.  Viral and impurity 
clearance studies intended to evaluate and estimate product quality at commercial scale should 
have a level of quality unit oversight that will ensure that the studies follow sound scientific 
methods and principles and the conclusions are supported by the data.   
  
Product development activities provide key inputs to the process design stage, such as the 
intended dosage form, the quality attributes, and a general manufacturing pathway.  Process 
information available from product development activities can be leveraged in the process design 
stage.  The functionality and limitations of commercial manufacturing equipment should be 
considered in the process design, as well as predicted contributions to variability posed by 
different component lots, production operators, environmental conditions, and measurement 
systems in the production setting.  However, the full spectrum of input variability typical of 
commercial production is not generally known at this stage.  Laboratory or pilot-scale models 
designed to be representative of the commercial process can be used to estimate variability.   
 
Designing an efficient process with an effective process control approach is dependent on the 
process knowledge and understanding obtained.  Design of Experiment (DOE) studies can help 
develop process knowledge by revealing relationships, including multivariate interactions, 
between the variable inputs (e.g., component characteristics 13 or process parameters) and the 
resulting outputs (e.g., in-process material, intermediates, or the final product).  Risk analysis 
tools can be used to screen potential variables for DOE studies to minimize the total number of 
experiments conducted while maximizing knowledge gained.  The results of DOE studies can 
provide justification for establishing ranges of incoming component quality, equipment 
 
12 Available at http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm. 
 
13 “Component means any ingredient [raw material] intended for use in the manufacture of a drug product, including 
those that may not appear in such drug product” (§ 210.3(b)(3)). 
 
8



[PAGE 12]

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
parameters, and in-process material quality attributes.  FDA does not generally expect 
manufacturers to develop and test the process until it fails.   
 
Other activities, such as experiments or demonstrations at laboratory or pilot scale, also assist in 
evaluation of certain conditions and prediction of performance of the commercial process.  These 
activities also provide information that can be used to model or simulate the commercial process.  
Computer-based or virtual simulations of certain unit operations or dynamics can provide 
process understanding and help avoid problems at commercial scale.  It is important to 
understand the degree to which models represent the commercial process, including any 
differences that might exist, as this may have an impact on the relevance of information derived 
from the models.  
 
It is essential that activities and studies resulting in process understanding be documented.  
Documentation should reflect the basis for decisions made about the process.  For example, 
manufacturers should document the variables studied for a unit operation and the rationale for 
those variables identified as significant.  This information is useful during the process 
qualification and continued process verification stages, including when the design is revised or 
the strategy for control is refined or changed. 
 
2. 
Establishing a Strategy for Process Control 
 
Process knowledge and understanding is the basis for establishing an approach to process control 
for each unit operation and the process overall.  Strategies for process control can be designed to 
reduce input variation, adjust for input variation during manufacturing (and so reduce its impact 
on the output), or combine both approaches.    
 
Process controls address variability to assure quality of the product.  Controls can consist of 
material analysis and equipment monitoring at significant processing points (§ 211.110(c)).  
Decisions regarding the type and extent of process controls can be aided by earlier risk 
assessments, then enhanced and improved as process experience is gained.  
 
FDA expects controls to include both examination of material quality and equipment monitoring.  
Special attention to control the process through operational limits and in-process monitoring is 
essential in two possible scenarios: 
 
1. When the product attribute is not readily measurable due to limitations of sampling or 
detectability (e.g., viral clearance or microbial contamination) or  
2. When intermediates and products cannot be highly characterized and well-defined quality 
attributes cannot be identified.   
 
These controls are established in the master production and control records (see § 211.186(a) and 
(b)(9)). 
 
More advanced strategies, which may involve the use of process analytical technology (PAT), 
can include timely analysis and control loops to adjust the processing conditions so that the 
output remains constant.  Manufacturing systems of this type can provide a higher degree of 
 
9



