1
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
1.0  Introduction
The design and implementation of an environmental monitoring (EM) program allows the confirma-
tion that controls to minimize the risk associated with processes, people, equipment, utilities, and fa-
cilities are designed correctly and continue to be effective in the manufacture of sterile pharmaceutical 
products. As such, it forms an important part of the contamination control strategy (CCS). 
PDA first published Technical Report No. 13 in 1990 and revised it two previous times, 2001 and 2014. 
This third revision intends to align the content of the document with current industry trends and regu-
latory expectations. Specifically, it will provide additional guidance and focus on the:
• Use of quality risk management (QRM) principles to establish a robust EM program by 
suggesting practical step-by-step approaches
• Increased expectations concerning data management and data integrity 
• Prerequisites to an effective EM program
• Qualification of controlled environments and how to maintain them in a qualified state 
• Rapid microbiological methods (RMM) or automated monitoring systems, since becoming more 
and more convenient, performant and accepted, or even recommended, by regulatory bodies.
Members of the task force who developed this technical report represent or provide expertise to global 
companies to ensure that the methods, terminology, and practices reflect not only U.S., but also inter-
national procedures. Technical peer reviews were completed by prominent EM scientists.
Although this TR has been updated to ensure its alignment with existing current regulations and guide-
lines, current and/or newly updated regulations or guidelines should be consulted when implementing or 
changing an environmental monitoring program. This TR should be viewed as technical guidance, it is not 
intended to replace existing or future regulations, nor should it be considered an all-inclusive document.
1.1	
Purpose
This document was created to aid in the establishment of an environmental monitoring program that 
is robust, meaningful, and practical whilst embracing innovation and the principles of quality risk 
management. This revision updates microbiological and total airborne particulate control concepts 
and principles as they relate to facilities involved in the manufacture of sterile pharmaceutical products 
and other designated cleanroom environments. 
1.2	
Scope
TR-13 serves as a resource applicable for controlled environments in general however its primary focus 
is environmental monitoring for sterile product manufacturing. 
This document discusses international standards and regulatory guidances, elements of an EM program, 
and EM application. Current (at the time of publication) guidelines for typical EM levels and frequen-
cies are presented in Section 3.0 and levels for pharmaceutical water are covered in Section 6.8. 
A comprehensive environmental monitoring program should demonstrate the effectiveness of a solid 
CCS focusing on: 
• Sound facility design, including barrier systems (e.g., isolators and RABS), operation and 
maintenance
• Established documentation systems
• Qualified sanitization, disinfection, and decontamination procedures
• Reliable process controls 
• Good housekeeping practices
• Effective area access controls
• Consistent sample collection and analysis
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


2
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
• Effective training, certification or qualification, and personnel evaluation programs (e.g., periodic 
shop/manufacturing-floor oversight programs by a quality assurance unit and/or adequate subject 
matter experts)
• Quality assurance and control of materials, facilities, and equipment
• Continuous improvement and quality risk management programs
Bulk and intermediate product bioburden monitoring (except for pharmaceutical water) is not con-
sidered part of all EM programs and is therefore outside of the scope of this technical report. For more 
specifics on this topic, refer to PDA Technical Report No. 69: Bioburden and Biofilm Management in 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Operations (1).
2.0 
Glossary and Abbreviations
Action Limit
A microbial or total airborne particulate limit 
that, when exceeded, indicates a process is out-
side of its normal operating range. A response to 
such an excursion should involve a documented 
investigation and corrective actions based on the 
results of that investigation. 
Airborne Particulate Count 
(Total Airborne Particulate Count)
The total number of particles of a specific size range 
per unit volume of air.
Airborne Viable Particulate Count 
(Total Airborne Aerobic Microbial Count)
The recovered number of colony-forming units 
or related signal per unit volume of air.
Alert Level
An established value that when exceeded, pro-
vides an early warning of potential drift from 
normal operating conditions and validated state, 
which does not necessarily give grounds for cor-
rective action but triggers appropriate scrutiny 
and follow-up to address the potential problem. 
Aseptic Filling
Part of aseptic processing in which a pre-steril-
ized or aseptically manufactured product is filled 
and sealed into sterile containers in a cleanroom, 
RABS, or isolator.
Aseptic Processing
Handling of product, packaging materials, and/
or processing equipment in a controlled environ-
ment in which the air supply, materials, equip-
ment, and personnel are controlled to maintain 
(product) sterility (2).
Bioburden
Viable microorganisms associated with person-
nel, manufacturing environments (air and sur-
faces), equipment, product packaging, raw ma-
terials (including water), in-process materials, or 
finished products. 
Campaign
A series of consecutive production batches man-
ufactured without or with reduced intervening 
cleaning, disinfection, and/or sterilization.
Cleaning
Chemical or physical means used to remove soil 
and/or microorganisms from surfaces.
Cleanroom 
A room designed, maintained, and controlled to 
prevent particle and microbiological contami-
nation of a drug product or medical device. A 
cleanroom is assigned and reproducibly meets an 
appropriate air cleanliness classification.
Colony-Forming Unit (CFU)
A single macroscopic colony formed after the 
growth of one or more microorganisms on a solid 
microbiological growth medium. 
Contamination Control Strategy (CCS)
A holistic, risk-based, planned, and documented 
approach based on product and process under-
standing, which explains all the elements that 
need to be controlled and monitored so micro-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


3
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
bial, particulate, and pyrogen contamination is 
minimized to ensure process performance and 
product quality. The CCS should allow for con-
tinuous improvement measures to be taken.
Continuous Monitoring
A process of data collection in which conditions 
are monitored continuously throughout the op-
eration. In most applications, this definition im-
plies “during production.” 
Controlled Non-Classified Area (CNC) 
An area that does not meet any of the formal 
classified grades of cleanliness (i.e., grades A to 
D), but where a manufacturer defined level of 
microbial control is still maintained. (May also 
be referred to as Pharmaceutically Controlled 
Clean Area (PCCA)) 
Corrective Action
Action to eliminate the cause of a nonconformity 
and to prevent recurrence. 
Critical Area/Critical Zone
An area designed to maintain sterility of materi-
als where sterilized product, containers, closures, 
and equipment may be exposed to the manufac-
turing environment.
Critical Surface
A surface within a critical area that may come in 
direct or indirect contact with sterilized or sterile 
filtered products, containers, or closures.
Decontamination
The overall process of removal or reduction of 
any contaminants (chemical residue, or micro-
organisms) from an area, processing equipment, 
or person. The method of decontamination used 
(e.g., cleaning, disinfection, sterilization) should 
be chosen and validated to achieve a level of 
cleanliness appropriate to the intended use of the 
item decontaminated.
Disinfection
The chemical or physical inactivation of a bio-
burden on inanimate surfaces (2). 
Grade A Air Supply
Air which is passed through a filter qualified as ca-
pable of producing Grade A total particulate quality 
air, but where there is no requirement to perform 
continuous total particulate monitoring or meet 
Grade A viable monitoring limits and the area itself 
is not classified. Specifically used for the protection 
of fully stoppered vials where the cap has not been 
crimped and the equipment and engineering sys-
tems that have a direct impact on product quality.
Grid Profiling
A process of dividing areas of equivalent classifi-
cations into grids for the purpose of uniformly as-
sessing contamination characteristics in that area. 
Isolator
A contained, decontaminated environment meet-
ing Grade A (ISO 5) conditions used for aseptic 
process manufacturing that provides an uncom-
promised, continuous isolation of its interior from 
the external environment including personnel. 
Once decontaminated by a validated cycle, an iso-
lator prevents the microbiological contamination 
of sterile products and product contact surfaces of 
the interior by enclosures and the supply of contin-
uous, controlled overpressure of HEPA-filtered air.
Closed Isolator
Systems exclude external contamination from 
the isolator’s interior by transfer material via 
aseptic connection to auxiliary equipment, 
rather than using openings to the surrounding 
environment. Closed systems remain sealed 
throughout operations.
Open Isolator 
Systems are designed to allow for the continu-
ous or semi-continuous ingress and/or egress of 
materials during operations through one or more 
openings. Openings are engineered (e.g., using 
continuous overpressure) to exclude the entry of 
external contamination into the isolator.
Manufacturing Control Parameters
Conditions and corresponding measurements 
associated with facilities and equipment used in 
the control of a manufacturing process and/or 
area that may impact the safety, quality, identity, 
potency, or purity of a product. Environmental 
control parameters may include airflow rates and 
patterns, pressure differentials, materials and per-
sonnel flow, temperature, and relative humidity, 
as well as total airborne total particulate and via-
ble particulates. Process and operating control pa-
rameters include bioburden, process rate, weight, 
volume, temperature, and pressure.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


4
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Microbial Characterization
The description of microorganisms based on 
their cellular morphology, Gram reaction, and 
key diagnostic tests (e.g., gram-positive coagu-
lase-negative cocci).
Microbial Classification
The arrangement of microorganisms into taxonomic 
groups based on their similarities and relationships.
Microbial Identification
The determination of the genus, and species, 
when possible, to which a laboratory or manu-
facturing isolate belongs.
Operational State
The status of a classified room often used an as 
indicator of the presence or absence of personnel 
and/or active manufacturing processes.
At Rest
Condition of the environment in the absence 
of normal operations. This includes having the 
equipment installed as specified and is stand-
ing by for operation when no personnel are 
present. (Synonymous with “static.”)
In Operation
Condition of an environment during normal 
operations, that is, when the usual equipment is 
operating and the specified number of personnel 
are present, and the process or simulated process 
is ongoing. (Synonymous with “dynamic.”)
Parametric Release
A sterility release program based on effective 
control, monitoring, and documentation of a 
validated sterile-product manufacturing process 
where sterility release is based on demonstrated 
achievement of critical operational parameters in 
lieu of end-product sterility testing (3).
Preventive action
Action to eliminate the cause of a potential non-
conformity or other potential undesirable situation. 
Restricted Access Barrier System 
(RABS)
Aseptic processing systems (typically ISO 5) 
intended to substantially reduce human-borne 
contamination within the aseptic environment 
where sterile product, containers, closures, and 
equipment can be exposed via the use of separa-
tive devices and defined mechanical features and 
operating procedures (4).
Open RABS
Where there are vents in the barrier that allow 
air to move from the RABS to the surrounding 
area (for example, Grade A zone to the sur-
rounding Grade B area). 
Closed RABS
Where the air is vented in return ducts within 
the cabinet.
Risk Analysis
The estimation of the risk associated with the 
identified hazards (5,6).
Sanitization
Process of reducing the number of all forms of 
microbial contamination including fungi, virus-
es, and bacteria (7).
Spore
A bacterial dormant form that is highly resis-
tant to adverse conditions. Fungal spores are not 
highly resistant; their susceptibilities are closer to 
vegetative microorganisms.
Sterilization
Validated process used to render product, equip-
ment, or primary packaging materials free from 
viable microorganisms (7).
Type Strain
A specific isolate of a species that is maintained in pure 
culture and is serotypically, genotypically, or chemo-
taxonomically characterized to differentiate it from 
other strains of the same species. The strain is repre-
sentative of the species and provides a reference for the 
species based on its historic isolation, characterization, 
and deposition in recognized culture collections.
Terminal Sterilization
A process where the material is sterilized in its 
primary packaging/container configuration.
Total Airborne Particulates
A term used in reference to the total number of 
particulates suspended in the air. Airborne par-
ticulates may be a complex mixture of viable and 
nonviable particulates. They can be characterized 
by their physical attributes (e.g., concentration 
and size distribution). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


5
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Trend Analysis
A review performed in response to an alert or ac-
tion condition or as part of periodic data review. 
This review provides an analysis of specific en-
vironmental monitoring data to identify adverse 
trends (e.g., increase in counts, a change to re-
petitive organism recoveries, or multiple counts 
in the same room).
Vegetative Cell
Cells in an actively growing state. Some microor-
ganisms can only be vegetative, while others are 
spore-formers and can be in a vegetative or spore 
(dormant) state.
2.1	
Abbreviations
API
Active pharmaceutical ingredient
CCS
Contamination control strategy
CRR
Contamination recovery rate
EM
Environmental monitoring
FMEA
Failure Mode & Effects Analysis
HACCP Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point
HEPA 
Filter
High-efficiency particulate air filter
RABS
Restricted access barrier system
SCDA
Soybean casein digest agar 
(synonymous with TSA)
SDA
Sabouraud dextrose agar
TSA
Trypticase soy agar or tryptone soya 
agar (synonymous with SCDA)
VBNC
Viable but not culturable
3.0 
Environmental Classifications: Regulatory Expectations
An EM program should be designed and implemented in conformance with the requirements of 
the government agencies regulating the manufacturing site as well as requirements of international 
standard-setting organizations. If the intent is to serve multinational markets, the most stringent re-
quirements should be evaluated as the basis of an EM program.
This section compares regulations and guidance instituted for EM by these authorities and standards-
setting organizations:
• 
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) 
• 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
• 
U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP)
• 
European Pharmacopoeia (Ph. Eur.)
• 
European Medicines Agency (EMA)
• 
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of 
Japan (MHLW)
• 
Japanese Pharmacopoeia (JP)
• 
Chinese Pharmacopeia (ChP)
• 
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention 
(PIC) and Pharmaceutical Inspection  
Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S)
• 
World Health Organization (WHO)
Although the regulations and guidelines of these organizations are similar in many respects, there are 
important differences among them in terms of the information each provides, particularly with respect 
to cleanroom classifications. Specific countries other than those listed above may have additional regu-
lations and guidances.
The most commonly accepted international cleanroom standard related to total airborne particulates 
is ISO 14644-1:2015 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments — Part 1: Classification of Air 
Cleanliness by Particle Concentration. ISO class designations are based on the number of particles greater 
than a specified size (0.1–5 μm) per cubic meter of air sampled. ISO 14644-1 defines classes from 1 to 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.