11
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.0 
Environmental Monitoring Qualification of  
Cleanrooms (Classified Areas) Used for Manufacturing and  
Filling of Sterile Products
Clean areas for the manufacture of sterile products are classified according to the required characteris-
tics of the environment. Each manufacturing operation requires an appropriate environmental cleanli-
ness level in the operational state to minimize the risks of particulate or microbial contamination of 
the product or materials being handled.
For new areas, the initial qualification should be performed in a prospective mode. For existing 
facilities that require a repeat of the initial qualification, the requalification can be performed in 
concurrence with routine production activities if historical data of existing rooms are shown to be 
in a good state of control. Release of product should await final release of the cleanroom qualifica-
tion exercise. 
To meet the in-operation conditions, these areas should be designed to reach certain specified air-
cleanliness levels in the “at rest” occupancy state. Section 9.0 (Appendix 1) provides additional guid-
ance to ensure and verify that critical system components meet user requirements and are properly 
identified, installed, and calibrated (typically covered within the installation qualification (IQ) and 
operational qualification (OQ) phases of cleanroom qualification).
To prepare the cleanroom for classification, air filters should be evaluated for cleanliness and replaced, 
if necessary, especially in new or modified facilities where excess construction debris or dust may cause 
clogging. Cleaning and disinfection protocols should be defined and performed prior to conducting 
qualification. The need to perform baseline viable and total airborne particulate monitoring should 
be assessed to ensure the cleanroom is ready to go into qualification. This might be a protocol-driven 
prerequisite.
Performance of the total airborne particulate cleanroom classification described in ISO 14644-1 
would confirm the air-cleanliness levels in the at-rest occupancy state. This initial exercise should be 
supplemented by an at-rest qualification using viable tests.
Viable at-rest locations might focus on more specific aspects related to the actual design of the clean-
room and can be documented as part of the EM risk assessment (see Section 5.2). Although human 
activity and material transfers (the primary sources of microbial contamination) are not evaluated in 
the at-rest state, the associated sampling locations will provide valuable information about the intrin-
sic microbial state-of-control of the cleanroom prior to starting the qualification under in-operation 
conditions. Specifications applied for viable qualification at rest might be more stringent than those 
applicable for in-operation conditions. All necessary measures should be taken to minimize the impact 
of personnel during at-rest monitoring. For instance, surface monitoring should be performed at the 
start of the run, only the EM technician should be present, and delay timers should be applied to au-
tomated samplers to allow the technician to leave the location before testing begins.
Subsequently, it should be confirmed that the cleanroom can maintain operational conditions when 
executing the activities foreseen within the area. The method detailed in ISO 14644-1 can be used to 
confirm the total airborne particulate cleanroom classification for the in-operation status. This initial 
qualification is normally performed by simulating manufacturing activities, ensuring that at a certain 
stage the maximum number of personnel and the worst-case level of activities are covered.
The runs described in this section may form part of the OQ of the cleanroom. Data obtained during 
this stage should be used as part of the EM risk assessment to define routine sampling locations. For 
both total airborne particulate runs (in the at-rest and in-operational conditions), one run conducted 
according to ISO 14644-1 is considered sufficient.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


12
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
A performance qualification (PQ) should follow the successful completion of the OQ. However, it 
may commence before the full OQ results are available, based on preliminary results (business risk 
approach). If this approach is chosen, PQ protocol should list the results which should be available 
before the PQ start.
PQ typically consists of three consecutive runs during routine (in-operation) conditions. In batch-
related production rooms, a run would typically comprise a batch covering all applicable shifts and 
activities. In supporting areas, a run should cover all relevant activities to be performed within that 
area. Simulating activities during performance qualification might reduce the total runtime (i.e., by 
executing them in a condensed period of time).
The sampling plan should be based on the viable and total airborne particulate sample locations defined 
as part of the routine monitoring (EM risk assessment) augmented with additional EM locations to cover 
remote parts of the room in order to confirm and document that the complete cleanroom environment is 
in control. This PQ can be performed during APS or activities can be simulated (10). There is a business 
risk, however, performing PQ during APS since the facility is not operating in a fully qualified environ-
ment and deficiencies could be detected that first require corrective measures. Consequently, at a certain 
stage, the maximum number of personnel and the worst-case level of activities need to be covered during 
one or more PQ runs. The maximum limits for microbial and total airborne particulate contamination 
during qualification should correspond to the action limits applied during routine monitoring. 
Following the initial PQ, an extended PQ may be conducted for a defined time period based on the 
routine sampling program or continuation of extended sampling. The intent of this process would be 
to account for conditions which may not have been covered in the initial PQ (e.g., seasonal variation 
of microbes, establishment of appropriate alert levels, selection of microorganisms for disinfectant ef-
ficacy tests, additional evaluation of the periodic cleaning program, etc.). 
Production or room configuration changes with a possible impact on EM (e.g., gowning procedures, 
cleaning set-up, layout, material or personnel flow, or other areas) should include a new assessment on 
the qualified status of the cleanroom and may require requalification as part of the change.
5.0 
Environmental Monitoring Program
An EM program (including EMPQ) should be in conformance with current GMP, which includes 
appropriate training and authority of personnel involved in implementing the EM program. Equip-
ment used should be qualified and calibrated, and microbiological growth media should be properly 
qualified, prepared, and tested. In addition, all operational procedures should be written, approved, 
and followed with appropriate controls to support their use. The methods selected should be justified 
and qualified for use as appropriate. 
Cleaning and disinfection, of the manufacturing area, and material handling and gowning processes, 
as well as appropriate aseptic behavior of the personnel, are key components of an effective contamina-
tion control strategy. 
Selection of sampling methods (see Section 6.0), sampling sites, and sampling frequencies should be 
based on the principles of risk management according to ICH Q9: Quality Risk Management to ensure 
that the respective production area is under control and meets regulatory requirements. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


13
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Establishment of alert levels and action limits may be based on individual sample sites or groups of 
related sample sites with a similar design or activities. Data obtained are subject to continual review, 
and alert and action decisions are made by qualified personnel. A documentation system should be in 
place for identifying and investigating excursions and adverse trends and the effectiveness of the cor-
rective actions taken. All data should be documented and periodically trended.
5.1	
Cleaning, Sanitization or Disinfection and Decontamination 
EM data demonstrates the effectiveness of the cleaning and disinfection program. The qualification of 
cleaning and disinfection procedures should demonstrate microbial reduction and maintenance of a 
microbiological state of control and should provide confidence in the effectiveness of the procedure. 
This typically includes laboratory surface challenge or carrier studies for contact time and bioburden 
reduction, supplemented by in-situ studies. 
Both USP <1072> and PDA Technical Report No. 70: Fundamentals of Cleaning and Disinfection Pro-
grams for Aseptic Manufacturing Facilities provide sufficient details of the requirements and in-vitro 
surface challenge methodology for qualification of the efficacy of the agent used (2,15).
5.2	
EM Sample Site Selection Using Risk Management Principles 
Sample site selection, selection of the appropriate sampling methods, sampling volumes, and monitor-
ing frequencies are critical components of contamination control within a facility. However, EM risk 
assessments are only intended to define the EM program as a part of the overall contamination control 
strategy. This section addresses how to create and how to maintain an EM program applying a lifecycle 
approach (Section 5.2.1) and the use of quality risk management principles to identify and select sites 
for EM of classified environments including ISO 5-8/Grades A-D as well as personnel monitoring 
(Section 5.2.2). Sections 6.8 and 6.9 discuss utilities (WFI/Compressed Air, Nitrogen, etc.). 
5.2.1	
Lifecycle Approach to an Environmental Monitoring Program 
The creation and maintenance of EM programs are best achieved using a lifecycle approach. This 
lifecycle approach encompasses the evaluation and definition of suitable sample sites, sample types, 
sampling volumes, and sample frequency for microbiological monitoring that are required before 
starting up a new facility, area, or room. These sample sites are used to perform an EM performance 
qualification (PQ). Based on the PQ results, adaptation (mainly reduction or addition) of sample sites 
may be necessary before setting up the sample plan for routine and, if applicable, batch-related EM. 
The impact of any major change (e.g., reconstruction, process change, or equipment relocation) needs 
to be evaluated and the affected area may need to be requalified. 
A final EM evaluation may be necessary for decommissioning a room, isolator, or facility to demon-
strate environmental control through to the end. The model presented in Figure 5.2.1-1 outlines the 
general flow of the lifecycle approach of an EM program. Each step defined is designed to ensure that 
once an EM program is developed, is it carefully reviewed during the lifecycle of the area, product, or 
process to affirm that a state of control is maintained. A periodic reevaluation of the EM program (e.g., 
in response to an adverse trend report) may be necessary.
5.2.2	
Initiation of Quality Risk Management Process 
Prior to executing a risk assessment, several elements must be defined: scope and objective, risk ques-
tion or problem statement, risk management tool to be applied, and risk-ranking criteria. 
To conduct an EM risk assessment, a risk facilitator should be assigned and a multidisciplinary team 
should be assembled representing the areas of microbiology, contamination control and hygiene, qual-
ity engineering, facilities and utilities, quality control, quality assurance, and manufacturing (16).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


14
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Figure 5.2.1-1	 Overview of the Lifecycle Approach to Risk Assessment of an EM Program
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


15
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The scope and objective of the risk assessment is defined as the area of the facility or process under 
assessment of the EM program. The scope can involve just one room, an isolator, or a larger manufac-
turing area. Independent of the scope, however, the manufacturing process associated with the area in 
scope is key to performing the risk assessment. 
Thorough process understanding and process mapping is necessary to evaluate the associated risk of 
contamination at a specific position within a cleanroom. Prior to initiating the risk assessment, process 
mapping should be conducted on the shop/manufacturing floor using room layouts and indicating 
equipment locations, people flow, material flow, and waste flow in the facility. During this process 
mock-up, the team will identify potential hazards within the areas under assessment. 
The assessment team will select the most appropriate risk management tool to be used among the dif-
ferent methods applicable, e.g., Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), Hazard Analysis Critical 
Control Point (HACCP), among others (17). One risk assessment tool, developed by a collaborative 
of pharmaceutical industry representatives through BioPhorum, addresses the wide range of practices 
within the industry, allowing harmonization as well as compliance with regulatory guidelines. This 
toolkit provides an easy to use, step-by-step guidance for establishing EM programs (18).
For process mapping, grid profiling can be useful to describe single process steps and consider activities 
specific to that grid. After gridding the room layout, the process steps in each grid are evaluated and the risk 
ranking is determined based on six risk factors: 1) cleaning and sanitization access, 2) personnel presence 
and flow, 3) material flow, 4) proximity to open product or product contact material, 5) interventions/op-
erations by personnel and their complexity, 6) frequency of interventions (see Appendix 2 Figure 10.0.1).
Based on the risk scoring, sampling locations are determined for performing the EMPQ and, after-
wards, for conducting the routine monitoring. To enable systematic assessment of all cleanroom areas, 
a recommendation of the grid size for the respective grades is made (e.g., 0.5 m2 for Grade A). In addi-
tion, grouping grids into functional sections (e.g., filling area) enables meaningful sample points to be 
defined. Various risk assessment examples from industry are available illustrating this approach (19).
Depending on the tool selected to execute the assessment, the risk-ranking elements must first be 
defined. To perform a multidimensional risk management approach, a minimum of two risk-ranking 
elements (e.g., proximity, complexity, frequency, severity) must be defined. Examples of risk assess-
ments using various tools are provided in Sections 9.0-11.0 (Appendices 1-3).
5.2.2.1	 General Points to Consider for a Risk-Based EM Program (Risk/Hazard Identification)
Sample locations should be chosen based on the criticality of the process being performed in the room 
or area, product exposure to the environment and susceptibility to microbial and particulate contami-
nation (i.e., serve as the most sensitive measurement of the state of control of the room), locations of 
potential ingress from supporting areas or adjacent non-classified areas (i.e., gowning areas, airlocks, 
corridors), and sites shown to be appropriately placed to detect a problem in the area.
Suitable sample sites will depend on the area design and manufacturing process. Locations posing the 
most critical microbiological risk to the product are a key part of the program. 
The following factors should be considered when the team is performing the walk-through of the facility: 
1.	 Adherence to industry and regulatory guidelines, e.g., CFR, ISO 14644, USP, FDA, EU (Note: 
ISO 14644 only provides a guidance for the classification of cleanrooms, e.g., minimum number 
of sample locations for total particulates)
2.	 Sites and locations where microbial and particulate contamination would most likely have an 
adverse effect on product quality and, therefore, have the highest risk, considering—
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


16
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
• 
Proximity to open product or product contact surfaces and critical sites (e.g., filling needles, 
stopper bowls)
• 
Activities linked with interventions 
• 
Areas that are the most inaccessible or difficult areas to clean and disinfect
• 
Locations with a high frequency and/or complexity of activities by cleanroom operators, 
(e.g., touch panel, forceps, door handles)
• 
Areas with a large number of personnel and high personnel flow (e.g., floors at the entrance 
of gowning rooms)
• 
Areas with high material flow
3.	 Uniform geometric pattern or grid-profiling within the cleanrooms, to cover the complete area
4.	 Assessment and a justification for locations that will not be part of the EM program due to cer-
tain restrictions or alternative/worst-case coverage
5.	 Historical data and/or data obtained during qualification
6.	 Anaerobic organisms: 
• 
Strict anaerobic strains are unlikely to be recovered in common aerobic cleanroom environ-
ments. Periodic and/or investigational monitoring for anaerobic organisms may be conduct-
ed as a risk-based activity; it is mainly performed to detect any micro-aerophilic bacteria, 
such as Cutibacterium (formerly Propionibacterium) acnes that usually are not detectable 
applying standard aerobic monitoring conditions.
• 
Generally, a flush or overlay with nitrogen or carbon dioxide does not deplete or replace 
enough oxygen to create anaerobic conditions that require routine anaerobic-viable moni-
toring of the area; however, periodic testing of the compressed gasses utilized must be 
considered.(11,14,15)
• 
The frequency of anaerobic testing may differ from the routine monitoring schedule. 
Although anaerobes are a significant component of the skin microbiota, aerobic 
environmental monitoring is considered adequate to detect inadequate gowning and poor 
aseptic technique by cleanroom personnel. Anaerobic environmental monitoring in response 
to a sterility test failure implicating strict anaerobes should be considered.
7.	 Airflow visualization studies, that is, smoke studies; areas of concern, such as turbulences and 
eddies, may be addressed through airflow, process, or facility redesign.
5.2.2.2	 Risk Initiation: Development of EM Risk Assessments
Typical approaches to EM risk assessments include the following activities:
• 
Map the layout of the room(s), overlay with grids, and combine them into functional sections
• 
Walk the process with the risk assessment team, detailing process activities grid-by-grid
• 
Assess each grid against the risk factors and score them to determine the relative probability of 
contamination
• 
Evaluate the results by functional sections to select sampling locations and methods
• 
Create an EMPQ plan
• 
Evaluate the EMPQ results
• 
Determine routine EM sampling locations, methods, and frequencies
• 
Review the risk assessment on a defined, periodic basis
For each grid, risk is scored based on the process used, and then ranked based on these six factors:
1.	 Accessibility of equipment and surfaces for cleaning and sanitization
2.	 Personnel presence and flow
3.	 Material flow
4.	 Proximity to open product or open product-contact materials
5.	 Need for interventions/operations by personnel and their complexity
6.	 Frequency of interventions and operations
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


17
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Strategies regarding risk scoring and risk ranking can be found in the BioPhorum EM Risk Assessment 
Toolkit.(18) For example, each risk factor is ranked as low (1), medium (2) or high risk (4), with excep-
tion of “proximity to product,” which is ranked as low (1), medium (4) or high risk (8). The calculated 
product for each grid results in the risk scoring as low risk (score of 1–16), medium risk (score of 32–
265) or high risk (score of 512–8192). A detailed example can be found in Section 10.0 (Appendix 2).
5.2.2.3	 Risk Assessment
Once the elements from of the EM Risk assessment are defined, the team will begin the risk assess-
ment phase of the lifecycle. Next, the hazards identified during the facility walk-through will be docu-
mented, and the hazards will be evaluated for risk factors given the current controls in place. During 
this phase of the risk assessment, all current controls are accounted for and documented, and consider 
the following items: 
• 
Timing of sampling and sample volume measured against the company standard
• 
Frequency of sampling measured against the company standard
• 
Additional criteria (e.g., height of sampling location)
• 
Risk of sampling procedure for product contamination (part of the justification if a site is not 
sampled)
• 
Locations and areas to be assessed where there is no monitoring 
• 
Historical data
• 
Air flow studies
Once the risk ranking is completed, the sampling site selection and sampling frequency can be deter-
mined. Additionally, if risks are identified which are not within the organization’s risk tolerance level, 
those risks must be mitigated. 
After having considered the relevant criteria and factors, in the case of a new EM program, a rough 
plan and site layout (with locations) should be prepared; or, in case of existing sample locations, these 
locations can be assessed against the relevant criteria. 
The outcome of the risk assessment includes a documented plan for monitoring and the rationale for 
the EM program (i.e., sampling locations, sampling volume, sampling frequency, methods). With a 
new EM program, there will be little historical data available to inform the risk assessment. In these 
cases, the team will need to focus on the factors that may contribute to or perpetuate contamination, 
using scientific experience and subject matter expertise to minimize the uncertainty in the assessment. 
Over time, the data collected during routine monitoring will reveal the risk level. 
If there is an existing EM program without a risk-based rationale to support the EM program, the risk 
team must be careful to ensure that they are not performing an assessment to justify the current sam-
pling program. In these cases, the team must evaluate the facility/process (e.g., via a Gemba walk), tak-
ing into consideration historical data to prevent removal of sampling locations which have historically 
demonstrated adverse recovery trends. Note: A Gemba (Japanese) walk is a practice of Lean Six Sigma, 
to watch how a process is actually performed and talking with those who actually perform the work.
Where an existing EM program was created using the principles of risk management, the team will 
evaluate the existing assessment to ensure that all conditions assumed in the original assessment are 
still in place. If there are discrepancies between the initial and current conditions, the assessment is 
modified, and the hazards are re-ranked to determine if the risks are below the required threshold. Any 
major deviations to the relevant criteria should be considered, and mitigation actions may be defined 
to control the risks. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.