30
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
15.	 Date results read
16.	 Alert level and/or action limit
17.	 Temperature and duration of incubation
18.	 Traceability of the certification date, release date, lot number, and expiration date of media used 
19.	 Microbial Characterization of contaminants
20.	 Name of reviewer
21.	 Approval of data
22.	 Review of historical data
23.	 Calibration due date for sampling instrumentation and equipment
24.	 Methodology and analysis used to specify action and/or alert levels
25.	 System for documenting investigative and corrective action:
• 
Description of deficiency
• 
Possible causes of problem
• 
Identification of persons responsible for relevant corrective action
• 
Description of action steps and their schedule for implementation
• 
Evaluation of effectiveness of corrective and preventative action steps
6.0 
Environmental Monitoring by Manufacturing Application
The levels and types of monitoring conducted may vary based on the type of product being manufac-
tured, the attributes of the product, and the manufacturing areas and processes used.
6.1	
Terminal Sterilization
Environmental monitoring in support of terminal sterilization monitors microflora from all sources—
manufacturing environment, process gases, water used in product formulations, sterilizer feed and 
cooling water—that have the potential to contribute to product bioburden or endotoxin. This includes 
testing of air, surfaces, and water for pharmaceutical use. 
Microbial levels of incoming containers and closures may also be monitored periodically (e.g., if the 
product is not terminally sterilized using an overkill cycle). While control of the environment in which 
the products are prepared is important, the most critical aspect of the program is the bioburden of 
the product and components to be sterilized, including both the number and type of microorganisms 
found. 
6.2	
Aseptic Processing
Environmental monitoring in support of aseptic processing is specifically designed to determine the 
number and type of microorganisms associated with the direct assembly or preparation of product 
prior to sealing the filled containers. The number of sample sites and frequency of monitoring are 
considerably greater than those for established terminal sterilization programs. Air, water, personnel, 
compressed gases, machinery, and other surfaces within the filling room and associated support areas 
are routinely monitored. Microbial levels may be periodically checked on incoming containers and 
closures. Adequate environmental control is an integral part of the aseptic manufacturing process and 
is critical to sterility assurance. EM data must be reviewed prior to product batch release and investi-
gation of excursions closed. EM should also be conducted when operator interventions are required 
during aseptic processing. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


31
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.2.1	 Isolation Technology 
The EM program for isolators differs from conventional aseptic filling operations and is based on the 
risks associated with isolator technology especially the physical integrity of half-suits (if applicable) and 
gloves. Monitoring of air, surfaces, and personnel outside of the isolator environment is not required 
after each filling operation; however, monitoring of isolator gloves and half-suits is required at the end 
of each filling operation or campaign (as applicable) to detect potential contamination. Product con-
tact surfaces that are sterilized or changed out between batches in a campaign should be monitored at 
the end of the batch specific activities, prior to sterilization / change out. 
6.3	
Air 
Effectively designed air-handling units and use of high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters or ul-
tralow particulate air filters bring air of appropriate quality to cleanrooms. Although the use of HEPA 
filters and air exchange rates to remove particles from the incoming air is a very effective way to reduce 
the particle load in an environment, especially under at-rest conditions, abnormal activity levels of 
equipment and people in a room require an increase in the air exchange rate for the area in order to 
remove the contaminants quickly. People are considered a major contributor of particulates, especially 
microorganisms, to the environment in aseptic areas. Air monitoring determines if there are viable 
and/or total airborne particulates in locations that would allow them to settle on product-contact 
surfaces and thereby find their way into process intermediates or final product. The analysis of trends 
and frequencies of viable and total airborne particulates is also vital to the understanding of the envi-
ronmental impact of personnel behavior and process activities. Air-sampling methods and frequencies 
of monitoring will depend on manufacturing process needs and should be risk-based. 
6.3.1	 Total Airborne Particulate Monitoring 
Monitoring of total airborne particulates is a necessary component of an EM program. It demonstrates con-
trol of potential contaminants in the environment to which the product is exposed during the manufacturing 
process. Cleanroom and other controlled areas are classified based on the level of total airborne particulates 
alone or air cleanliness. Classified areas must consistently meet these particulate levels (see Section 3.0). 
ISO Standard 14644-1 describes the classification of air cleanliness for cleanrooms and clean zones 
based on specified concentrations of airborne particulates per volume of air sampled. It prescribes 
methods for verifying air cleanliness in specified particulate size ranges. The sample volume for routine 
monitoring does not need to be the same as that used for formal classification of cleanrooms (8).
For products marketed in the United States, the FDA requires that total airborne particulates of 0.5 µm 
or larger be measured as part of cleanroom classification and routine monitoring. (14) At the time of 
this Technical Report revision, requirements outside of the United States (e.g., EU and PIC/S Annex 1) 
also include measurements for particles of 5 µm or larger for both classification and monitoring purposes 
(10,11). 
For aseptic processes, some regulatory guidance documents require monitoring in each production shift. 
Some regulators recommend remote counting systems and continuous monitoring. For remote systems, 
the distance from the sample collection port to the detection or quantification technology should be con-
sidered for the potential of particle loss. Design of the monitoring system should comply with the system 
manufacturer’s recommendations and align with ISO 14644 in that the length of tubing should typically 
not exceed one meter and the radius should be greater than 15 cm. Continuous monitoring of particles is 
required for aseptic processing rooms of Grade A (ISO 5) classification during operation. Some operations 
can generate high levels of product particles (e.g., powder) that, by their nature, do not pose a risk of prod-
uct contamination. In these cases, it is acceptable to monitor prior to and post-exposure to the risk since 
it would be impossible to distinguish extrinsic contamination to intrinsic particle generation. Addition-
ally, continuous monitoring of environments with intrinsic particle generation may damage the particle 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


32
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
measuring equipment. Initial qualification of the area under dynamic conditions without the actual filling 
function provides some baseline information on the non-product particle generation of the operation.
Generally, routine monitoring of total airborne particulates should be performed within a one-foot 
radius (approximately 0.3 m) of the identified critical location, if possible, and also at critical working 
or processing height. However, sampling should not be intrusive to the process.
6.3.2	 Viable Particulates
Viable particulate determinations are critical in monitoring air quality in controlled environments. 
Traditional growth-based techniques for monitoring viable particulates in air are limited by: 
• 
Type of equipment
• 
Growth media
• 
Incubation time
• 
Operator contamination of the capture media
6.3.2.1	 Sampling Sites
The principles mentioned for site selection in Section 5.2 apply here as well. 
6.3.2.2	 Methods
Regulatory agencies currently require active air sampling of environments on a routine basis to demonstrate 
control of viable airborne particulates. Some agencies require that passive sampling methods such as settling 
plates should be performed and justification provided if a company does not use passive sampling for select 
operations. Generally, active sampling methods are required with operating levels defined per unit volume 
of air. Both active and passive sampling methods may be used together to gain knowledge and understand-
ing of changes and trends in the cleanroom environment. Active sampling methods have the benefit of sam-
pling large homogeneous volumes of air in short amounts of time, but these methods may cause disruptions 
in the airflow of the environment being sampled. Therefore, these sampling methods should be included 
in air flow visualization studies in order to assess their potential impact on the aseptic environment. Alter-
natively, passive sampling methods can be used for prolonged periods of time (up to four hours) in close 
proximity to critical processes without affecting the airflow of the environment. An additional advantage of 
passive sampling is that it mimics the potential pathway of contamination to a critical process. 
6.3.2.3	 Equipment
Microbial air samplers are typically based on two principles —inertial or centrifugal impaction—to 
capture and deposit the organisms onto the agar or filter surface. No microbial air samplers are 100% 
efficient at detection or collection of all viable particles present. The physical efficiency of an air sam-
pler is referred to as the “cutoff size” or “d50 value” (i.e., the size of a particle in microns that the sampler 
has a 50% chance of recovering), which is supplied by the equipment manufacturer. Some portable 
viable samplers are capable of remotely sampling room air as well as compressed gases with the use of 
adapters. Other samplers are dedicated for specific sampling types (portable, remote, isolator, RABS, 
compressed gas, etc.). Features of each sampler should be discussed with the individual manufacturer.
Requirements for the validation of equipment are the responsibility of the manufacturer or a third party 
designated by the manufacturer. Physical and biological efficiency data presented by the manufacturer 
of the device should be sufficient to implement the sampling device (see also ISO 14698-1) (25). 
However, equipment must be qualified; typical user requirements are:
• 
Calibration of the instrument
• 
Verification of volume accuracy
Alternative microbiological methods may require more extensive validation. For a more detailed dis-
cussion, refer to PDA Technical Report No. 33 (Revised 2013): Evaluation, Validation and Implementa-
tion of Alternative and Rapid Microbiological Methods (22).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


33
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.4	
Surface Monitoring
In addition to conducting viable air and total airborne particulate monitoring to determine the micro-
bial contaminants and particulates surrounding the manufacturing operations, surface monitoring is 
conducted to determine the bioburden of surfaces, e.g., walls, floors and ceilings, in the manufacturing 
area as well as nonproduct- and product-contact surfaces of equipment. 
6.4.1	 Monitoring Considerations
The method of testing should be considered when developing the sampling plan. When periodic 
surface monitoring is performed, it should be done after the filling operation or a campaign has been 
completed so no extraneous contamination or residual growth media are introduced during the filling 
activities. The basic methods—contact plates, flexible films, swabs, and surface rinses—each provide 
surface monitoring data, (qualitative or quantitative) that can be used to assess environmental quality. 
The accuracy, reliability, and reproducibility of the sampling is affected by the collection and handling 
of samples. Proper personnel training is essential to ensure consistent and standardized sample col-
lection. The type of media used will determine the ability to detect the representative flora from the 
sample site. Neutralizers are typically added to the media to inactivate chemical disinfectant residues 
on surfaces. Additionally, validation should be performed on the test method to confirm that sanitiz-
ing agents do not influence the recovery of microorganisms. 
Recovery levels of surface-monitoring methods are typically low, due to the variability and/or com-
position of surfaces, variability in sampling procedure, analytical methods being employed (i.e., dilu-
tion), and the use of growth-based techniques. However, consistent sampling techniques will generate 
data that can be trended and analyzed over periods of time. These trends and data provide key insights 
into the efficacy of cleaning and disinfectant programs and potential impact of manufacturing activi-
ties in the environment being assessed.
6.4.1.1	 Contact Plates
Contact plates are easy to use and can provide quantitative results, i.e., CFU per surface area sample. 
The plates are filled with sufficient neutralizing media to provide a convex surface to support the 
growth of microorganisms. The contact plate is pressed against a flat surface by gently rolling the plate 
from front to back on the sample area. The sample plate is then placed in an incubator for the required 
period of time as determined during method validation. Colonies, if present, are counted at the end 
of the incubation period. 
Prior to use, the type of media and incubation conditions must be qualified. Such qualification may 
include laboratory studies using the compendial growth promotion organisms and/or representative 
organisms recovered from the facility environment. The use of irradiated plates in ISO 5 areas is re-
quired and is recommended in ISO 7 and ISO 8 areas. Contact plates should be allowed to acclimate 
to room temperature before use to minimize confluent organism growth due to condensation.
Contact plates are not suitable for sampling irregular surfaces; swabs are recommended for that situa-
tion. The media residue contact plates leave behind must be removed from the sample site after sam-
pling has been completed.
6.4.1.2	 Flexible Films
A flexible film containing media can be used in a manner similar to a contact plate or to provide a 
defined sampling area. The surface of the media film is pressed against a flat surface in a rolling mo-
tion to ensure full contact of the flexible film. The film is then placed in the incubator for the required 
period of time determined during method validation. Colonies, if present, are counted at the end of 
the incubation period. Like the contact plate, flexible films leave a media residue that must be removed 
from the sample site post-sampling.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


34
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
6.4.1.3	 Swabs
Swabs are employed for equipment and irregular surfaces that are not suitable for contact plates or 
flexible films. Swabbing may also be performed on flat surfaces provided a template of approximately 
2 in by 2 in (~25 cm²) is used to define the sample area (however, contact plates are recommended for 
flat surfaces).
Swabs are composed of materials such as Dacron® or nylon manufactured in a flocked or spun mate-
rial format. Prior to plating, each swab is vortexed in an appropriate diluent (e.g., sodium chloride, 
phosphate buffer, or peptone solutions containing neutralizers if needed). Swabs may provide qualita-
tive (e.g., immersing the swab directly into liquid growth medium) or quantitative (e.g., processing 
the swab to obtain individual colony data) results depending on how they are processed after sampling 
(26).
6.4.1.4	 Surface Rinse Method
The surface rinse method is best used for when a large surface area sample is required (e.g., kettles, 
equipment, trains, tanks). A sterile diluent should be used as the rinsing fluid that comes in contact 
with the interior surface and is then collected and tested. Membrane filtration is used to test the rinse 
fluid, because of the large sample volume, and the applied holding time of the rinsing samples prior 
to plating should be qualified.
6.5	
Personnel Considerations
Personnel are the primary source of contamination, which is why all cleanroom personnel (including 
maintenance workers and others who enter periodically when cleanrooms are in operation) must be 
carefully trained and qualified before entering an aseptic environment. 
The qualification training should include:
• 
Attention to personal hygiene
• 
Basic microbiology education or background
• 
Aseptic techniques
• 
Appropriate cleanroom behavior 
• 
Patient safety hazards posed by a contaminated product 
• 
Gowning certification 
• 
Participation in aseptic processing simulation (APS or media fill) activities, where applicable 
After initial training, personnel should participate regularly in an ongoing training and monitoring 
program. Routine microbiological monitoring of personnel garments and gloves should also be com-
pleted to assess the ongoing practice of aseptic technique. Supervisory personnel should routinely 
evaluate each operator’s conformance to written procedures during actual operations. Likewise, the 
quality unit should provide regular oversight to ensure that established, written procedures and aseptic 
techniques are being followed during manufacturing operations. 
6.5.1	 Training and Certification of Personnel for Aseptic Manufacturing Areas
All training and certification activities should be documented and kept as part of the employee file.
6.5.2	 Causes for Requalification or Retraining 
Companies should have a policy stating when requalification or retraining is necessary, for example:
• 
Retraining on general aseptic practices and techniques should be provided at least annually
• 
Recertification should be required after extended absences (e.g., for illness or family leave)
• 
Recertification and/or retraining should be considered as corrective action for trends in 
personnel monitoring excursions
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


35
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.6	
Environmental Monitoring During Product Sterility Testing
Sterility-testing facilities should be monitored to demonstrate the absence microbial contamination 
(4,10,14). Routine types of monitoring that are conducted are as follows:
• 
Viable air monitoring
• 
Surface monitoring (including isolator gloves if applicable)
• 
Personnel monitoring
Total airborne particulate monitoring is not mandatory; however, it may provide useful information 
regarding the HEPA filters in the ISO 5 testing environment or the integrity of isolators. Lab materials 
may generate particles that are not representative of the actual manufacturing conditions, and there is 
no risk to marketed product in the testing environment.
6.7	
Environmental Monitoring in Grade A Air Supply
The term “Grade A air supply” is introduced in Annex 1 and is specifically used to support the capping 
of fully stoppered vials until the cap has been crimped by providing additional protection without the 
requirement to meet all criteria related to a Grade A area (e.g., environmental continuous total par-
ticulate monitoring or environmental viable monitoring limits). 
Grade A air supply provides air which is passed through a filter qualified as capable of producing Grade 
A total particulate quality air, but where there is no requirement to perform continuous total particu-
late monitoring or meet Grade A viable monitoring limits and the area itself is not classified. 
As Grade A Air Supply is not a clean room category (e.g., according to ISO 14644), no guidelines for 
viable and total particulate limits exists. In order to confirm Grade A total particulate quality air is 
supplied, testing at the point of supply of the filtered air should be performed as a minimum during 
qualification and requalification. 
At rest viable (air and surfaces) and total particulate monitoring may be performed based upon a risk 
assessment. Routine monitoring, limits, and positioning should reflect the requirements for this “clean 
process” and be aligned with the contamination control strategy and meet criteria applied for the back-
ground of the Grade A Air supply (usually Grade C, but minimum Grade D).
6.8	
Water 
As water is used as a raw material in the production, processing, and formulation of products, this 
document only addresses the process monitoring of the water for microbial attributes. Most countries 
have compendial requirements for evaluation of water quality The recently published EMA Guideline 
for the Quality of Water for Pharmaceutical Use should be consulted as to the type of pharmaceutical-
grade water used manufacturing (27–30).
The type of water selected for manufacturing is based on the type of product and process being used. 
The water quality should be evaluated for microbial, bacterial endotoxin, and chemical attributes in ac-
cordance with the type of water and applicable compendial or regulatory requirements. Water quality 
is critical for the manufacturing of parenteral drugs and selected devices because it is used in product 
formulation, product-contact component and equipment washing, and final rinsing of equipment and 
devices. When purified water is used to manufacture other types of products or intermediates (e.g., 
solid dosage forms, API, small molecules), the control of microbial quality is critical to minimize the 
buildup and spread of microbial contaminants in the facility as well as on manufacturing equipment. 
The quality of the laboratory water should meet the needs of analytical methods and technologies, 
which may require compendial-quality laboratory water. Table 6.8-1 lists the pharmacopeial water 
GMP specifications used for manufacturing water and distribution system for pharmaceutical use.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


36
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Table 6.8-1		
Examples of measurements critical to water for Injection manufacturing and distribution process
Critical Parameters Measurement 
Quality Attributes
US Pharmacopeia (USP) 
2021
European 
Pharmacopeia (EP) 9:8 
2019, and 10,
Japanese 
Pharmacopeia (JP) 17, 
2016
Chinese Pharmacopeia (ChP) 
2015
Source water 
Drinking water source, 
Purified water 
Suitable for Human 
Consumption
JP Drinking water 
specification or purified 
water 
Purified water
Purification Process
Distillation or equivalent/superior process
 Distillation
pH
N/A
5.0-7.0
Conductivity at 25°C
1.3 µS/cm In-line Stage 1 (Stage 2-3 offline)1,2
WFI Microbial Limit Specification 
NMT 10 CFU/100 mL
Maximum TOC 
500 ppb or 0.5 mg/L3
Bacterial Endotoxin Limit
< 0.25 (EU/mL)
Nitrates Limit (ppm)
NA
0.2
NA
0.06
Nitrites Limit (ppm)
N/A
0.02
Ammonia Limit (ppm)
N/A
0.2
Heavy metals Limit (ppm)
N/A
0.1
1	 In-line/stage 1 conductivity specification at 25°C with other values at other temperatures. For usual WFI, the USP additionally has off-line stage 2 and 3 specifications which may alternatively be met. 
2	 Performed as an atmosphere and temperature equilibrium test. Alternatively, for JP Chapter 21, the test may be performed in-line with specified limit at 25°C and other values at other temperatures. There is no separate Stage 
3-like option in JP.
3	 There is no specification for in-line TOC test USP 2021 Issue 1, JP recommends Recommended levels of TOC ≤ 300ppb (in-line) ≤4 00ppb (off-line)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


37
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.8.1	 Sample Site Selection and Frequency of Monitoring 
The sampling and frequency of monitoring for water systems should be sufficient to ensure that the 
water quality meets its intended use specifications and appropriate regulatory requirements.
The frequency of monitoring and sampling site selection depends on the type of water and manu-
facturing process, system configuration, and facility design. The frequency of sampling should be de-
signed to facilitate detection and analysis of trends in chemical attributes, microbial flora, and bacterial 
endotoxin.
High-purity water systems should be validated to demonstrate that design requirements are consistent-
ly met and maintain a state of control. The site selection and frequency determination should be justi-
fied by thorough review of the water system validation performed and, using risk-based approaches, 
by type of product and manufacturing processes in concert with pharmacopeia and regulatory require-
ments. See Section 10.0 (Appendix 2) for suggested sites and sampling frequencies.
Once a water system is validated to be in a state of control, appropriate samples should be taken from 
the water source or generation system, holding and storage tanks, and distribution system to assess the 
microbiological quality for its intended use. Initial testing of water systems typically includes sampling 
after each process step. The testing of high-purity water systems should include the sampling of all 
point-of-use sites.
6.8.2	 Sample Collection and Testing
Water samples should be collected in a manner that is consistent with manufacturing practices. For 
example, if manufacturing flushes use points prior to use, samples should be collected with the same 
flush cycle. On the other hand, if manufacturing does not flush use points, there should be no flush 
prior to sample collection. All sample sites should be in a good state of repair and fully functional to 
support the monitoring program (including consideration for the use, maintenance, and proper drain-
age of flexible hoses). Distribution-system sample locations aside from the point-of-use sites should 
be chosen carefully to demonstrate microbiological quality throughout the distribution system. Ad-
ditionally, it is recommended to not use IPA on gloves or sample port prior to TOC sampling to not 
generate false positives.
Microbiological examination of water should be initiated as soon as possible after collection of the 
sample. If immediate processing is not possible, samples should be refrigerated at 2–8 °C. The time 
elapsed between collection and examination should be justified in terms of microbial survival or sta-
bility, including considerations for storage and shipping to third-party testing facilities. Table 6.8.2-1 
provides and overview of current guidelines for typical pharmaceutical water and clean steam distribu-
tion systems monitoring, methods, requirements, frequencies, and levels.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


38
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Table 6.8.2-1	 Typical Pharmaceutical Water and Clean Steam Distribution System Guidelines
Clean Steam
Purified Water
USP Water 
for Injection
EP Water for 
Injection
JP Water for 
Injection
ChP Water for 
Injection
Site
Sample at 
the point of 
generation and 
the furthest point 
of use
Representative 
use points in 
the distribution 
system
All accessible use ports in the distribution system.
Methods
Chemistry and 
LAL
Chemistry, pour 
plate (1.0 mL) or 
membrane filter 
(100 mL)
Chemistry, LAL, and membrane 
filter (200 mL)
Chemistry, LAL, and 
membrane filtration 
(100mL)
Chemistry, LAL, 
and membrane 
filtration (not less 
than 100 mL)
Microbiological 
test and 
incubation 
requirements  
(10 CFU/100 mL 
limit)
Not 
recommended
Plate Count Agar (PCA/TGYA)1 for 
48 – 72 hours2 at 30 – 35 °C3
R2A agar, 
incubated at 30 – 
35 °C for not less 
than 5 days
Standard agar media, 
incubated at 
30 – 35 °C for  
48 – 72 hours, or R2A 
agar, incubated at 20 – 
25 °C or 30 – 35 °C for 
4 – 7 days
R2A agar, 
incubated at 30 – 
35 °C for not less 
than 5 days
1	 For optimum recovery, an alternative medium may be more appropriate (e.g., m-HPC, TSA/SCDA, R2A).
2	 For optimum recovery, alternative incubation times may be needed.
3	 For optimum recovery, alternative incubation temperatures may be needed.
6.9	
Compressed Gas Monitoring 
The use of compressed air and compressed gas in the aseptic ISO 5 environment may adversely affect 
the environmental conditions if appropriate precautions, routine testing, and critical assurances are 
not developed into a system. This section offers some points that should be considered.
Using a 0.2 μm filter on the compressed gas line prior to entry into the cleanroom is common practice. 
Integrity testing of the filter and sanitization of the line post-filtration may reduce the need for sam-
pling. The sampling equipment must be compatible for use with compressed gases. A pre-filter may 
be installed in the system to reduce the bioburden to the point-of-use filter that will extend its life and 
reduce the possibility of higher contamination reaching the area.
The particulate or bioburden level of any gas or air expelled into the environment should be equal to 
or better than the classification level of the room (10). 
7.0 
Environmental Monitoring Prerequisites
This section briefly describes the scope of prerequisites for EM, which includes the following:
1.	 Good facility and equipment design
2.	 Media vendor audit and qualification 
3.	 Selection of microbiological culture media 
for EM testing
4.	 Culture media release
5.	 Selection of microorganisms for growth 
promotion
6.	 Microbiological culture maintenance
7.	 Culture media shelf-life confirmation 
8.	 Sample holding studies and transport 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.