17
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Strategies regarding risk scoring and risk ranking can be found in the BioPhorum EM Risk Assessment 
Toolkit.(18) For example, each risk factor is ranked as low (1), medium (2) or high risk (4), with excep-
tion of “proximity to product,” which is ranked as low (1), medium (4) or high risk (8). The calculated 
product for each grid results in the risk scoring as low risk (score of 1–16), medium risk (score of 32–
265) or high risk (score of 512–8192). A detailed example can be found in Section 10.0 (Appendix 2).
5.2.2.3	 Risk Assessment
Once the elements from of the EM Risk assessment are defined, the team will begin the risk assess-
ment phase of the lifecycle. Next, the hazards identified during the facility walk-through will be docu-
mented, and the hazards will be evaluated for risk factors given the current controls in place. During 
this phase of the risk assessment, all current controls are accounted for and documented, and consider 
the following items: 
• 
Timing of sampling and sample volume measured against the company standard
• 
Frequency of sampling measured against the company standard
• 
Additional criteria (e.g., height of sampling location)
• 
Risk of sampling procedure for product contamination (part of the justification if a site is not 
sampled)
• 
Locations and areas to be assessed where there is no monitoring 
• 
Historical data
• 
Air flow studies
Once the risk ranking is completed, the sampling site selection and sampling frequency can be deter-
mined. Additionally, if risks are identified which are not within the organization’s risk tolerance level, 
those risks must be mitigated. 
After having considered the relevant criteria and factors, in the case of a new EM program, a rough 
plan and site layout (with locations) should be prepared; or, in case of existing sample locations, these 
locations can be assessed against the relevant criteria. 
The outcome of the risk assessment includes a documented plan for monitoring and the rationale for 
the EM program (i.e., sampling locations, sampling volume, sampling frequency, methods). With a 
new EM program, there will be little historical data available to inform the risk assessment. In these 
cases, the team will need to focus on the factors that may contribute to or perpetuate contamination, 
using scientific experience and subject matter expertise to minimize the uncertainty in the assessment. 
Over time, the data collected during routine monitoring will reveal the risk level. 
If there is an existing EM program without a risk-based rationale to support the EM program, the risk 
team must be careful to ensure that they are not performing an assessment to justify the current sam-
pling program. In these cases, the team must evaluate the facility/process (e.g., via a Gemba walk), tak-
ing into consideration historical data to prevent removal of sampling locations which have historically 
demonstrated adverse recovery trends. Note: A Gemba (Japanese) walk is a practice of Lean Six Sigma, 
to watch how a process is actually performed and talking with those who actually perform the work.
Where an existing EM program was created using the principles of risk management, the team will 
evaluate the existing assessment to ensure that all conditions assumed in the original assessment are 
still in place. If there are discrepancies between the initial and current conditions, the assessment is 
modified, and the hazards are re-ranked to determine if the risks are below the required threshold. Any 
major deviations to the relevant criteria should be considered, and mitigation actions may be defined 
to control the risks. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


18
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
5.2.2.4	 Risk Control and Risk Review 
Throughout the lifecycle of the EM program, if risks are found to be above the allowable threshold, 
the team will develop risk control actions, which will lessen the likelihood of contamination occurring 
and/ or increase the likelihood of detection by defining additional sample locations. Once these ad-
ditional controls have been implemented, the assessment will be revisited to ensure the controls were 
effective in minimizing the risk. In addition to reviewing the effectiveness of in-process or procedural 
controls, the completed risk assessment is subject to review on a routine basis (e.g., annually) to ensure 
the EM program is functioning as designed. 
5.3	
Alert Levels and Action Limits
EM programs require action limits to be established based on the applicable regulatory guidelines or 
requirements. These guidelines frequently recommend alert levels also be established. Some companies 
also choose to set levels for individual cleanrooms or sample sites. The alert level will be established 
based on statistical analysis of the historic EM data. 
Alert levels and action limits based on CFU count excursions have been eliminated from USP <1116>, 
which indicates a paradigm shift to contamination recovery rate (CRR).(9) CRR is the percentage 
of environmental samples found to have microbial contamination (e.g., a CRR of 1% would mean 
that only 1% of the samples taken showed contamination, regardless of colony numbers). The CRR 
approach may lend itself to wider applicability considering emerging EM technologies, such as those 
not reliant on CFU measurement. However, current official regulatory guidances from both the EU 
and the US still retain GMP requirements for alert levels and action limits. Consequently, companies 
may want to voluntarily monitor CRR as an EM trending tool in addition to the required alert levels 
and action limits. 
The response to alert levels or action limits should be written and employed consistently. To create 
consistency, investigatory and corrective action steps should be specified in advance. Records should 
show that the excursion was recognized, appropriate follow-up occurred, and appropriate corrective 
and preventive actions (CAPA) were taken. Established alert levels, should be reviewed periodically as 
part of routine trend analysis. They may be revised to reflect improvements, advances in technology, 
changes in use patterns, or other changes. 
When no regulatory or industry guidelines are provided, alert levels and action limits may be derived 
statistically from historical data. Statistically derived alert levels, based on performance of the area, 
might be low; however, one should be using those values to detect atypical recurrences. Other consid-
erations in adjusting levels include improving process capability, consistency of alert levels and action 
limits for similar room classifications, level of gowning, and product contamination risk. Infrequent 
excursions from these levels are expected at frequencies characteristic for the specific mathematical 
model used in their derivation. The critical requirement is recognizing an adverse trend that may rep-
resent a loss of environmental control.
The alert levels and action limits do not define product attributes, such as sterility, and should not be 
considered as product specifications. Rather, alert levels are intended to indicate changes or drifts in 
environmental control so that corrective action may be taken before product quality is adversely af-
fected. However, where an action limit is exceeded where critical aseptic process steps are conducted, 
the investigation should be completed prior to release of the batches impacted by the excursion, which 
should include an evaluation of the product impact, based on the most probable root cause identified.
Since there is no one best method for setting alert levels, the approaches described in Sections 5.3.1–
5.3.3 may be taken within the pharmaceutical industry. Where compendial requirements exist, as with 
action limits, they supersede these examples.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


19
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Using standard statistical tools for setting alert levels and action limits can be misleading because en-
vironmental monitoring data is not normally distributed. No pharmaceutical industry or regulatory 
consensus exists on the best statistical model to use for setting these levels. Therefore, it may be ap-
propriate to determine the model that best fits the data and use that model to set the levels. When data 
does not fall within a normal distribution and exhibits high levels of skewness towards lower counts 
and /or zero counts, a non-parametric approach to setting alert levels and action limits are suitable 
when large number of historical observations exists. In the absence of large data sets, non-parametric 
approaches run the risk of selecting as the control limits, the outlying data points caused by out-of-
control conditions, resulting in inflated estimates of alert levels and action limits. 
Traditionally, alert levels and action limits are established, using a mean of 2 or 3 standard devia-
tions (SDs) to render certain degrees of assurance that the classified environments are in control. This 
method hinges on the assumption that the data or data after a transformation such as logarithmic are 
normally distributed.
Some of the commonly practiced approaches are described below.
5.3.1	 Nonparametric Approach
A nonparametric evaluation is based on 99.9th and 99.99th percentiles and can be chosen as the alert 
and action levels. These levels correspond to about mean plus 3 and 4 sigma ranges, respectively. These 
levels are commonly selected as process alert and action levels. When the requirement of proper sample 
size is met (N≈1000), the alert levels analysis establishes confidence that during actual process moni-
toring 99.9% of the population will lie below the stated value. When these limits are exceeded, it will 
trigger investigation that will prevent contamination or an adverse trend condition. 
Action levels can be selected at 99.99th percentile. The action level analysis establishes confidence that 
during actual process monitoring 99.99% of the population will lie below the stated value. Therefore, 
the derived action levels serve to identify an excursion at the selected percentile level. By definition, it 
is very unlikely that validated system, operating in a state of control, will deliver results that will devi-
ate significantly from the norm especially when multiple alert/action excursions in same room in the 
same day are detected. This condition is likely indicative of a significant drift the process control(s) or 
a systemic failure of the validated system has occurred. 
5.3.2	 Nonparametric Tolerance Limit Approach
As environmental monitoring data, especially in cleanrooms, is typically not normally distributed (i.e., 
exhibits skew heavily toward lower counts or zero counts), a nonparametric tolerance limit approach 
to setting alert levels and action limits is recommended. These limits allow the user to assert with at 
least 95% (K=0.95) confidence that 100(P) or 99% of a population lies below the value, as determined 
by the stated action limits, for the respective data.(16) For distribution-free tolerance limits, minimum 
sample sizes are N=60 for 95/95 (alert level) and N=300 for 95/99 (action limits).
5.3.3	 Cutoff Value Approach
All the test data for a particular site, or group of similar sites, are arranged in a histogram, and the alert 
levels and action limits are set at values whose monitoring results are respectively 5% and 1% higher 
than the level selected (i.e., 95th and 99th percentile, respectively). Other percentiles may be used in 
establishing levels. Alert levels are typically determined per test type (active air, passive air, and surface 
monitoring). 
The alert definition should be based on a timeframe allowing the accumulation of enough data to be 
representative of a population. A general text on statistics (Juran’s Quality Handbook, The complete Guide to 
Performance Excellence, Joseph A. Defeo, 7th Ed. McGraw Hill Education Books, 2017) recommends a statisti-
cally significant value of at least 20 data points. Alert levels are typically set at about 50-60% of action until 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


20
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
enough data is generated. An example is to take the last 100 monitoring results or data collected during 
one full year and use the 95th and 99th percentile values as the alert levels and action limits
Areas that have the same activities may be grouped to provide more data points; for example, material 
airlocks of the same Grade, or Grade D hallways of same function can be grouped. 
The calculated alert level should be challenged for its appropriateness, however, avoid modifying or 
increasing the alert as such it loses any correlation with your actual cleanroom performance. In ad-
dition, performance-based alert levels that seem to be well below the applied action limits should be 
considered as a confirmation of a solid microbial control of the environment and does not per defini-
tion to be considered as inappropriate. One should be aware that above alerts will occur and that this 
is inherent with the use of a cut-off approach. One should be more focused on the level of occurrence 
(see its use as a trigger for trend analysis within Section 5.4.3).
If the outcome of the periodic reassessment of the alert assessment results in a level increase, this should 
be interpreted as a warning that the facility may be slowly drifting out of control or might be a result of 
modifications of the activities within the area (e.g., increase in batches produced, changes in process). 
It is recommended not to increase alert levels without a good understanding of the reasons behind it.
The frequency-based excursion rates and trends can be used to determine the state of the EM control 
and gowning process. The cumulative conforming count chart (CCC) is easy to use and more sensi-
tive to short-term drifts in process parameter, enabling its user to judge the state of control. The idea 
behind the CCC is the fact that the number of conforming items between two consecutive noncon-
forming items changes when the fraction nonconforming shifts is observed. CCC plots the number 
of inspectional monitoring data sets between excursions. The method is suitable when large number 
of data exists.
At a specified excursion rate, a likely number of excursions per given number of samples can be es-
timated at a 95% confidence level. The CCC can be used to identify the average and the minimum 
number of continuous successful (within alert levels) facility- or gown-monitoring examinations before 
the data shifts. Such approaches can be used to evaluate limits, define trends, and assess training ef-
fectiveness, for example, gowning process and operator or analyst disqualification and requalification. 
Other models based on negative binomial, Poisson, Weibull, or exponential distributions are possible. 
It may be appropriate to determine the model that best fits the data and use that model to set the levels. 
As noted, contamination in strictly controlled environments does not typically fall within a normal 
distribution. Environmental monitoring data may be evaluated to determine the suitability of the ap-
proaches to level setting.
The monitoring group should review the data for trends at an appropriate frequency. The quality unit 
should review quarterly and yearly monitoring reports.
5.3.4	 Quantitative and Qualitative Trending Rules
Trend rules should supplement alert levels and action limits and focus on two important axes:
• 
To rapidly detect gradual bioburden changes before it leads to real excursions with potential 
impact for production and/or the cleanroom environment (immediate term trending)
• 
It should be able to periodically evaluate the general state of control of the cleanroom environ-
ment (short- and long-term trending)
A useful trending rule is to look at alert level excursions over time within the same room identifying 
correlation between/among locations, or frequent sustained recoveries above alert. When trend rules 
are exceeded, an investigation is recommended.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


21
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Immediate — short term trending rules typically look at an increase in the proportion of above alerts 
over a specified time period. Examples:
• 
A specified number of above alerts at a single location/type of test
• 
A specified number of alerts within one room (same and different types of tests)
Some statistical rules can be used as well in order to identify when the proportion of above alerts is 
moving to an atypical level.
Short Term — monthly or quarterly
The monitoring group should perform a comprehensive review of the data at an appropriate frequency 
as a function of the amount and criticality of the data generated. The quality unit should review and 
approve the periodic monitoring reports.
Typically, a thorough analysis with a statement if data indicate that the facility is operating in a state 
of control or if data indicate some issues, how it was discovered, where and what corrective action was 
taken and what impact the issue had on the facility. The integration of graphs is highly recommended 
to visualize the state of control.
One can assess:
• 
Same sample type from same location exceeding the action limit multiple times 
• 
Increases of the number of alert level excursions (e.g., same monitoring type: active, passive or 
surface monitoring)
• 
Recovery rate increases for the same location (e.g., all personnel on one filling line), or the same 
room or area. 
Long Term — annual
Annual trending should report the changes in a year’s worth of data. Since it incorporates more data 
and thus is should be able to give a better holistic picture of the cleanroom environment.
It might include:
• 
Number of EM Deviations per grade with indication of concerned rooms and test type and 
corrective actions
• 
Occurrence of atypical microorganism per grade and explanation of potential root cause 
identified
• 
Microbial flora analysis and confirmation of the disinfection program efficiency and validated state
• 
Global analysis of the site performance covered by the monthly/ quarterly reports and 
comparison with the previous period
• 
Key findings and highlights on any change in SOP or modification during the year
• 
Year graphical representation and global analysis of the data from your cleanrooms and 
conclusion with a statement such as data indicate that the facility is operating in a state of 
control or if data indicate some issues and any related CAPAs
• 
Analysis of potential correlations between observed product contamination (e.g., bioburden) and 
the micro-organisms recovered within the cleanroom environment.
5.4	
Data Management 
Routine review and analysis of EM data for trends at an appropriate frequency is essential to aid in the 
interpretation of process stability and assess overall environmental control performance. Management 
must be kept abreast of trends and the subsequent state of operations within facilities with review of 
quarterly and yearly monitoring reports.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


22
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Based on the large number of samples tested by a given facility, a computer-based data-tracking system 
is essential. Before implementation, all database applications used should be validated or qualified for 
specific software applications.
5.4.1	 Data Integrity
The PDA Elements of a Code of Conduct for Data Integrity in the Pharmaceutical Industry (19) and 
PDA Technical Report No. 80: Data Integrity Management Systems for Pharmaceutical Laboratories (20) 
provide comprehensive information on this topic.
Collecting, analyzing, reporting and retention of EM data should be done under conditions that are 
designed to guarantee reliability and integrity of the data. The data are required to be attributable, leg-
ible, contemporaneous, original, and accurate (ALCOA):
Attributable: Information is captured that identifies where the data came from
Legible: Data are readable and understandable by humans
Contemporaneous: Data are recorded at the time they are generated or observed
Original: Data are recorded for the first time
Accurate: Data are correct
Important elements to consider with respect to environmental monitoring are:
• 
Integrity of the sampling site data by including a formal mechanism to enable full reconciliation 
of sample collection, incubation, and evaluation
• 
EM data must be documented on controlled worksheets for paper records or entered into a 
validated computer system with appropriate security, audit trails, validation, and oversight
• 
Employees must adhere to the established site documentation requirement and will not record 
raw data on unofficial forms, writing pads, or other uncontrolled media 
• 
Employees will not discard or destroy raw data or original records, other than at the end of the 
prescribed retention period
The deployment of a second-person verification should be considered to confirm the enumeration of 
microbial recovery. The main focus, however, should be to have in place a robust plate-reading process, 
reducing the risk for variability to the minimum, for instance, by applying appropriate lighting and/
or magnification and a robust training of the technicians performing the readout. The utilization of 
QRM principles can aid in the determination of whether or not a secondary verification is required 
(e.g., Grade A EM). Automated systems for EM test readouts and data storage can eliminate bias and 
the need to perform a second verification.
Routine data are aligned into a source in a consistent record format. At a minimum, the record format 
should include the following: 
• 
Identification of the operator and analyst
• 
Monitoring date and time
• 
Equipment used
• 
Specific sampling locations
• 
Sampling methods including media used
• 
Incubation conditions
• 
Colony-forming units (CFU) or total airborne particulate count results
• 
Identifications performed
• 
Batch information (if applicable, e.g., for batch-related monitoring)
• 
Current alert levels or action limits
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


23
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Records must be signed and verified by the appropriate person, depending on the type of system used. 
Some alternative microbiological methods can use measurements other than CFUs, provided they 
have been properly validated before use, for example, relative light units, cells, etc. A manual data 
entry or image scanner system, with the advantages of speed and accuracy, can be used to populate 
tables. Regardless of the type of system used, data integrity must be verified prior to data collection 
and analysis.
5.4.2	 Data Trending Analysis 
Histograms or tables, characterized by a number of data points that fall within a common frequency, 
are valuable tools to conduct the trending expected by regulatory agencies. Different room classifica-
tions with defined requirements will produce different histograms. For example, the CFU spread ob-
tained across an ISO 8 data set will not be observed in a data set from an ISO 5 area. Therefore, each 
area, or area type, and its accompanying data set must be viewed as distinct. Data trends in counts, 
occurrences, and organism types can provide a holistic view of the cleanroom environment. They can 
also be used to evaluate if there is ingress from lower to higher grades. Cleanroom maps indicating 
sampling excursions are useful as well to show connectivity of various grades and potential ingress 
through equipment and personnel flows. While this does not require statistical tools, mathematical 
models could be applied. Examples of statistical methods and control charts can be found in PDA 
Technical Report 59: Utilization of Statistical Methods for Production Monitoring (21).
5.4.3	 Interpretation
Routine environmental microbial monitoring data should demonstrate that the classified area is op-
erating under an adequate microbial control for the needs of the operations conducted in that area. 
Individual recoveries in critical areas (i.e., Grade A) must be adequately investigated. Compliant EM 
results do not guarantee the sterility assurance of the process, however, as EM incorporates multiple 
limitations (e.g., recovery efficiency of the applied methods, selected sample locations etc.). EM can 
only confirm to some extent the robustness of the design and processes.
Data generated should be summarized and evaluated to determine whether the EM process is in a 
state of control and documented in periodic reports. A variety of methods are available to perform this 
analysis, for example, the use of frequency distribution and control charts or statistical analysis. 
Measurements for viable contamination, such as contamination excursion rates and/or recovery rates, 
can be used to determine the level of control in a given area. The excursion rate is related to the number 
of samples exceeding the defined alert levels and action limits, whereas the contamination recovery rate 
(expressed as a percentage) is related to the number of samples that are positive for microbial growth 
when compared to the total number of samples taken within the same classified area(s). Therefore, 
recovery rates differ from excursion rates. Given that microorganisms are not homogeneously distrib-
uted in the same environments, and the sensitivity and variability associated with microbial sampling 
methods, these rates can be useful approaches to trending results in controlled areas. The combined 
excursion rates are calculated by determining the number of samples with excursions outside of estab-
lished levels, dividing by the total number of samples collected, and converting to a percentage. Table 
3.0-2 shows the recommended acceptable action limits and recovery rates for various ISO classifica-
tions. For an ISO 5 environment, an excursion rate of not more than 1% is achievable due to stringent 
controls, and the expectation is that the results show no viable recoveries. 
In addition to individual excursions, CRRs may be used for trending and control of the overall mi-
crobial load in the classified environment, equipment surfaces, material, and personnel. Table 5.4.4-1 
summarizes CRRs recommended by USP <1116> for various classified areas. Companies can utilize 
the criteria from USP <1116> to develop their recovery rates for cleanroom environments depending 
on the activities and processes conducted in those areas. They should also establish a CRR for each 
monitoring attribute, such as surfaces, air, and garments, for each classified area. Any changes from 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


24
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
the established calculated contamination rates should be investigated and corrected. However, any 
contamination in Grade A/ISO 5 areas must be investigated, since there should not be any microbial 
recovery within those areas. The CRR provides an alternative measurement of the effectiveness of the 
overall contamination control strategy. 
Table 5.4.4-1	 Contamination Recovery Rates Suggested by USP Chapter <1116>
Room Classification
Suggested Initial Contamination Recovery Rates (%)
Active Air Sample
Settle Plate (9 cm) 
4-Hour Exposure
Contact Plate or Swab
Glove or Garment
Isolator/closed RABS or 
ISO 5 or better
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
ISO 5
<1
<1
<1
<1
ISO 6
<3
<3
<3
<3
ISO 7
<5
<5
<5
<5
ISO 8
<10
<10
<10
<10
Note: All operators are aseptically gowned in these environments. These recommendations do not apply 
to production areas for nonsterile products or other classified environments in which fully aseptic gowns 
are not donned. In those conditions other Recovery Rates might be used if appropriately justified.
Evaluating the recovery rate levels at a defined frequency is recommended (at least monthly as per USP 
<1116>). Trends may include a gradual increase or decrease in the overall counts observed over time, 
or a change in flora or counts on several plates of a particular area on a given day. Interpretation of the 
impact of a significant fluctuation in counts or a change in flora should be based on the experienced 
judgment of a qualified microbiologist. 
Some considerations for assessing the state of control for a given process include:
• 
Multiple excursions observed within a specified time period may be considered a pattern or 
cluster formation that, if above the alert level, signals a trend that requires investigation. As an Al-
ternative, such approaches as statistically derived frequency of excursion can be used and justified. 
• 
Fluctuations in environmental monitoring data values for a given process or a specific area re-
quire further attention as this may point to construction activities, facility conditions, change in 
process, flow of material, seasonal variations, disruptive events, or other factors.
Understanding the potential impact of the results generated during EM is critical to a successful EM 
program.
5.5	
Rapid Microbiological Methods in Environmental Monitoring
The majority of EM performed currently relies on conventional methods based on the recovery and 
growth of microorganisms using solid or liquid microbiological culture media. However, these meth-
ods are often limited by slow microbial growth rates, long incubation periods, unintended selectivity 
of culture media, and the inherent variability of microorganism recovery rates due to their non-specific 
response to culture methods. Rapid methods that provide faster time-to-result may offer an advantage 
for EM tests over current, conventional approaches. 
Rapid methods may afford the industry with several opportunities when applied to EM:
• 
Confirmation (in real-time or close to real-time) of microbial control during manufacturing 
activities, including manual aseptic manipulations, filling, and packaging 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


25
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
• 
Confirmation of microbial control in controlled areas prior to use (e.g., manufacturing suites, 
gowning rooms)
• 
Rapid assessment of controlled areas during facility qualification activities (e.g., EM PQ) 
• 
Evaluation of contamination remediation efforts and root cause analysis (e.g., using rapid 
methods to find a source of contamination and/or determine the effectiveness of cleaning and 
disinfection procedures)
Subsequently, the industry should look toward utilizing innovative approaches for the detection and 
quantification of microorganisms as part of a holistic EM program. From a QRM perspective, the 
benefits of implementing rapid microbiological testing strategies can help to design robust processes 
that prevent contamination, ensure that a state of microbial control is maintained, evaluate the impact 
of human interventions during aseptic filling, establish recovery time after power shortages, develop 
more effective strategies to correct a contamination problem, continually improve processes and prod-
ucts, and quickly and efficiently assess the potential impact of failing results on the patient. 
Additional, detailed guidance related to Sections 5.7.1–5.7.5 may be found in PDA Technical Report 
No. 33: Evaluation, Validation and Implementation of Alternative and Rapid Microbiological Methods (22).
5.5.1	 Rapid Microbiological Method Scientific Principles Applied to Environmental 
Monitoring
Rapid methods appropriate for EM are based on a wide variety of scientific principles. Some methods 
still require growth of microorganisms using conventional microbiological media; however, detection 
and enumeration can be faster if using novel detection techniques, such as:
• 
Digital imaging and autofluorescence of microcolonies
• 
Fluorescent staining and laser excitation of microcolonies
• 
Rapid detection of carbon dioxide (CO2)
• 
Detection of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) after a brief microbial enrichment period 
Other rapid methods do not require microbial growth prior to detection or enumeration and, as such, 
the time to result can be instantaneous or close to real-time. Rapid technologies that achieve these 
results include:
• 
Flow and solid-phase cytometry using viability stains and laser detection systems
• 
ATP bioluminescence, when enrichment is not required due to the concentration of microor-
ganisms in the sample
• 
Intrinsic fluorescence and optical spectroscopy detection of microorganisms in air or water
• 
RAMAN spectroscopy coupled with viability staining
• 
Nucleic acid amplification techniques, when enrichment is not required due to the concentra-
tion of microorganisms in the sample
The most appropriate technology and detection method to consider will depend on a variety of factors, 
including, but not limited to:
• 
Sample type
• 
Sample size required for analysis
• 
Sample compatibility with the rapid method workflow and instrumentation
• 
Desired time to result
• 
Level of sensitivity required
• 
Need to neutralize antimicrobial activity for methods requiring growth
• 
Ability of the rapid method to allow identification of any recoveries (destructive vs. non-destructive assay)
• 
Potential for false positives or false negatives due to cleaning or disinfectant residues
Automated and high-throughput methods using conventional media are also available that may afford 
faster results with better efficiency in terms of automation, and data management and data integrity. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.