1
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
1.0  Introduction
The design and implementation of an environmental monitoring (EM) program allows the confirma-
tion that controls to minimize the risk associated with processes, people, equipment, utilities, and fa-
cilities are designed correctly and continue to be effective in the manufacture of sterile pharmaceutical 
products. As such, it forms an important part of the contamination control strategy (CCS). 
PDA first published Technical Report No. 13 in 1990 and revised it two previous times, 2001 and 2014. 
This third revision intends to align the content of the document with current industry trends and regu-
latory expectations. Specifically, it will provide additional guidance and focus on the:
• Use of quality risk management (QRM) principles to establish a robust EM program by 
suggesting practical step-by-step approaches
• Increased expectations concerning data management and data integrity 
• Prerequisites to an effective EM program
• Qualification of controlled environments and how to maintain them in a qualified state 
• Rapid microbiological methods (RMM) or automated monitoring systems, since becoming more 
and more convenient, performant and accepted, or even recommended, by regulatory bodies.
Members of the task force who developed this technical report represent or provide expertise to global 
companies to ensure that the methods, terminology, and practices reflect not only U.S., but also inter-
national procedures. Technical peer reviews were completed by prominent EM scientists.
Although this TR has been updated to ensure its alignment with existing current regulations and guide-
lines, current and/or newly updated regulations or guidelines should be consulted when implementing or 
changing an environmental monitoring program. This TR should be viewed as technical guidance, it is not 
intended to replace existing or future regulations, nor should it be considered an all-inclusive document.
1.1	
Purpose
This document was created to aid in the establishment of an environmental monitoring program that 
is robust, meaningful, and practical whilst embracing innovation and the principles of quality risk 
management. This revision updates microbiological and total airborne particulate control concepts 
and principles as they relate to facilities involved in the manufacture of sterile pharmaceutical products 
and other designated cleanroom environments. 
1.2	
Scope
TR-13 serves as a resource applicable for controlled environments in general however its primary focus 
is environmental monitoring for sterile product manufacturing. 
This document discusses international standards and regulatory guidances, elements of an EM program, 
and EM application. Current (at the time of publication) guidelines for typical EM levels and frequen-
cies are presented in Section 3.0 and levels for pharmaceutical water are covered in Section 6.8. 
A comprehensive environmental monitoring program should demonstrate the effectiveness of a solid 
CCS focusing on: 
• Sound facility design, including barrier systems (e.g., isolators and RABS), operation and 
maintenance
• Established documentation systems
• Qualified sanitization, disinfection, and decontamination procedures
• Reliable process controls 
• Good housekeeping practices
• Effective area access controls
• Consistent sample collection and analysis
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


2
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
• Effective training, certification or qualification, and personnel evaluation programs (e.g., periodic 
shop/manufacturing-floor oversight programs by a quality assurance unit and/or adequate subject 
matter experts)
• Quality assurance and control of materials, facilities, and equipment
• Continuous improvement and quality risk management programs
Bulk and intermediate product bioburden monitoring (except for pharmaceutical water) is not con-
sidered part of all EM programs and is therefore outside of the scope of this technical report. For more 
specifics on this topic, refer to PDA Technical Report No. 69: Bioburden and Biofilm Management in 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Operations (1).
2.0 
Glossary and Abbreviations
Action Limit
A microbial or total airborne particulate limit 
that, when exceeded, indicates a process is out-
side of its normal operating range. A response to 
such an excursion should involve a documented 
investigation and corrective actions based on the 
results of that investigation. 
Airborne Particulate Count 
(Total Airborne Particulate Count)
The total number of particles of a specific size range 
per unit volume of air.
Airborne Viable Particulate Count 
(Total Airborne Aerobic Microbial Count)
The recovered number of colony-forming units 
or related signal per unit volume of air.
Alert Level
An established value that when exceeded, pro-
vides an early warning of potential drift from 
normal operating conditions and validated state, 
which does not necessarily give grounds for cor-
rective action but triggers appropriate scrutiny 
and follow-up to address the potential problem. 
Aseptic Filling
Part of aseptic processing in which a pre-steril-
ized or aseptically manufactured product is filled 
and sealed into sterile containers in a cleanroom, 
RABS, or isolator.
Aseptic Processing
Handling of product, packaging materials, and/
or processing equipment in a controlled environ-
ment in which the air supply, materials, equip-
ment, and personnel are controlled to maintain 
(product) sterility (2).
Bioburden
Viable microorganisms associated with person-
nel, manufacturing environments (air and sur-
faces), equipment, product packaging, raw ma-
terials (including water), in-process materials, or 
finished products. 
Campaign
A series of consecutive production batches man-
ufactured without or with reduced intervening 
cleaning, disinfection, and/or sterilization.
Cleaning
Chemical or physical means used to remove soil 
and/or microorganisms from surfaces.
Cleanroom 
A room designed, maintained, and controlled to 
prevent particle and microbiological contami-
nation of a drug product or medical device. A 
cleanroom is assigned and reproducibly meets an 
appropriate air cleanliness classification.
Colony-Forming Unit (CFU)
A single macroscopic colony formed after the 
growth of one or more microorganisms on a solid 
microbiological growth medium. 
Contamination Control Strategy (CCS)
A holistic, risk-based, planned, and documented 
approach based on product and process under-
standing, which explains all the elements that 
need to be controlled and monitored so micro-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


3
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
bial, particulate, and pyrogen contamination is 
minimized to ensure process performance and 
product quality. The CCS should allow for con-
tinuous improvement measures to be taken.
Continuous Monitoring
A process of data collection in which conditions 
are monitored continuously throughout the op-
eration. In most applications, this definition im-
plies “during production.” 
Controlled Non-Classified Area (CNC) 
An area that does not meet any of the formal 
classified grades of cleanliness (i.e., grades A to 
D), but where a manufacturer defined level of 
microbial control is still maintained. (May also 
be referred to as Pharmaceutically Controlled 
Clean Area (PCCA)) 
Corrective Action
Action to eliminate the cause of a nonconformity 
and to prevent recurrence. 
Critical Area/Critical Zone
An area designed to maintain sterility of materi-
als where sterilized product, containers, closures, 
and equipment may be exposed to the manufac-
turing environment.
Critical Surface
A surface within a critical area that may come in 
direct or indirect contact with sterilized or sterile 
filtered products, containers, or closures.
Decontamination
The overall process of removal or reduction of 
any contaminants (chemical residue, or micro-
organisms) from an area, processing equipment, 
or person. The method of decontamination used 
(e.g., cleaning, disinfection, sterilization) should 
be chosen and validated to achieve a level of 
cleanliness appropriate to the intended use of the 
item decontaminated.
Disinfection
The chemical or physical inactivation of a bio-
burden on inanimate surfaces (2). 
Grade A Air Supply
Air which is passed through a filter qualified as ca-
pable of producing Grade A total particulate quality 
air, but where there is no requirement to perform 
continuous total particulate monitoring or meet 
Grade A viable monitoring limits and the area itself 
is not classified. Specifically used for the protection 
of fully stoppered vials where the cap has not been 
crimped and the equipment and engineering sys-
tems that have a direct impact on product quality.
Grid Profiling
A process of dividing areas of equivalent classifi-
cations into grids for the purpose of uniformly as-
sessing contamination characteristics in that area. 
Isolator
A contained, decontaminated environment meet-
ing Grade A (ISO 5) conditions used for aseptic 
process manufacturing that provides an uncom-
promised, continuous isolation of its interior from 
the external environment including personnel. 
Once decontaminated by a validated cycle, an iso-
lator prevents the microbiological contamination 
of sterile products and product contact surfaces of 
the interior by enclosures and the supply of contin-
uous, controlled overpressure of HEPA-filtered air.
Closed Isolator
Systems exclude external contamination from 
the isolator’s interior by transfer material via 
aseptic connection to auxiliary equipment, 
rather than using openings to the surrounding 
environment. Closed systems remain sealed 
throughout operations.
Open Isolator 
Systems are designed to allow for the continu-
ous or semi-continuous ingress and/or egress of 
materials during operations through one or more 
openings. Openings are engineered (e.g., using 
continuous overpressure) to exclude the entry of 
external contamination into the isolator.
Manufacturing Control Parameters
Conditions and corresponding measurements 
associated with facilities and equipment used in 
the control of a manufacturing process and/or 
area that may impact the safety, quality, identity, 
potency, or purity of a product. Environmental 
control parameters may include airflow rates and 
patterns, pressure differentials, materials and per-
sonnel flow, temperature, and relative humidity, 
as well as total airborne total particulate and via-
ble particulates. Process and operating control pa-
rameters include bioburden, process rate, weight, 
volume, temperature, and pressure.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


4
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Microbial Characterization
The description of microorganisms based on 
their cellular morphology, Gram reaction, and 
key diagnostic tests (e.g., gram-positive coagu-
lase-negative cocci).
Microbial Classification
The arrangement of microorganisms into taxonomic 
groups based on their similarities and relationships.
Microbial Identification
The determination of the genus, and species, 
when possible, to which a laboratory or manu-
facturing isolate belongs.
Operational State
The status of a classified room often used an as 
indicator of the presence or absence of personnel 
and/or active manufacturing processes.
At Rest
Condition of the environment in the absence 
of normal operations. This includes having the 
equipment installed as specified and is stand-
ing by for operation when no personnel are 
present. (Synonymous with “static.”)
In Operation
Condition of an environment during normal 
operations, that is, when the usual equipment is 
operating and the specified number of personnel 
are present, and the process or simulated process 
is ongoing. (Synonymous with “dynamic.”)
Parametric Release
A sterility release program based on effective 
control, monitoring, and documentation of a 
validated sterile-product manufacturing process 
where sterility release is based on demonstrated 
achievement of critical operational parameters in 
lieu of end-product sterility testing (3).
Preventive action
Action to eliminate the cause of a potential non-
conformity or other potential undesirable situation. 
Restricted Access Barrier System 
(RABS)
Aseptic processing systems (typically ISO 5) 
intended to substantially reduce human-borne 
contamination within the aseptic environment 
where sterile product, containers, closures, and 
equipment can be exposed via the use of separa-
tive devices and defined mechanical features and 
operating procedures (4).
Open RABS
Where there are vents in the barrier that allow 
air to move from the RABS to the surrounding 
area (for example, Grade A zone to the sur-
rounding Grade B area). 
Closed RABS
Where the air is vented in return ducts within 
the cabinet.
Risk Analysis
The estimation of the risk associated with the 
identified hazards (5,6).
Sanitization
Process of reducing the number of all forms of 
microbial contamination including fungi, virus-
es, and bacteria (7).
Spore
A bacterial dormant form that is highly resis-
tant to adverse conditions. Fungal spores are not 
highly resistant; their susceptibilities are closer to 
vegetative microorganisms.
Sterilization
Validated process used to render product, equip-
ment, or primary packaging materials free from 
viable microorganisms (7).
Type Strain
A specific isolate of a species that is maintained in pure 
culture and is serotypically, genotypically, or chemo-
taxonomically characterized to differentiate it from 
other strains of the same species. The strain is repre-
sentative of the species and provides a reference for the 
species based on its historic isolation, characterization, 
and deposition in recognized culture collections.
Terminal Sterilization
A process where the material is sterilized in its 
primary packaging/container configuration.
Total Airborne Particulates
A term used in reference to the total number of 
particulates suspended in the air. Airborne par-
ticulates may be a complex mixture of viable and 
nonviable particulates. They can be characterized 
by their physical attributes (e.g., concentration 
and size distribution). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


5
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Trend Analysis
A review performed in response to an alert or ac-
tion condition or as part of periodic data review. 
This review provides an analysis of specific en-
vironmental monitoring data to identify adverse 
trends (e.g., increase in counts, a change to re-
petitive organism recoveries, or multiple counts 
in the same room).
Vegetative Cell
Cells in an actively growing state. Some microor-
ganisms can only be vegetative, while others are 
spore-formers and can be in a vegetative or spore 
(dormant) state.
2.1	
Abbreviations
API
Active pharmaceutical ingredient
CCS
Contamination control strategy
CRR
Contamination recovery rate
EM
Environmental monitoring
FMEA
Failure Mode & Effects Analysis
HACCP Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point
HEPA 
Filter
High-efficiency particulate air filter
RABS
Restricted access barrier system
SCDA
Soybean casein digest agar 
(synonymous with TSA)
SDA
Sabouraud dextrose agar
TSA
Trypticase soy agar or tryptone soya 
agar (synonymous with SCDA)
VBNC
Viable but not culturable
3.0 
Environmental Classifications: Regulatory Expectations
An EM program should be designed and implemented in conformance with the requirements of 
the government agencies regulating the manufacturing site as well as requirements of international 
standard-setting organizations. If the intent is to serve multinational markets, the most stringent re-
quirements should be evaluated as the basis of an EM program.
This section compares regulations and guidance instituted for EM by these authorities and standards-
setting organizations:
• 
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) 
• 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
• 
U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP)
• 
European Pharmacopoeia (Ph. Eur.)
• 
European Medicines Agency (EMA)
• 
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of 
Japan (MHLW)
• 
Japanese Pharmacopoeia (JP)
• 
Chinese Pharmacopeia (ChP)
• 
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention 
(PIC) and Pharmaceutical Inspection  
Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S)
• 
World Health Organization (WHO)
Although the regulations and guidelines of these organizations are similar in many respects, there are 
important differences among them in terms of the information each provides, particularly with respect 
to cleanroom classifications. Specific countries other than those listed above may have additional regu-
lations and guidances.
The most commonly accepted international cleanroom standard related to total airborne particulates 
is ISO 14644-1:2015 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments — Part 1: Classification of Air 
Cleanliness by Particle Concentration. ISO class designations are based on the number of particles greater 
than a specified size (0.1–5 μm) per cubic meter of air sampled. ISO 14644-1 defines classes from 1 to 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


6
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
9, with ISO 1 being the cleanest. ISO classes 5 through 8 are used in the pharmaceutical industry for 
sterile-product manufacture and other areas where airborne particulate control is required (8).
Some international and national bodies have based their cleanroom requirements for sterile manufac-
turing on the ISO standard, thus it is used here as the benchmark for other regulations and standards. 
USP has adopted the ISO cleanliness classes in its General Guidance Chapter <1116> Microbiological 
Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments (9).
Some international regulations, for example, those from the People’s Republic of China, require ISO-
class cleanrooms for the manufacture of all types of nonsterile products. China’s National Medical 
Products Administration requires ISO 8 tested at rest for areas where nonsterile product is exposed 
during manufacture. The EU good manufacturing practice (GMP) regulations, however, require ISO 
8 classification only for the manufacture of inhalants. In other jurisdictions, firms are free to apply 
the ISO classes to nonsterile manufacturing or to specify equivalent or modified conditions based on 
their product requirements. In general, environmental control and monitoring in non-sterile product 
manufacturing is out-of-scope of this technical report. There are other resources available which cover 
this topic, including USP <1115> Bioburden Control of Non-sterile Drug Substances and Products.
ISO does not specify the operating state of the area being classified (i.e., as built, at rest, or in opera-
tion), nor does it specify the particle-size thresholds to be employed. In addition, the ISO standard 
deals only with total particulate count and does not discern between viable and nonviable particles. 
The regulating or advisory body determines those specifications. Therefore, each regulatory or stan-
dard-setting body has comparable, but somewhat different, applications of the ISO standard. The 
following are activities generally expected to take place in each of the ISO classifications:
• ISO 5: Aseptic processing zone; sterile product and/or packaging component exposed; unidirec-
tional airflow required
• ISO 7: Area immediately surrounding the aseptic processing zone 
• ISO 8: Non-sterile formulation, materials, and component preparation; filling area for terminally 
sterilized product
The EU, PIC/S members, and WHO use an alphabetic classification of Grades A–D (10-12). For each grade, 
a ≥0.5 µm and ≥5 µm particle-count limit is specified (see Table 3.0-1). In addition, these limits are set for 
both at-rest and in-operation states. Thus, each grade covers up to two corresponding ISO classes, as follows: 
• Grade A: ISO 5 at rest and in operation (ISO 4.8 if based on particles ≥5 µm)
• Grade B: ISO 5 at rest, ISO 7 in operation
• Grade C: ISO 7 at rest, ISO 8 in operation
• Grade D: ISO 8 at rest, undefined in operation 
Japan has adopted similar classifications in its Guidance on the Manufacture of Sterile Pharmaceutical 
Products by Aseptic Processing. One minor difference is that the Japan guidance refers to the Grade A 
classification as ISO 5 rather than ISO 4.8, although the limit for particles ≥5 µm technically corre-
sponds to ISO 4.8. The Japanese Pharmacopeia also uses the Grade A–D classification system but does 
not specify counts ≥5.0 µm and refers to the U.S. FDA guidance for equivalency in operation (13).
For the United States, the FDA’s 2004 Guidance for Industry Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Pro-
cessing: Current Good Manufacturing Practice and USP <1116> both discuss the application and environ-
mental requirements for cleanrooms used for aseptic processing. (9, 14) These include ISO classes 5–8 and 
their corresponding Federal Standard 209E classes (e.g., ISO 5/Class 100). Limits are set only for particles 
≥0.5 µm. Both are silent on the state of the area to be tested but clearly imply areas to be “in operation.”
Common factors among the various guidelines and regulations described here include the requirement 
that ISO 5 areas, where aseptic conditions must be maintained, typically require unidirectional airflow. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


7
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
ISO 14644-1 describes unidirectional flow as 0.45 meters per second (90 ft/min) plus or minus 20% 
measured 150–300 mm from the supply filter face. EU Annex 1, though, recommends this measure-
ment be taken as close to the work surface as practical (10).
In addition, all regulatory authorities recommend an air pressurization scheme to ensure airflow from 
the cleaner zone to the less-clean zone. The broadly acceptable guidance value is a differential pres-
sure (ΔP) of 10–15 Pa (0.04–0.06 in H2O) between zones of differing classes. Several of the relevant 
guidance documents describe the use of air locks to maintain the differential pressures while doors are 
used between different Grades. Where an open ISO 5 unidirectional zone is placed within an ISO 7 
background, this pressure differential is not required.
Table 3.0-1 summarizes the area maximum particulate limits for sterile manufacturing specified by 
various regulatory and standard-setting organizations. Table 3.0-2 summarizes monitoring require-
ments for the various environments according to the relevant authorities. The summary of require-
ments is condensed and is limited to routine monitoring; it excludes requirements for area qualifica-
tion or requalification. More complete guidance may be found in the references cited.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


8
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Table 3.0-1		
Cleanroom Monitoring – Airborne Particulate Limits (particles/m3)
Particle Size
ISO 14644
U.S. FDA 
(Aseptic Processing Guidance) 1,2
USP <1116>
EU & PIC/S Annex 1 and 
WHO Annex 6
Japan MHLW 
(Aseptic Processing Guidance)
JP XVI
ISO 5
ISO 5/Class 100
ISO 5
Grade A/ Grade B  
(at rest)
Grade A/ Grade B  
(at rest)
Grade A/ Grade B  
(at rest)
≥0.5 µm
3,520
3,520
3,520
3,520
3,520
3,520
≥5.0 µm
Not specified
Not specified
Not specified
203 /29
203
Not specified
ISO 7
ISO 7/Class 10,000
ISO 7
Grade B  
(in operation) 
Grade C (at rest)
Grade B  
(in operation) 
Grade C (at rest)
Grade B  
(in operation) 
Grade C (at rest)
≥0.5 µm
352,000
352,000
352,000
352,000
352,000
352,000
≥5.0 µm
2,930
Not specified
Not specified
2,900
2,900
Not specified
ISO 8
ISO 8/Class 100,000
ISO 8
Grade C  
(in operation) 
Grade D (at rest)4
Grade C  
(in operation) 
Grade D (at rest)
Grade C  
(in operation) 
Grade D (at rest)
≥0.5 µm
3,520,000
3,520,000
3,520,000
3,520,000
3,520,000
3,520,000
≥5.0 µm
29,300
Not specified
Not specified
29,000
29,000
Not specified
1	 Obsolete U.S. Federal Standard 209E classification added for continuity
2	 Class titles for U.S. FDA and USP indicate equivalent particle counts per cubic foot
3	 ISO 4.8 is based on reduced limit for particles ≥5 µm. European regulation is considering removing the ≥5µm classification for Grade A and Grade B at-rest. However, as it is still an expectation within the current EU Annex 1 
regulation and other standards, so this particle-size requirement remains within the table.
4	 Grade D operational particulate counts depend on the operation and are not defined by any guideline.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


9
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Table 3.0-2		
Environmental Monitoring Requirements/Guidance1
Monitoring 
Guidance
U.S. FDA
(Aseptic Processing Guidance)
USP <1116>3
EU Annex 1, PIC/S
and WHO Annex 4 2
Japan MHLW
(Aseptic Processing Guidance)
JP XVI
Frequency
(Airborne total particulate and viable count, surface viable count, 
personnel sampling as noted)
ISO 5: Each production shift. 
Gloves/Gown each exit, daily 
or each lot. 
Other classes not specified.
Cleanroom/RABS
Critical Zone (ISO 5 or better):
• Each operational shift (active air)
• Surface monitoring (end of operation)
Aseptic area adjacent critical zone:
• Each operating shift (all sampling)
Other non-adjacent aseptic areas:
• Once per day (all sampling)
Isolators
Critical Zone (ISO 5 or better):
• Once per day (active air)
• Surface monitoring (end of campaign)
Non-aseptic areas surrounding the 
isolator:
• Once per month (all sampling)
A: In operation, continuous particulate 
monitoring required for critical 
operations. Frequent viable sampling.
B: In operation, frequent particle 
monitoring is required.
C, D: Monitoring on risk basis.
Surfaces and personnel should be 
monitored after critical operations.
A, B: Each operating shift for airborne 
micro, surfaces, and personnel; 
continuous particulate monitoring.
C, D: Areas in which products and 
containers are exposed to the 
environment: Airborne micro twice per 
week; airborne particulate once per 
month; personnel not required.
C, D other: Airborne micro once per 
week; airborne particulate once per 
month; personnel not required.
A: Each operating shift.
B: Each operating shift.
C, D (potential product/container 
contact): Twice per week
C, D (no potential product/container 
contact): Once per week
Airborne viable action limits  
(Active air sampling)
ISO 5: 1 CFU/m3
ISO 7: 10 CFU/m3
ISO 8: 100 CFU/m3
Recommends use of Recovery Rate (% 
of samples with micro contamination) 
rather than count levels, as follows:
Isolator/Closed RABS (ISO 5 or better): 
<0.1%
ISO 5: <1%
ISO 7: <5%
ISO 8: <10%
Applies to all active air, passive air, and 
surface samples. 5
A: <1 CFU/m3
B: 10 CFU/m3
C: 100 CFU/m3
D: 200 CFU/m3
A: <1 CFU/m3
B: 10 CFU/m3
C: 100 CFU/m3
D: 200 CFU/m3
A: <1 CFU/m3
B: 10 CFU/m3
C: 100 CFU/m3
D: 200 CFU/m3
0.5 m3 sample required for A, B
0.2 m3 sample required for C, D
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


10
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Monitoring 
Guidance
U.S. FDA
(Aseptic Processing Guidance)
USP <1116>3
EU Annex 1, PIC/S
and WHO Annex 4 2
Japan MHLW
(Aseptic Processing Guidance)
JP XVI
Airborne viable action 
limits  
(Passive air sampling)
ISO 5: 1 CFU
ISO 7: 5 CFU
ISO 8: 50 CFU
90 mm diameter  
settle plate/4 hr
Use of settling plates is optional.
Same sample Recovery Rate as active 
air, above.
90 mm diameter settle plate/4 hr
A: <1 CFU/plate
B: 5 CFU/ plate
C: 50 CFU/ plate
D: 100 CFU/ plate
90 mm diameter settle plate/4 hr
A: <1 CFU/ plate	
C: 50 CFU/ plate
B: 5 CFU/ plate	
D: 100 CFU/ plate
90 mm diameter settle plate/4 hr.
Not specified
Surface viables action 
limits [CFU]4
Not specified
Same sample Recovery Rate as active air.
Use contact plate or swab.
A: <1 
B: 5
C: 25
D: 50
55 mm diameter contact plate
A: <1 	
B: 5
C: 25
D: 50
24–30 cm2 contact or swab area
A: <1 	
B: 5
C: 25
D: 50
24–30 cm2 (5.4–6.2 cm diameter 
contact or 25 cm2 swab area)
Personnel 
(gown) viables 
action limits
Not specified.
Gown sampling must be 
established based on job 
responsibility.
Same sample Recovery Rate as active air.
Not specified
Not specified
Not specified
Personnel 
(gloves) 
viables 
action limits
Not specified
Same sample Recovery Rate as active air.
Glove print, 5 fingers
A: <1 CFU/glove
B: 5 CFU/glove
Glove print, 5 fingers
A: <1 CFU/5 fingers
B: 5 CFU/5 fingers
Glove print, 5 fingers
A: <1 CFU/5 fingers
B: 5 CFU/5 fingers
1	 Guidance is condensed. Refer to the cited references for complete guidance.
2	 Limits are based on averages (currently averaging was removed from the draft of EU Annex 1 (Feb 2020)) – In Grade A no growth is expected 
3	 USP utilizes contamination recovery rate instead of excursion limits as found in all other guidance documents.
4	 In general, surface and personnel monitoring should not interfere with the zone protection and should be done after critical operations.
5	 Operators may not be aseptically gowned in ISO 8 support areas.
Note: Settle plates should be exposed for the duration of operations and changed as required after 4 hours (exposure time should be based on qualification including recovery studies and it should not have any negative effect on 
the suitability of the media used).
(Table 3.0-2 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


11
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.0 
Environmental Monitoring Qualification of  
Cleanrooms (Classified Areas) Used for Manufacturing and  
Filling of Sterile Products
Clean areas for the manufacture of sterile products are classified according to the required characteris-
tics of the environment. Each manufacturing operation requires an appropriate environmental cleanli-
ness level in the operational state to minimize the risks of particulate or microbial contamination of 
the product or materials being handled.
For new areas, the initial qualification should be performed in a prospective mode. For existing 
facilities that require a repeat of the initial qualification, the requalification can be performed in 
concurrence with routine production activities if historical data of existing rooms are shown to be 
in a good state of control. Release of product should await final release of the cleanroom qualifica-
tion exercise. 
To meet the in-operation conditions, these areas should be designed to reach certain specified air-
cleanliness levels in the “at rest” occupancy state. Section 9.0 (Appendix 1) provides additional guid-
ance to ensure and verify that critical system components meet user requirements and are properly 
identified, installed, and calibrated (typically covered within the installation qualification (IQ) and 
operational qualification (OQ) phases of cleanroom qualification).
To prepare the cleanroom for classification, air filters should be evaluated for cleanliness and replaced, 
if necessary, especially in new or modified facilities where excess construction debris or dust may cause 
clogging. Cleaning and disinfection protocols should be defined and performed prior to conducting 
qualification. The need to perform baseline viable and total airborne particulate monitoring should 
be assessed to ensure the cleanroom is ready to go into qualification. This might be a protocol-driven 
prerequisite.
Performance of the total airborne particulate cleanroom classification described in ISO 14644-1 
would confirm the air-cleanliness levels in the at-rest occupancy state. This initial exercise should be 
supplemented by an at-rest qualification using viable tests.
Viable at-rest locations might focus on more specific aspects related to the actual design of the clean-
room and can be documented as part of the EM risk assessment (see Section 5.2). Although human 
activity and material transfers (the primary sources of microbial contamination) are not evaluated in 
the at-rest state, the associated sampling locations will provide valuable information about the intrin-
sic microbial state-of-control of the cleanroom prior to starting the qualification under in-operation 
conditions. Specifications applied for viable qualification at rest might be more stringent than those 
applicable for in-operation conditions. All necessary measures should be taken to minimize the impact 
of personnel during at-rest monitoring. For instance, surface monitoring should be performed at the 
start of the run, only the EM technician should be present, and delay timers should be applied to au-
tomated samplers to allow the technician to leave the location before testing begins.
Subsequently, it should be confirmed that the cleanroom can maintain operational conditions when 
executing the activities foreseen within the area. The method detailed in ISO 14644-1 can be used to 
confirm the total airborne particulate cleanroom classification for the in-operation status. This initial 
qualification is normally performed by simulating manufacturing activities, ensuring that at a certain 
stage the maximum number of personnel and the worst-case level of activities are covered.
The runs described in this section may form part of the OQ of the cleanroom. Data obtained during 
this stage should be used as part of the EM risk assessment to define routine sampling locations. For 
both total airborne particulate runs (in the at-rest and in-operational conditions), one run conducted 
according to ISO 14644-1 is considered sufficient.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


12
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
A performance qualification (PQ) should follow the successful completion of the OQ. However, it 
may commence before the full OQ results are available, based on preliminary results (business risk 
approach). If this approach is chosen, PQ protocol should list the results which should be available 
before the PQ start.
PQ typically consists of three consecutive runs during routine (in-operation) conditions. In batch-
related production rooms, a run would typically comprise a batch covering all applicable shifts and 
activities. In supporting areas, a run should cover all relevant activities to be performed within that 
area. Simulating activities during performance qualification might reduce the total runtime (i.e., by 
executing them in a condensed period of time).
The sampling plan should be based on the viable and total airborne particulate sample locations defined 
as part of the routine monitoring (EM risk assessment) augmented with additional EM locations to cover 
remote parts of the room in order to confirm and document that the complete cleanroom environment is 
in control. This PQ can be performed during APS or activities can be simulated (10). There is a business 
risk, however, performing PQ during APS since the facility is not operating in a fully qualified environ-
ment and deficiencies could be detected that first require corrective measures. Consequently, at a certain 
stage, the maximum number of personnel and the worst-case level of activities need to be covered during 
one or more PQ runs. The maximum limits for microbial and total airborne particulate contamination 
during qualification should correspond to the action limits applied during routine monitoring. 
Following the initial PQ, an extended PQ may be conducted for a defined time period based on the 
routine sampling program or continuation of extended sampling. The intent of this process would be 
to account for conditions which may not have been covered in the initial PQ (e.g., seasonal variation 
of microbes, establishment of appropriate alert levels, selection of microorganisms for disinfectant ef-
ficacy tests, additional evaluation of the periodic cleaning program, etc.). 
Production or room configuration changes with a possible impact on EM (e.g., gowning procedures, 
cleaning set-up, layout, material or personnel flow, or other areas) should include a new assessment on 
the qualified status of the cleanroom and may require requalification as part of the change.
5.0 
Environmental Monitoring Program
An EM program (including EMPQ) should be in conformance with current GMP, which includes 
appropriate training and authority of personnel involved in implementing the EM program. Equip-
ment used should be qualified and calibrated, and microbiological growth media should be properly 
qualified, prepared, and tested. In addition, all operational procedures should be written, approved, 
and followed with appropriate controls to support their use. The methods selected should be justified 
and qualified for use as appropriate. 
Cleaning and disinfection, of the manufacturing area, and material handling and gowning processes, 
as well as appropriate aseptic behavior of the personnel, are key components of an effective contamina-
tion control strategy. 
Selection of sampling methods (see Section 6.0), sampling sites, and sampling frequencies should be 
based on the principles of risk management according to ICH Q9: Quality Risk Management to ensure 
that the respective production area is under control and meets regulatory requirements. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


13
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Establishment of alert levels and action limits may be based on individual sample sites or groups of 
related sample sites with a similar design or activities. Data obtained are subject to continual review, 
and alert and action decisions are made by qualified personnel. A documentation system should be in 
place for identifying and investigating excursions and adverse trends and the effectiveness of the cor-
rective actions taken. All data should be documented and periodically trended.
5.1	
Cleaning, Sanitization or Disinfection and Decontamination 
EM data demonstrates the effectiveness of the cleaning and disinfection program. The qualification of 
cleaning and disinfection procedures should demonstrate microbial reduction and maintenance of a 
microbiological state of control and should provide confidence in the effectiveness of the procedure. 
This typically includes laboratory surface challenge or carrier studies for contact time and bioburden 
reduction, supplemented by in-situ studies. 
Both USP <1072> and PDA Technical Report No. 70: Fundamentals of Cleaning and Disinfection Pro-
grams for Aseptic Manufacturing Facilities provide sufficient details of the requirements and in-vitro 
surface challenge methodology for qualification of the efficacy of the agent used (2,15).
5.2	
EM Sample Site Selection Using Risk Management Principles 
Sample site selection, selection of the appropriate sampling methods, sampling volumes, and monitor-
ing frequencies are critical components of contamination control within a facility. However, EM risk 
assessments are only intended to define the EM program as a part of the overall contamination control 
strategy. This section addresses how to create and how to maintain an EM program applying a lifecycle 
approach (Section 5.2.1) and the use of quality risk management principles to identify and select sites 
for EM of classified environments including ISO 5-8/Grades A-D as well as personnel monitoring 
(Section 5.2.2). Sections 6.8 and 6.9 discuss utilities (WFI/Compressed Air, Nitrogen, etc.). 
5.2.1	
Lifecycle Approach to an Environmental Monitoring Program 
The creation and maintenance of EM programs are best achieved using a lifecycle approach. This 
lifecycle approach encompasses the evaluation and definition of suitable sample sites, sample types, 
sampling volumes, and sample frequency for microbiological monitoring that are required before 
starting up a new facility, area, or room. These sample sites are used to perform an EM performance 
qualification (PQ). Based on the PQ results, adaptation (mainly reduction or addition) of sample sites 
may be necessary before setting up the sample plan for routine and, if applicable, batch-related EM. 
The impact of any major change (e.g., reconstruction, process change, or equipment relocation) needs 
to be evaluated and the affected area may need to be requalified. 
A final EM evaluation may be necessary for decommissioning a room, isolator, or facility to demon-
strate environmental control through to the end. The model presented in Figure 5.2.1-1 outlines the 
general flow of the lifecycle approach of an EM program. Each step defined is designed to ensure that 
once an EM program is developed, is it carefully reviewed during the lifecycle of the area, product, or 
process to affirm that a state of control is maintained. A periodic reevaluation of the EM program (e.g., 
in response to an adverse trend report) may be necessary.
5.2.2	
Initiation of Quality Risk Management Process 
Prior to executing a risk assessment, several elements must be defined: scope and objective, risk ques-
tion or problem statement, risk management tool to be applied, and risk-ranking criteria. 
To conduct an EM risk assessment, a risk facilitator should be assigned and a multidisciplinary team 
should be assembled representing the areas of microbiology, contamination control and hygiene, qual-
ity engineering, facilities and utilities, quality control, quality assurance, and manufacturing (16).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


14
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Figure 5.2.1-1	 Overview of the Lifecycle Approach to Risk Assessment of an EM Program
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


15
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The scope and objective of the risk assessment is defined as the area of the facility or process under 
assessment of the EM program. The scope can involve just one room, an isolator, or a larger manufac-
turing area. Independent of the scope, however, the manufacturing process associated with the area in 
scope is key to performing the risk assessment. 
Thorough process understanding and process mapping is necessary to evaluate the associated risk of 
contamination at a specific position within a cleanroom. Prior to initiating the risk assessment, process 
mapping should be conducted on the shop/manufacturing floor using room layouts and indicating 
equipment locations, people flow, material flow, and waste flow in the facility. During this process 
mock-up, the team will identify potential hazards within the areas under assessment. 
The assessment team will select the most appropriate risk management tool to be used among the dif-
ferent methods applicable, e.g., Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), Hazard Analysis Critical 
Control Point (HACCP), among others (17). One risk assessment tool, developed by a collaborative 
of pharmaceutical industry representatives through BioPhorum, addresses the wide range of practices 
within the industry, allowing harmonization as well as compliance with regulatory guidelines. This 
toolkit provides an easy to use, step-by-step guidance for establishing EM programs (18).
For process mapping, grid profiling can be useful to describe single process steps and consider activities 
specific to that grid. After gridding the room layout, the process steps in each grid are evaluated and the risk 
ranking is determined based on six risk factors: 1) cleaning and sanitization access, 2) personnel presence 
and flow, 3) material flow, 4) proximity to open product or product contact material, 5) interventions/op-
erations by personnel and their complexity, 6) frequency of interventions (see Appendix 2 Figure 10.0.1).
Based on the risk scoring, sampling locations are determined for performing the EMPQ and, after-
wards, for conducting the routine monitoring. To enable systematic assessment of all cleanroom areas, 
a recommendation of the grid size for the respective grades is made (e.g., 0.5 m2 for Grade A). In addi-
tion, grouping grids into functional sections (e.g., filling area) enables meaningful sample points to be 
defined. Various risk assessment examples from industry are available illustrating this approach (19).
Depending on the tool selected to execute the assessment, the risk-ranking elements must first be 
defined. To perform a multidimensional risk management approach, a minimum of two risk-ranking 
elements (e.g., proximity, complexity, frequency, severity) must be defined. Examples of risk assess-
ments using various tools are provided in Sections 9.0-11.0 (Appendices 1-3).
5.2.2.1	 General Points to Consider for a Risk-Based EM Program (Risk/Hazard Identification)
Sample locations should be chosen based on the criticality of the process being performed in the room 
or area, product exposure to the environment and susceptibility to microbial and particulate contami-
nation (i.e., serve as the most sensitive measurement of the state of control of the room), locations of 
potential ingress from supporting areas or adjacent non-classified areas (i.e., gowning areas, airlocks, 
corridors), and sites shown to be appropriately placed to detect a problem in the area.
Suitable sample sites will depend on the area design and manufacturing process. Locations posing the 
most critical microbiological risk to the product are a key part of the program. 
The following factors should be considered when the team is performing the walk-through of the facility: 
1.	 Adherence to industry and regulatory guidelines, e.g., CFR, ISO 14644, USP, FDA, EU (Note: 
ISO 14644 only provides a guidance for the classification of cleanrooms, e.g., minimum number 
of sample locations for total particulates)
2.	 Sites and locations where microbial and particulate contamination would most likely have an 
adverse effect on product quality and, therefore, have the highest risk, considering—
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


16
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
• 
Proximity to open product or product contact surfaces and critical sites (e.g., filling needles, 
stopper bowls)
• 
Activities linked with interventions 
• 
Areas that are the most inaccessible or difficult areas to clean and disinfect
• 
Locations with a high frequency and/or complexity of activities by cleanroom operators, 
(e.g., touch panel, forceps, door handles)
• 
Areas with a large number of personnel and high personnel flow (e.g., floors at the entrance 
of gowning rooms)
• 
Areas with high material flow
3.	 Uniform geometric pattern or grid-profiling within the cleanrooms, to cover the complete area
4.	 Assessment and a justification for locations that will not be part of the EM program due to cer-
tain restrictions or alternative/worst-case coverage
5.	 Historical data and/or data obtained during qualification
6.	 Anaerobic organisms: 
• 
Strict anaerobic strains are unlikely to be recovered in common aerobic cleanroom environ-
ments. Periodic and/or investigational monitoring for anaerobic organisms may be conduct-
ed as a risk-based activity; it is mainly performed to detect any micro-aerophilic bacteria, 
such as Cutibacterium (formerly Propionibacterium) acnes that usually are not detectable 
applying standard aerobic monitoring conditions.
• 
Generally, a flush or overlay with nitrogen or carbon dioxide does not deplete or replace 
enough oxygen to create anaerobic conditions that require routine anaerobic-viable moni-
toring of the area; however, periodic testing of the compressed gasses utilized must be 
considered.(11,14,15)
• 
The frequency of anaerobic testing may differ from the routine monitoring schedule. 
Although anaerobes are a significant component of the skin microbiota, aerobic 
environmental monitoring is considered adequate to detect inadequate gowning and poor 
aseptic technique by cleanroom personnel. Anaerobic environmental monitoring in response 
to a sterility test failure implicating strict anaerobes should be considered.
7.	 Airflow visualization studies, that is, smoke studies; areas of concern, such as turbulences and 
eddies, may be addressed through airflow, process, or facility redesign.
5.2.2.2	 Risk Initiation: Development of EM Risk Assessments
Typical approaches to EM risk assessments include the following activities:
• 
Map the layout of the room(s), overlay with grids, and combine them into functional sections
• 
Walk the process with the risk assessment team, detailing process activities grid-by-grid
• 
Assess each grid against the risk factors and score them to determine the relative probability of 
contamination
• 
Evaluate the results by functional sections to select sampling locations and methods
• 
Create an EMPQ plan
• 
Evaluate the EMPQ results
• 
Determine routine EM sampling locations, methods, and frequencies
• 
Review the risk assessment on a defined, periodic basis
For each grid, risk is scored based on the process used, and then ranked based on these six factors:
1.	 Accessibility of equipment and surfaces for cleaning and sanitization
2.	 Personnel presence and flow
3.	 Material flow
4.	 Proximity to open product or open product-contact materials
5.	 Need for interventions/operations by personnel and their complexity
6.	 Frequency of interventions and operations
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


17
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Strategies regarding risk scoring and risk ranking can be found in the BioPhorum EM Risk Assessment 
Toolkit.(18) For example, each risk factor is ranked as low (1), medium (2) or high risk (4), with excep-
tion of “proximity to product,” which is ranked as low (1), medium (4) or high risk (8). The calculated 
product for each grid results in the risk scoring as low risk (score of 1–16), medium risk (score of 32–
265) or high risk (score of 512–8192). A detailed example can be found in Section 10.0 (Appendix 2).
5.2.2.3	 Risk Assessment
Once the elements from of the EM Risk assessment are defined, the team will begin the risk assess-
ment phase of the lifecycle. Next, the hazards identified during the facility walk-through will be docu-
mented, and the hazards will be evaluated for risk factors given the current controls in place. During 
this phase of the risk assessment, all current controls are accounted for and documented, and consider 
the following items: 
• 
Timing of sampling and sample volume measured against the company standard
• 
Frequency of sampling measured against the company standard
• 
Additional criteria (e.g., height of sampling location)
• 
Risk of sampling procedure for product contamination (part of the justification if a site is not 
sampled)
• 
Locations and areas to be assessed where there is no monitoring 
• 
Historical data
• 
Air flow studies
Once the risk ranking is completed, the sampling site selection and sampling frequency can be deter-
mined. Additionally, if risks are identified which are not within the organization’s risk tolerance level, 
those risks must be mitigated. 
After having considered the relevant criteria and factors, in the case of a new EM program, a rough 
plan and site layout (with locations) should be prepared; or, in case of existing sample locations, these 
locations can be assessed against the relevant criteria. 
The outcome of the risk assessment includes a documented plan for monitoring and the rationale for 
the EM program (i.e., sampling locations, sampling volume, sampling frequency, methods). With a 
new EM program, there will be little historical data available to inform the risk assessment. In these 
cases, the team will need to focus on the factors that may contribute to or perpetuate contamination, 
using scientific experience and subject matter expertise to minimize the uncertainty in the assessment. 
Over time, the data collected during routine monitoring will reveal the risk level. 
If there is an existing EM program without a risk-based rationale to support the EM program, the risk 
team must be careful to ensure that they are not performing an assessment to justify the current sam-
pling program. In these cases, the team must evaluate the facility/process (e.g., via a Gemba walk), tak-
ing into consideration historical data to prevent removal of sampling locations which have historically 
demonstrated adverse recovery trends. Note: A Gemba (Japanese) walk is a practice of Lean Six Sigma, 
to watch how a process is actually performed and talking with those who actually perform the work.
Where an existing EM program was created using the principles of risk management, the team will 
evaluate the existing assessment to ensure that all conditions assumed in the original assessment are 
still in place. If there are discrepancies between the initial and current conditions, the assessment is 
modified, and the hazards are re-ranked to determine if the risks are below the required threshold. Any 
major deviations to the relevant criteria should be considered, and mitigation actions may be defined 
to control the risks. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


18
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
5.2.2.4	 Risk Control and Risk Review 
Throughout the lifecycle of the EM program, if risks are found to be above the allowable threshold, 
the team will develop risk control actions, which will lessen the likelihood of contamination occurring 
and/ or increase the likelihood of detection by defining additional sample locations. Once these ad-
ditional controls have been implemented, the assessment will be revisited to ensure the controls were 
effective in minimizing the risk. In addition to reviewing the effectiveness of in-process or procedural 
controls, the completed risk assessment is subject to review on a routine basis (e.g., annually) to ensure 
the EM program is functioning as designed. 
5.3	
Alert Levels and Action Limits
EM programs require action limits to be established based on the applicable regulatory guidelines or 
requirements. These guidelines frequently recommend alert levels also be established. Some companies 
also choose to set levels for individual cleanrooms or sample sites. The alert level will be established 
based on statistical analysis of the historic EM data. 
Alert levels and action limits based on CFU count excursions have been eliminated from USP <1116>, 
which indicates a paradigm shift to contamination recovery rate (CRR).(9) CRR is the percentage 
of environmental samples found to have microbial contamination (e.g., a CRR of 1% would mean 
that only 1% of the samples taken showed contamination, regardless of colony numbers). The CRR 
approach may lend itself to wider applicability considering emerging EM technologies, such as those 
not reliant on CFU measurement. However, current official regulatory guidances from both the EU 
and the US still retain GMP requirements for alert levels and action limits. Consequently, companies 
may want to voluntarily monitor CRR as an EM trending tool in addition to the required alert levels 
and action limits. 
The response to alert levels or action limits should be written and employed consistently. To create 
consistency, investigatory and corrective action steps should be specified in advance. Records should 
show that the excursion was recognized, appropriate follow-up occurred, and appropriate corrective 
and preventive actions (CAPA) were taken. Established alert levels, should be reviewed periodically as 
part of routine trend analysis. They may be revised to reflect improvements, advances in technology, 
changes in use patterns, or other changes. 
When no regulatory or industry guidelines are provided, alert levels and action limits may be derived 
statistically from historical data. Statistically derived alert levels, based on performance of the area, 
might be low; however, one should be using those values to detect atypical recurrences. Other consid-
erations in adjusting levels include improving process capability, consistency of alert levels and action 
limits for similar room classifications, level of gowning, and product contamination risk. Infrequent 
excursions from these levels are expected at frequencies characteristic for the specific mathematical 
model used in their derivation. The critical requirement is recognizing an adverse trend that may rep-
resent a loss of environmental control.
The alert levels and action limits do not define product attributes, such as sterility, and should not be 
considered as product specifications. Rather, alert levels are intended to indicate changes or drifts in 
environmental control so that corrective action may be taken before product quality is adversely af-
fected. However, where an action limit is exceeded where critical aseptic process steps are conducted, 
the investigation should be completed prior to release of the batches impacted by the excursion, which 
should include an evaluation of the product impact, based on the most probable root cause identified.
Since there is no one best method for setting alert levels, the approaches described in Sections 5.3.1–
5.3.3 may be taken within the pharmaceutical industry. Where compendial requirements exist, as with 
action limits, they supersede these examples.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


19
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Using standard statistical tools for setting alert levels and action limits can be misleading because en-
vironmental monitoring data is not normally distributed. No pharmaceutical industry or regulatory 
consensus exists on the best statistical model to use for setting these levels. Therefore, it may be ap-
propriate to determine the model that best fits the data and use that model to set the levels. When data 
does not fall within a normal distribution and exhibits high levels of skewness towards lower counts 
and /or zero counts, a non-parametric approach to setting alert levels and action limits are suitable 
when large number of historical observations exists. In the absence of large data sets, non-parametric 
approaches run the risk of selecting as the control limits, the outlying data points caused by out-of-
control conditions, resulting in inflated estimates of alert levels and action limits. 
Traditionally, alert levels and action limits are established, using a mean of 2 or 3 standard devia-
tions (SDs) to render certain degrees of assurance that the classified environments are in control. This 
method hinges on the assumption that the data or data after a transformation such as logarithmic are 
normally distributed.
Some of the commonly practiced approaches are described below.
5.3.1	 Nonparametric Approach
A nonparametric evaluation is based on 99.9th and 99.99th percentiles and can be chosen as the alert 
and action levels. These levels correspond to about mean plus 3 and 4 sigma ranges, respectively. These 
levels are commonly selected as process alert and action levels. When the requirement of proper sample 
size is met (N≈1000), the alert levels analysis establishes confidence that during actual process moni-
toring 99.9% of the population will lie below the stated value. When these limits are exceeded, it will 
trigger investigation that will prevent contamination or an adverse trend condition. 
Action levels can be selected at 99.99th percentile. The action level analysis establishes confidence that 
during actual process monitoring 99.99% of the population will lie below the stated value. Therefore, 
the derived action levels serve to identify an excursion at the selected percentile level. By definition, it 
is very unlikely that validated system, operating in a state of control, will deliver results that will devi-
ate significantly from the norm especially when multiple alert/action excursions in same room in the 
same day are detected. This condition is likely indicative of a significant drift the process control(s) or 
a systemic failure of the validated system has occurred. 
5.3.2	 Nonparametric Tolerance Limit Approach
As environmental monitoring data, especially in cleanrooms, is typically not normally distributed (i.e., 
exhibits skew heavily toward lower counts or zero counts), a nonparametric tolerance limit approach 
to setting alert levels and action limits is recommended. These limits allow the user to assert with at 
least 95% (K=0.95) confidence that 100(P) or 99% of a population lies below the value, as determined 
by the stated action limits, for the respective data.(16) For distribution-free tolerance limits, minimum 
sample sizes are N=60 for 95/95 (alert level) and N=300 for 95/99 (action limits).
5.3.3	 Cutoff Value Approach
All the test data for a particular site, or group of similar sites, are arranged in a histogram, and the alert 
levels and action limits are set at values whose monitoring results are respectively 5% and 1% higher 
than the level selected (i.e., 95th and 99th percentile, respectively). Other percentiles may be used in 
establishing levels. Alert levels are typically determined per test type (active air, passive air, and surface 
monitoring). 
The alert definition should be based on a timeframe allowing the accumulation of enough data to be 
representative of a population. A general text on statistics (Juran’s Quality Handbook, The complete Guide to 
Performance Excellence, Joseph A. Defeo, 7th Ed. McGraw Hill Education Books, 2017) recommends a statisti-
cally significant value of at least 20 data points. Alert levels are typically set at about 50-60% of action until 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


20
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
enough data is generated. An example is to take the last 100 monitoring results or data collected during 
one full year and use the 95th and 99th percentile values as the alert levels and action limits
Areas that have the same activities may be grouped to provide more data points; for example, material 
airlocks of the same Grade, or Grade D hallways of same function can be grouped. 
The calculated alert level should be challenged for its appropriateness, however, avoid modifying or 
increasing the alert as such it loses any correlation with your actual cleanroom performance. In ad-
dition, performance-based alert levels that seem to be well below the applied action limits should be 
considered as a confirmation of a solid microbial control of the environment and does not per defini-
tion to be considered as inappropriate. One should be aware that above alerts will occur and that this 
is inherent with the use of a cut-off approach. One should be more focused on the level of occurrence 
(see its use as a trigger for trend analysis within Section 5.4.3).
If the outcome of the periodic reassessment of the alert assessment results in a level increase, this should 
be interpreted as a warning that the facility may be slowly drifting out of control or might be a result of 
modifications of the activities within the area (e.g., increase in batches produced, changes in process). 
It is recommended not to increase alert levels without a good understanding of the reasons behind it.
The frequency-based excursion rates and trends can be used to determine the state of the EM control 
and gowning process. The cumulative conforming count chart (CCC) is easy to use and more sensi-
tive to short-term drifts in process parameter, enabling its user to judge the state of control. The idea 
behind the CCC is the fact that the number of conforming items between two consecutive noncon-
forming items changes when the fraction nonconforming shifts is observed. CCC plots the number 
of inspectional monitoring data sets between excursions. The method is suitable when large number 
of data exists.
At a specified excursion rate, a likely number of excursions per given number of samples can be es-
timated at a 95% confidence level. The CCC can be used to identify the average and the minimum 
number of continuous successful (within alert levels) facility- or gown-monitoring examinations before 
the data shifts. Such approaches can be used to evaluate limits, define trends, and assess training ef-
fectiveness, for example, gowning process and operator or analyst disqualification and requalification. 
Other models based on negative binomial, Poisson, Weibull, or exponential distributions are possible. 
It may be appropriate to determine the model that best fits the data and use that model to set the levels. 
As noted, contamination in strictly controlled environments does not typically fall within a normal 
distribution. Environmental monitoring data may be evaluated to determine the suitability of the ap-
proaches to level setting.
The monitoring group should review the data for trends at an appropriate frequency. The quality unit 
should review quarterly and yearly monitoring reports.
5.3.4	 Quantitative and Qualitative Trending Rules
Trend rules should supplement alert levels and action limits and focus on two important axes:
• 
To rapidly detect gradual bioburden changes before it leads to real excursions with potential 
impact for production and/or the cleanroom environment (immediate term trending)
• 
It should be able to periodically evaluate the general state of control of the cleanroom environ-
ment (short- and long-term trending)
A useful trending rule is to look at alert level excursions over time within the same room identifying 
correlation between/among locations, or frequent sustained recoveries above alert. When trend rules 
are exceeded, an investigation is recommended.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


21
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Immediate — short term trending rules typically look at an increase in the proportion of above alerts 
over a specified time period. Examples:
• 
A specified number of above alerts at a single location/type of test
• 
A specified number of alerts within one room (same and different types of tests)
Some statistical rules can be used as well in order to identify when the proportion of above alerts is 
moving to an atypical level.
Short Term — monthly or quarterly
The monitoring group should perform a comprehensive review of the data at an appropriate frequency 
as a function of the amount and criticality of the data generated. The quality unit should review and 
approve the periodic monitoring reports.
Typically, a thorough analysis with a statement if data indicate that the facility is operating in a state 
of control or if data indicate some issues, how it was discovered, where and what corrective action was 
taken and what impact the issue had on the facility. The integration of graphs is highly recommended 
to visualize the state of control.
One can assess:
• 
Same sample type from same location exceeding the action limit multiple times 
• 
Increases of the number of alert level excursions (e.g., same monitoring type: active, passive or 
surface monitoring)
• 
Recovery rate increases for the same location (e.g., all personnel on one filling line), or the same 
room or area. 
Long Term — annual
Annual trending should report the changes in a year’s worth of data. Since it incorporates more data 
and thus is should be able to give a better holistic picture of the cleanroom environment.
It might include:
• 
Number of EM Deviations per grade with indication of concerned rooms and test type and 
corrective actions
• 
Occurrence of atypical microorganism per grade and explanation of potential root cause 
identified
• 
Microbial flora analysis and confirmation of the disinfection program efficiency and validated state
• 
Global analysis of the site performance covered by the monthly/ quarterly reports and 
comparison with the previous period
• 
Key findings and highlights on any change in SOP or modification during the year
• 
Year graphical representation and global analysis of the data from your cleanrooms and 
conclusion with a statement such as data indicate that the facility is operating in a state of 
control or if data indicate some issues and any related CAPAs
• 
Analysis of potential correlations between observed product contamination (e.g., bioburden) and 
the micro-organisms recovered within the cleanroom environment.
5.4	
Data Management 
Routine review and analysis of EM data for trends at an appropriate frequency is essential to aid in the 
interpretation of process stability and assess overall environmental control performance. Management 
must be kept abreast of trends and the subsequent state of operations within facilities with review of 
quarterly and yearly monitoring reports.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


22
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Based on the large number of samples tested by a given facility, a computer-based data-tracking system 
is essential. Before implementation, all database applications used should be validated or qualified for 
specific software applications.
5.4.1	 Data Integrity
The PDA Elements of a Code of Conduct for Data Integrity in the Pharmaceutical Industry (19) and 
PDA Technical Report No. 80: Data Integrity Management Systems for Pharmaceutical Laboratories (20) 
provide comprehensive information on this topic.
Collecting, analyzing, reporting and retention of EM data should be done under conditions that are 
designed to guarantee reliability and integrity of the data. The data are required to be attributable, leg-
ible, contemporaneous, original, and accurate (ALCOA):
Attributable: Information is captured that identifies where the data came from
Legible: Data are readable and understandable by humans
Contemporaneous: Data are recorded at the time they are generated or observed
Original: Data are recorded for the first time
Accurate: Data are correct
Important elements to consider with respect to environmental monitoring are:
• 
Integrity of the sampling site data by including a formal mechanism to enable full reconciliation 
of sample collection, incubation, and evaluation
• 
EM data must be documented on controlled worksheets for paper records or entered into a 
validated computer system with appropriate security, audit trails, validation, and oversight
• 
Employees must adhere to the established site documentation requirement and will not record 
raw data on unofficial forms, writing pads, or other uncontrolled media 
• 
Employees will not discard or destroy raw data or original records, other than at the end of the 
prescribed retention period
The deployment of a second-person verification should be considered to confirm the enumeration of 
microbial recovery. The main focus, however, should be to have in place a robust plate-reading process, 
reducing the risk for variability to the minimum, for instance, by applying appropriate lighting and/
or magnification and a robust training of the technicians performing the readout. The utilization of 
QRM principles can aid in the determination of whether or not a secondary verification is required 
(e.g., Grade A EM). Automated systems for EM test readouts and data storage can eliminate bias and 
the need to perform a second verification.
Routine data are aligned into a source in a consistent record format. At a minimum, the record format 
should include the following: 
• 
Identification of the operator and analyst
• 
Monitoring date and time
• 
Equipment used
• 
Specific sampling locations
• 
Sampling methods including media used
• 
Incubation conditions
• 
Colony-forming units (CFU) or total airborne particulate count results
• 
Identifications performed
• 
Batch information (if applicable, e.g., for batch-related monitoring)
• 
Current alert levels or action limits
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


23
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Records must be signed and verified by the appropriate person, depending on the type of system used. 
Some alternative microbiological methods can use measurements other than CFUs, provided they 
have been properly validated before use, for example, relative light units, cells, etc. A manual data 
entry or image scanner system, with the advantages of speed and accuracy, can be used to populate 
tables. Regardless of the type of system used, data integrity must be verified prior to data collection 
and analysis.
5.4.2	 Data Trending Analysis 
Histograms or tables, characterized by a number of data points that fall within a common frequency, 
are valuable tools to conduct the trending expected by regulatory agencies. Different room classifica-
tions with defined requirements will produce different histograms. For example, the CFU spread ob-
tained across an ISO 8 data set will not be observed in a data set from an ISO 5 area. Therefore, each 
area, or area type, and its accompanying data set must be viewed as distinct. Data trends in counts, 
occurrences, and organism types can provide a holistic view of the cleanroom environment. They can 
also be used to evaluate if there is ingress from lower to higher grades. Cleanroom maps indicating 
sampling excursions are useful as well to show connectivity of various grades and potential ingress 
through equipment and personnel flows. While this does not require statistical tools, mathematical 
models could be applied. Examples of statistical methods and control charts can be found in PDA 
Technical Report 59: Utilization of Statistical Methods for Production Monitoring (21).
5.4.3	 Interpretation
Routine environmental microbial monitoring data should demonstrate that the classified area is op-
erating under an adequate microbial control for the needs of the operations conducted in that area. 
Individual recoveries in critical areas (i.e., Grade A) must be adequately investigated. Compliant EM 
results do not guarantee the sterility assurance of the process, however, as EM incorporates multiple 
limitations (e.g., recovery efficiency of the applied methods, selected sample locations etc.). EM can 
only confirm to some extent the robustness of the design and processes.
Data generated should be summarized and evaluated to determine whether the EM process is in a 
state of control and documented in periodic reports. A variety of methods are available to perform this 
analysis, for example, the use of frequency distribution and control charts or statistical analysis. 
Measurements for viable contamination, such as contamination excursion rates and/or recovery rates, 
can be used to determine the level of control in a given area. The excursion rate is related to the number 
of samples exceeding the defined alert levels and action limits, whereas the contamination recovery rate 
(expressed as a percentage) is related to the number of samples that are positive for microbial growth 
when compared to the total number of samples taken within the same classified area(s). Therefore, 
recovery rates differ from excursion rates. Given that microorganisms are not homogeneously distrib-
uted in the same environments, and the sensitivity and variability associated with microbial sampling 
methods, these rates can be useful approaches to trending results in controlled areas. The combined 
excursion rates are calculated by determining the number of samples with excursions outside of estab-
lished levels, dividing by the total number of samples collected, and converting to a percentage. Table 
3.0-2 shows the recommended acceptable action limits and recovery rates for various ISO classifica-
tions. For an ISO 5 environment, an excursion rate of not more than 1% is achievable due to stringent 
controls, and the expectation is that the results show no viable recoveries. 
In addition to individual excursions, CRRs may be used for trending and control of the overall mi-
crobial load in the classified environment, equipment surfaces, material, and personnel. Table 5.4.4-1 
summarizes CRRs recommended by USP <1116> for various classified areas. Companies can utilize 
the criteria from USP <1116> to develop their recovery rates for cleanroom environments depending 
on the activities and processes conducted in those areas. They should also establish a CRR for each 
monitoring attribute, such as surfaces, air, and garments, for each classified area. Any changes from 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


24
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
the established calculated contamination rates should be investigated and corrected. However, any 
contamination in Grade A/ISO 5 areas must be investigated, since there should not be any microbial 
recovery within those areas. The CRR provides an alternative measurement of the effectiveness of the 
overall contamination control strategy. 
Table 5.4.4-1	 Contamination Recovery Rates Suggested by USP Chapter <1116>
Room Classification
Suggested Initial Contamination Recovery Rates (%)
Active Air Sample
Settle Plate (9 cm) 
4-Hour Exposure
Contact Plate or Swab
Glove or Garment
Isolator/closed RABS or 
ISO 5 or better
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
ISO 5
<1
<1
<1
<1
ISO 6
<3
<3
<3
<3
ISO 7
<5
<5
<5
<5
ISO 8
<10
<10
<10
<10
Note: All operators are aseptically gowned in these environments. These recommendations do not apply 
to production areas for nonsterile products or other classified environments in which fully aseptic gowns 
are not donned. In those conditions other Recovery Rates might be used if appropriately justified.
Evaluating the recovery rate levels at a defined frequency is recommended (at least monthly as per USP 
<1116>). Trends may include a gradual increase or decrease in the overall counts observed over time, 
or a change in flora or counts on several plates of a particular area on a given day. Interpretation of the 
impact of a significant fluctuation in counts or a change in flora should be based on the experienced 
judgment of a qualified microbiologist. 
Some considerations for assessing the state of control for a given process include:
• 
Multiple excursions observed within a specified time period may be considered a pattern or 
cluster formation that, if above the alert level, signals a trend that requires investigation. As an Al-
ternative, such approaches as statistically derived frequency of excursion can be used and justified. 
• 
Fluctuations in environmental monitoring data values for a given process or a specific area re-
quire further attention as this may point to construction activities, facility conditions, change in 
process, flow of material, seasonal variations, disruptive events, or other factors.
Understanding the potential impact of the results generated during EM is critical to a successful EM 
program.
5.5	
Rapid Microbiological Methods in Environmental Monitoring
The majority of EM performed currently relies on conventional methods based on the recovery and 
growth of microorganisms using solid or liquid microbiological culture media. However, these meth-
ods are often limited by slow microbial growth rates, long incubation periods, unintended selectivity 
of culture media, and the inherent variability of microorganism recovery rates due to their non-specific 
response to culture methods. Rapid methods that provide faster time-to-result may offer an advantage 
for EM tests over current, conventional approaches. 
Rapid methods may afford the industry with several opportunities when applied to EM:
• 
Confirmation (in real-time or close to real-time) of microbial control during manufacturing 
activities, including manual aseptic manipulations, filling, and packaging 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


25
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
• 
Confirmation of microbial control in controlled areas prior to use (e.g., manufacturing suites, 
gowning rooms)
• 
Rapid assessment of controlled areas during facility qualification activities (e.g., EM PQ) 
• 
Evaluation of contamination remediation efforts and root cause analysis (e.g., using rapid 
methods to find a source of contamination and/or determine the effectiveness of cleaning and 
disinfection procedures)
Subsequently, the industry should look toward utilizing innovative approaches for the detection and 
quantification of microorganisms as part of a holistic EM program. From a QRM perspective, the 
benefits of implementing rapid microbiological testing strategies can help to design robust processes 
that prevent contamination, ensure that a state of microbial control is maintained, evaluate the impact 
of human interventions during aseptic filling, establish recovery time after power shortages, develop 
more effective strategies to correct a contamination problem, continually improve processes and prod-
ucts, and quickly and efficiently assess the potential impact of failing results on the patient. 
Additional, detailed guidance related to Sections 5.7.1–5.7.5 may be found in PDA Technical Report 
No. 33: Evaluation, Validation and Implementation of Alternative and Rapid Microbiological Methods (22).
5.5.1	 Rapid Microbiological Method Scientific Principles Applied to Environmental 
Monitoring
Rapid methods appropriate for EM are based on a wide variety of scientific principles. Some methods 
still require growth of microorganisms using conventional microbiological media; however, detection 
and enumeration can be faster if using novel detection techniques, such as:
• 
Digital imaging and autofluorescence of microcolonies
• 
Fluorescent staining and laser excitation of microcolonies
• 
Rapid detection of carbon dioxide (CO2)
• 
Detection of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) after a brief microbial enrichment period 
Other rapid methods do not require microbial growth prior to detection or enumeration and, as such, 
the time to result can be instantaneous or close to real-time. Rapid technologies that achieve these 
results include:
• 
Flow and solid-phase cytometry using viability stains and laser detection systems
• 
ATP bioluminescence, when enrichment is not required due to the concentration of microor-
ganisms in the sample
• 
Intrinsic fluorescence and optical spectroscopy detection of microorganisms in air or water
• 
RAMAN spectroscopy coupled with viability staining
• 
Nucleic acid amplification techniques, when enrichment is not required due to the concentra-
tion of microorganisms in the sample
The most appropriate technology and detection method to consider will depend on a variety of factors, 
including, but not limited to:
• 
Sample type
• 
Sample size required for analysis
• 
Sample compatibility with the rapid method workflow and instrumentation
• 
Desired time to result
• 
Level of sensitivity required
• 
Need to neutralize antimicrobial activity for methods requiring growth
• 
Ability of the rapid method to allow identification of any recoveries (destructive vs. non-destructive assay)
• 
Potential for false positives or false negatives due to cleaning or disinfectant residues
Automated and high-throughput methods using conventional media are also available that may afford 
faster results with better efficiency in terms of automation, and data management and data integrity. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


26
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
5.5.2	 Benefits of Using Rapid Microbiological Methods 
The implementation of rapid methods for EM may present the industry operational enhancements 
related to product quality, process knowledge, and regulatory acceptance, such as: 
• 
Potential for reduced in-process microbiology testing and finished product release cycle times
• 
Reduction in risks associated with forward processing 
• 
Elimination or reduction of off-line microbiology assays
• 
Increases in laboratory automation and reductions in manual testing, sample handling, and/or 
data management and data integrity
• 
Reduced overhead and/or headcount for sampling and/or testing
• 
Ability to make immediate quality decisions on the state of microbial control
• 
Faster response to contamination events and initiation of investigations
• 
Reduced repeat testing, lot rejection, reprocessing, and rework
• 
Reduction in room or facility downtime and investigations
• 
Faster confirmation of contamination remediation efforts 
5.5.3	 Validation of Rapid Microbiology Methods and Equipment
Rapid microbiology methods vary in complexity and in the associated equipment required. The vali-
dation of software and equipment follows the equipment validation model as found in USP <1058 
>; the validation of the methods is discussed in compendial chapters of U.S. and EU pharmacopeias, 
USP <1116> and Ph. Eur. 5.1.6. respectively. (9, 23, 24) PDA Technical Report No. 33 also provides 
industry-proven strategies that may be employed during validation. (22)
The most recent public draft of EU Annex 1 (Feb 2020) recommends that when a different or new 
microbiology technology is used that presents a result in a manner different from the CFU, the manu-
facturer should scientifically justify the limits applied and, where possible, correlate them to the CFU 
(see Table 3.0-2, footnote #2). This is true for Grade A areas in which “no growth” is expected from 
active air, passive air, and surface samples during the qualification of the area and routine monitoring. 
The use of a rapid method for EM may result in data that can be compared with existing alert levels and 
action limits, especially when the rapid method relies on the growth of microorganisms and the data 
signal is the CFU. If the data signal is not a CFU, however, the possibility exists that the resulting quan-
titative result will not align with existing alert levels and action limits, even though a correlation between 
the CFU and the new signal can be made. In this instance, the end-user may elect to generate sufficient 
data to modify the existing alert levels and action limits based on historical data associated with the new 
method and data signal. The new levels that are applied to the rapid method should be rationalized and 
meaningful, and a risk-based analysis or approach should be used to finalize the setpoints.
Alternatively, trending the EM values may be more appropriate than looking at individual counts, as 
this approach may be more suitable for determining when a microbiological problem is occurring. 
This may be especially apt when performing EM in well-controlled environments in which zero cell 
counts are expected (e.g., Grade A (ISO 5) areas). 
Results obtained using a rapid method may differ from traditional methods that have been used for routine 
EM. Traditional EM utilizes standard nutrient agar plates and depends on a number of factors (i.e., time, 
temperature, humidity, nutrients) in order to recover microorganisms. Many rapid methods do not require 
recovery and growth of the microorganisms to generate a quantitative result. Therefore, it may not be possible 
to draw a direct correlation between the number of CFU generated from an EM sample compared to the 
result generated by a rapid method during side-by-side equivalence testing. In this case, additional statistical 
analyses between the two data sets may be warranted. Furthermore, recovery may be numerically higher us-
ing a rapid method that does not rely on microbial growth, as organisms that would not be detected using a 
traditional, growth-based method could be detected using alternative methods. This is especially true when 
the organisms are viable, but not culturable (VBNC), physically stressed, damaged, or in a dormant state.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


27
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.6	
Identification of Isolates 
Identifying and strain-typing of microorganisms is not only important as part of the cleanroom quali-
fication or when related to EM excursions but should also form an integral part of routine surveillance 
monitoring programs. 
The identification program selected by the laboratory should be defined in writing, including the 
frequency of identification, standard procedures for the methods used, and consistency with regula-
tory expectations for identifications. Companies that rely on the services of contract laboratories for 
microbial identification should qualify them per the requirements of their own supplier qualification 
procedures and have a quality agreement in place.
The identification of microorganisms recovered within the different cleanroom environments forms an 
important element to assess its microbial state of control, allowing:
• 
Detection of any microbial changes and potential seasonal variations of the flora
• 
Definition of potential sources of the microbial isolates related to a detected contamination (e.g., as part 
of an investigation)
• 
Assessment of the level of contamination control
• 
Response upon recovery of undesirable organisms that might pose particular risks
The Grade A environment is expected to be completely free of recovery of viable organisms because 
any presence of an organism within this area is considered undesirable. Within its surrounding envi-
ronment (e.g., Grade B), an additional challenge might come from organisms that are spore forming 
(mold species, Bacillus species) and put additional stress on the Grade A/B barrier. In this context, 
water-borne Gram-negative microorganisms should be considered undesirable and of particular con-
cern since the use of nonsterile water sources is not authorized within aseptic cleanrooms. Therefore, 
presence of Gram-negative microorganisms may indicate water intrusion which would also increase 
the potential risk for mold proliferation.
In Grade C and D environments, levels of undesirable organisms should be controlled in order to limit 
any microbial stress on surrounding aseptic cleanrooms.
Table 5.6-1 illustrates an example of a scheme for the extent of identification that may be used for the 
recovered microbial isolates. The extent of identification and rationale should be documented and should 
be determined on a case-by-case basis, risk assessment, facility validation, and appropriate trend analysis.
Table 5.6-1		
Typical Scheme for Microbial Identification
Extent of Identification
Isolate and Origin
Identification to species  
(or genus where speciation is not possible)
All recoveries in Grades A & B 
Grades C & D, for alert level or action limit excursions
Periodically as part of the ongoing surveillance program
Strain typing or molecular fingerprinting
Significant product failure (e.g.)
• media fills
• sterility test
• significant adverse trends
For some types of processes and products, concern regarding specific organisms may determine the 
level of identification required.
Initially, many isolates may be identified to establish a database of the representative microorganisms 
found in the area. Periodic identifications should be performed on routine monitoring to check for any 
changes in the predominant microflora, even if no excursions have occurred in the Grades C and D ar-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


28
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
eas. A change in the microflora might signify a change in the environmental controls in the facility that 
should be investigated. Identification can be useful information as to the possible source of isolates. 
For example, Staphylococcus species are commonly found on skin, Pseudomonas species are usually as-
sociated with water sources, and Bacillus species and mold are generally connected to soil, dust, and air.
5.7	
Investigations and Corrective Actions
Investigations are needed in response to an action-limit excursion and to address an adverse trend in 
order to determine a cause-and-effect relationship or most probable cause (i.e., sources of contamina-
tion). For consistency in the response to excursions, investigative and corrective action steps should be 
specified in a written procedure (see Table 5.9-1). The procedure should define the level of investiga-
tion required if there are multiple or sequential excursions. The investigation should include a product 
impact assessment and evaluate the risk to other batches of the same or related products manufactured 
in the same time frame. Critical investigation should be closed prior to product release. 
Table 5.7-1	 	
Examples of Investigation Elements for Different Systems 
System
Investigation Elements
Compressed gas 
system
Repeat test immediately. Perform filter integrity testing.
Replace filter if excursion is confirmed on retest.
Evaluate impact on processed component and/or product.
Room air/ HVAC
Review level of personnel activity.
Review/perform airflow patterns and HEPA integrity tests.
Review aseptic technique of personnel and training records.
Review gowning procedures and requirements for area.
Review trends and any incidents of HVAC outages, if any occurred.
Inspect incoming air filters for leaks and pressure differential across filter.
Review room cleaning and disinfection and procedures. Review training records of individuals performing cleaning 
and disinfection.
Check area pressure differentials, particularly with respect to the last sanitization.
Evaluate mechanical equipment in the area as possible source of contamination.
Review prior and subsequent monitoring results. 
Review sterilization cycle records.
Facility surfaces
Perform investigation for possible sources of contamination.
Evaluate cleaning and disinfection practices; review preparation of disinfectants, cleaning records, and training 
records of individuals performing cleaning and disinfection.
Review possible unusual events during manufacturing operation.
Examine areas during operation.
Review closed-circuit video (if applicable).
Verify that environmental controls were not circumvented.
Review risk of direct or indirect product contact with impacted surfaces.
Review isolates for occurrence in other types of EM tests.
Evaluate condition of the room (e.g., peeling paint or cracks in ceiling, walls, and floor).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


29
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
System
Investigation Elements
High purity 
water system 
(WFI, clean steam, 
purified water)
Review upstream water treatment systems (e.g., carbon beds used to remove chlorine from municipal water 
systems).
Examine bioburden data for other samples or sites in system—port contamination vs. system contamination.
Examine endotoxin and water chemistry data for system.
Review efficacy of sanitization procedure and schedule.
Inspect system preventive maintenance records. Evaluate impact on product.
Verify integrity of sample collection and use procedures.
Inspect system for dead-legs, proper sloping, hose management, and sample-port design and location. Review 
data for generation and distribution system for potential trends. Determine whether system is functioning properly. 
Review data for flow rate, pressure, and vent filter integrity wherever used.
Personnel 
gowning 
(gowning and 
gloves)
Evaluate possible operator impact on product.
Review EM data and sterility test data.
Review preparation and expiry dates for disinfectants used on gloves.
Identify all morphologically unique isolates (human vs. environmental).
Interview operator for potential cause and retrain or requalify operator. Check the system for integrity of isolators 
and RABS gloves.
Evaluate training of operator. Review sanitization and disinfection records of area.
Review closed-circuit video (if available).
Review previous gowning data for the operator and other operators on the same day. 
The points listed in the table are not all-inclusive, as these recommendations are intended only to 
suggest investigative activities. Corrective actions based on process knowledge and understanding can 
be implemented when sampling and laboratory failures have been ruled out. Appropriate corrective 
actions arise holistically from evaluation of the investigation elements, leading to the root cause.
The reviewer may employ scientific judgment to postpone any corrective action until the result is con-
firmed and/or an investigation has been completed. It may also be appropriate to provide management 
with a routine summary of action-level excursions for review. All corrective actions listed include an 
evaluation of the action for effect on the product.
5.8	
Documentation
The types of records that should be maintained as part of a routine EM program include:
1.	 Date and time of sampling
2.	 Product identification
3.	 Identification of the individual performing test
4.	 Test method or procedure reference
5.	 Activity level at site during test 
6.	 Sampling equipment identification
7.	 Physical parameters like temperature, relative humidity, and differential pressurization
8.	 Sample site
9.	 Area classification
10.	 Schematics of areas showing sample site locations
11.	 Sample site criticality 
12.	 Sampling frequency
13.	 Test results with units (e.g., CFU/plate/hour)
14.	 Identification of the analyst recording results 
(Table 5.7-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


30
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
15.	 Date results read
16.	 Alert level and/or action limit
17.	 Temperature and duration of incubation
18.	 Traceability of the certification date, release date, lot number, and expiration date of media used 
19.	 Microbial Characterization of contaminants
20.	 Name of reviewer
21.	 Approval of data
22.	 Review of historical data
23.	 Calibration due date for sampling instrumentation and equipment
24.	 Methodology and analysis used to specify action and/or alert levels
25.	 System for documenting investigative and corrective action:
• 
Description of deficiency
• 
Possible causes of problem
• 
Identification of persons responsible for relevant corrective action
• 
Description of action steps and their schedule for implementation
• 
Evaluation of effectiveness of corrective and preventative action steps
6.0 
Environmental Monitoring by Manufacturing Application
The levels and types of monitoring conducted may vary based on the type of product being manufac-
tured, the attributes of the product, and the manufacturing areas and processes used.
6.1	
Terminal Sterilization
Environmental monitoring in support of terminal sterilization monitors microflora from all sources—
manufacturing environment, process gases, water used in product formulations, sterilizer feed and 
cooling water—that have the potential to contribute to product bioburden or endotoxin. This includes 
testing of air, surfaces, and water for pharmaceutical use. 
Microbial levels of incoming containers and closures may also be monitored periodically (e.g., if the 
product is not terminally sterilized using an overkill cycle). While control of the environment in which 
the products are prepared is important, the most critical aspect of the program is the bioburden of 
the product and components to be sterilized, including both the number and type of microorganisms 
found. 
6.2	
Aseptic Processing
Environmental monitoring in support of aseptic processing is specifically designed to determine the 
number and type of microorganisms associated with the direct assembly or preparation of product 
prior to sealing the filled containers. The number of sample sites and frequency of monitoring are 
considerably greater than those for established terminal sterilization programs. Air, water, personnel, 
compressed gases, machinery, and other surfaces within the filling room and associated support areas 
are routinely monitored. Microbial levels may be periodically checked on incoming containers and 
closures. Adequate environmental control is an integral part of the aseptic manufacturing process and 
is critical to sterility assurance. EM data must be reviewed prior to product batch release and investi-
gation of excursions closed. EM should also be conducted when operator interventions are required 
during aseptic processing. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


31
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.2.1	 Isolation Technology 
The EM program for isolators differs from conventional aseptic filling operations and is based on the 
risks associated with isolator technology especially the physical integrity of half-suits (if applicable) and 
gloves. Monitoring of air, surfaces, and personnel outside of the isolator environment is not required 
after each filling operation; however, monitoring of isolator gloves and half-suits is required at the end 
of each filling operation or campaign (as applicable) to detect potential contamination. Product con-
tact surfaces that are sterilized or changed out between batches in a campaign should be monitored at 
the end of the batch specific activities, prior to sterilization / change out. 
6.3	
Air 
Effectively designed air-handling units and use of high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters or ul-
tralow particulate air filters bring air of appropriate quality to cleanrooms. Although the use of HEPA 
filters and air exchange rates to remove particles from the incoming air is a very effective way to reduce 
the particle load in an environment, especially under at-rest conditions, abnormal activity levels of 
equipment and people in a room require an increase in the air exchange rate for the area in order to 
remove the contaminants quickly. People are considered a major contributor of particulates, especially 
microorganisms, to the environment in aseptic areas. Air monitoring determines if there are viable 
and/or total airborne particulates in locations that would allow them to settle on product-contact 
surfaces and thereby find their way into process intermediates or final product. The analysis of trends 
and frequencies of viable and total airborne particulates is also vital to the understanding of the envi-
ronmental impact of personnel behavior and process activities. Air-sampling methods and frequencies 
of monitoring will depend on manufacturing process needs and should be risk-based. 
6.3.1	 Total Airborne Particulate Monitoring 
Monitoring of total airborne particulates is a necessary component of an EM program. It demonstrates con-
trol of potential contaminants in the environment to which the product is exposed during the manufacturing 
process. Cleanroom and other controlled areas are classified based on the level of total airborne particulates 
alone or air cleanliness. Classified areas must consistently meet these particulate levels (see Section 3.0). 
ISO Standard 14644-1 describes the classification of air cleanliness for cleanrooms and clean zones 
based on specified concentrations of airborne particulates per volume of air sampled. It prescribes 
methods for verifying air cleanliness in specified particulate size ranges. The sample volume for routine 
monitoring does not need to be the same as that used for formal classification of cleanrooms (8).
For products marketed in the United States, the FDA requires that total airborne particulates of 0.5 µm 
or larger be measured as part of cleanroom classification and routine monitoring. (14) At the time of 
this Technical Report revision, requirements outside of the United States (e.g., EU and PIC/S Annex 1) 
also include measurements for particles of 5 µm or larger for both classification and monitoring purposes 
(10,11). 
For aseptic processes, some regulatory guidance documents require monitoring in each production shift. 
Some regulators recommend remote counting systems and continuous monitoring. For remote systems, 
the distance from the sample collection port to the detection or quantification technology should be con-
sidered for the potential of particle loss. Design of the monitoring system should comply with the system 
manufacturer’s recommendations and align with ISO 14644 in that the length of tubing should typically 
not exceed one meter and the radius should be greater than 15 cm. Continuous monitoring of particles is 
required for aseptic processing rooms of Grade A (ISO 5) classification during operation. Some operations 
can generate high levels of product particles (e.g., powder) that, by their nature, do not pose a risk of prod-
uct contamination. In these cases, it is acceptable to monitor prior to and post-exposure to the risk since 
it would be impossible to distinguish extrinsic contamination to intrinsic particle generation. Addition-
ally, continuous monitoring of environments with intrinsic particle generation may damage the particle 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


32
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
measuring equipment. Initial qualification of the area under dynamic conditions without the actual filling 
function provides some baseline information on the non-product particle generation of the operation.
Generally, routine monitoring of total airborne particulates should be performed within a one-foot 
radius (approximately 0.3 m) of the identified critical location, if possible, and also at critical working 
or processing height. However, sampling should not be intrusive to the process.
6.3.2	 Viable Particulates
Viable particulate determinations are critical in monitoring air quality in controlled environments. 
Traditional growth-based techniques for monitoring viable particulates in air are limited by: 
• 
Type of equipment
• 
Growth media
• 
Incubation time
• 
Operator contamination of the capture media
6.3.2.1	 Sampling Sites
The principles mentioned for site selection in Section 5.2 apply here as well. 
6.3.2.2	 Methods
Regulatory agencies currently require active air sampling of environments on a routine basis to demonstrate 
control of viable airborne particulates. Some agencies require that passive sampling methods such as settling 
plates should be performed and justification provided if a company does not use passive sampling for select 
operations. Generally, active sampling methods are required with operating levels defined per unit volume 
of air. Both active and passive sampling methods may be used together to gain knowledge and understand-
ing of changes and trends in the cleanroom environment. Active sampling methods have the benefit of sam-
pling large homogeneous volumes of air in short amounts of time, but these methods may cause disruptions 
in the airflow of the environment being sampled. Therefore, these sampling methods should be included 
in air flow visualization studies in order to assess their potential impact on the aseptic environment. Alter-
natively, passive sampling methods can be used for prolonged periods of time (up to four hours) in close 
proximity to critical processes without affecting the airflow of the environment. An additional advantage of 
passive sampling is that it mimics the potential pathway of contamination to a critical process. 
6.3.2.3	 Equipment
Microbial air samplers are typically based on two principles —inertial or centrifugal impaction—to 
capture and deposit the organisms onto the agar or filter surface. No microbial air samplers are 100% 
efficient at detection or collection of all viable particles present. The physical efficiency of an air sam-
pler is referred to as the “cutoff size” or “d50 value” (i.e., the size of a particle in microns that the sampler 
has a 50% chance of recovering), which is supplied by the equipment manufacturer. Some portable 
viable samplers are capable of remotely sampling room air as well as compressed gases with the use of 
adapters. Other samplers are dedicated for specific sampling types (portable, remote, isolator, RABS, 
compressed gas, etc.). Features of each sampler should be discussed with the individual manufacturer.
Requirements for the validation of equipment are the responsibility of the manufacturer or a third party 
designated by the manufacturer. Physical and biological efficiency data presented by the manufacturer 
of the device should be sufficient to implement the sampling device (see also ISO 14698-1) (25). 
However, equipment must be qualified; typical user requirements are:
• 
Calibration of the instrument
• 
Verification of volume accuracy
Alternative microbiological methods may require more extensive validation. For a more detailed dis-
cussion, refer to PDA Technical Report No. 33 (Revised 2013): Evaluation, Validation and Implementa-
tion of Alternative and Rapid Microbiological Methods (22).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


33
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.4	
Surface Monitoring
In addition to conducting viable air and total airborne particulate monitoring to determine the micro-
bial contaminants and particulates surrounding the manufacturing operations, surface monitoring is 
conducted to determine the bioburden of surfaces, e.g., walls, floors and ceilings, in the manufacturing 
area as well as nonproduct- and product-contact surfaces of equipment. 
6.4.1	 Monitoring Considerations
The method of testing should be considered when developing the sampling plan. When periodic 
surface monitoring is performed, it should be done after the filling operation or a campaign has been 
completed so no extraneous contamination or residual growth media are introduced during the filling 
activities. The basic methods—contact plates, flexible films, swabs, and surface rinses—each provide 
surface monitoring data, (qualitative or quantitative) that can be used to assess environmental quality. 
The accuracy, reliability, and reproducibility of the sampling is affected by the collection and handling 
of samples. Proper personnel training is essential to ensure consistent and standardized sample col-
lection. The type of media used will determine the ability to detect the representative flora from the 
sample site. Neutralizers are typically added to the media to inactivate chemical disinfectant residues 
on surfaces. Additionally, validation should be performed on the test method to confirm that sanitiz-
ing agents do not influence the recovery of microorganisms. 
Recovery levels of surface-monitoring methods are typically low, due to the variability and/or com-
position of surfaces, variability in sampling procedure, analytical methods being employed (i.e., dilu-
tion), and the use of growth-based techniques. However, consistent sampling techniques will generate 
data that can be trended and analyzed over periods of time. These trends and data provide key insights 
into the efficacy of cleaning and disinfectant programs and potential impact of manufacturing activi-
ties in the environment being assessed.
6.4.1.1	 Contact Plates
Contact plates are easy to use and can provide quantitative results, i.e., CFU per surface area sample. 
The plates are filled with sufficient neutralizing media to provide a convex surface to support the 
growth of microorganisms. The contact plate is pressed against a flat surface by gently rolling the plate 
from front to back on the sample area. The sample plate is then placed in an incubator for the required 
period of time as determined during method validation. Colonies, if present, are counted at the end 
of the incubation period. 
Prior to use, the type of media and incubation conditions must be qualified. Such qualification may 
include laboratory studies using the compendial growth promotion organisms and/or representative 
organisms recovered from the facility environment. The use of irradiated plates in ISO 5 areas is re-
quired and is recommended in ISO 7 and ISO 8 areas. Contact plates should be allowed to acclimate 
to room temperature before use to minimize confluent organism growth due to condensation.
Contact plates are not suitable for sampling irregular surfaces; swabs are recommended for that situa-
tion. The media residue contact plates leave behind must be removed from the sample site after sam-
pling has been completed.
6.4.1.2	 Flexible Films
A flexible film containing media can be used in a manner similar to a contact plate or to provide a 
defined sampling area. The surface of the media film is pressed against a flat surface in a rolling mo-
tion to ensure full contact of the flexible film. The film is then placed in the incubator for the required 
period of time determined during method validation. Colonies, if present, are counted at the end of 
the incubation period. Like the contact plate, flexible films leave a media residue that must be removed 
from the sample site post-sampling.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


34
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
6.4.1.3	 Swabs
Swabs are employed for equipment and irregular surfaces that are not suitable for contact plates or 
flexible films. Swabbing may also be performed on flat surfaces provided a template of approximately 
2 in by 2 in (~25 cm²) is used to define the sample area (however, contact plates are recommended for 
flat surfaces).
Swabs are composed of materials such as Dacron® or nylon manufactured in a flocked or spun mate-
rial format. Prior to plating, each swab is vortexed in an appropriate diluent (e.g., sodium chloride, 
phosphate buffer, or peptone solutions containing neutralizers if needed). Swabs may provide qualita-
tive (e.g., immersing the swab directly into liquid growth medium) or quantitative (e.g., processing 
the swab to obtain individual colony data) results depending on how they are processed after sampling 
(26).
6.4.1.4	 Surface Rinse Method
The surface rinse method is best used for when a large surface area sample is required (e.g., kettles, 
equipment, trains, tanks). A sterile diluent should be used as the rinsing fluid that comes in contact 
with the interior surface and is then collected and tested. Membrane filtration is used to test the rinse 
fluid, because of the large sample volume, and the applied holding time of the rinsing samples prior 
to plating should be qualified.
6.5	
Personnel Considerations
Personnel are the primary source of contamination, which is why all cleanroom personnel (including 
maintenance workers and others who enter periodically when cleanrooms are in operation) must be 
carefully trained and qualified before entering an aseptic environment. 
The qualification training should include:
• 
Attention to personal hygiene
• 
Basic microbiology education or background
• 
Aseptic techniques
• 
Appropriate cleanroom behavior 
• 
Patient safety hazards posed by a contaminated product 
• 
Gowning certification 
• 
Participation in aseptic processing simulation (APS or media fill) activities, where applicable 
After initial training, personnel should participate regularly in an ongoing training and monitoring 
program. Routine microbiological monitoring of personnel garments and gloves should also be com-
pleted to assess the ongoing practice of aseptic technique. Supervisory personnel should routinely 
evaluate each operator’s conformance to written procedures during actual operations. Likewise, the 
quality unit should provide regular oversight to ensure that established, written procedures and aseptic 
techniques are being followed during manufacturing operations. 
6.5.1	 Training and Certification of Personnel for Aseptic Manufacturing Areas
All training and certification activities should be documented and kept as part of the employee file.
6.5.2	 Causes for Requalification or Retraining 
Companies should have a policy stating when requalification or retraining is necessary, for example:
• 
Retraining on general aseptic practices and techniques should be provided at least annually
• 
Recertification should be required after extended absences (e.g., for illness or family leave)
• 
Recertification and/or retraining should be considered as corrective action for trends in 
personnel monitoring excursions
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


35
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.6	
Environmental Monitoring During Product Sterility Testing
Sterility-testing facilities should be monitored to demonstrate the absence microbial contamination 
(4,10,14). Routine types of monitoring that are conducted are as follows:
• 
Viable air monitoring
• 
Surface monitoring (including isolator gloves if applicable)
• 
Personnel monitoring
Total airborne particulate monitoring is not mandatory; however, it may provide useful information 
regarding the HEPA filters in the ISO 5 testing environment or the integrity of isolators. Lab materials 
may generate particles that are not representative of the actual manufacturing conditions, and there is 
no risk to marketed product in the testing environment.
6.7	
Environmental Monitoring in Grade A Air Supply
The term “Grade A air supply” is introduced in Annex 1 and is specifically used to support the capping 
of fully stoppered vials until the cap has been crimped by providing additional protection without the 
requirement to meet all criteria related to a Grade A area (e.g., environmental continuous total par-
ticulate monitoring or environmental viable monitoring limits). 
Grade A air supply provides air which is passed through a filter qualified as capable of producing Grade 
A total particulate quality air, but where there is no requirement to perform continuous total particu-
late monitoring or meet Grade A viable monitoring limits and the area itself is not classified. 
As Grade A Air Supply is not a clean room category (e.g., according to ISO 14644), no guidelines for 
viable and total particulate limits exists. In order to confirm Grade A total particulate quality air is 
supplied, testing at the point of supply of the filtered air should be performed as a minimum during 
qualification and requalification. 
At rest viable (air and surfaces) and total particulate monitoring may be performed based upon a risk 
assessment. Routine monitoring, limits, and positioning should reflect the requirements for this “clean 
process” and be aligned with the contamination control strategy and meet criteria applied for the back-
ground of the Grade A Air supply (usually Grade C, but minimum Grade D).
6.8	
Water 
As water is used as a raw material in the production, processing, and formulation of products, this 
document only addresses the process monitoring of the water for microbial attributes. Most countries 
have compendial requirements for evaluation of water quality The recently published EMA Guideline 
for the Quality of Water for Pharmaceutical Use should be consulted as to the type of pharmaceutical-
grade water used manufacturing (27–30).
The type of water selected for manufacturing is based on the type of product and process being used. 
The water quality should be evaluated for microbial, bacterial endotoxin, and chemical attributes in ac-
cordance with the type of water and applicable compendial or regulatory requirements. Water quality 
is critical for the manufacturing of parenteral drugs and selected devices because it is used in product 
formulation, product-contact component and equipment washing, and final rinsing of equipment and 
devices. When purified water is used to manufacture other types of products or intermediates (e.g., 
solid dosage forms, API, small molecules), the control of microbial quality is critical to minimize the 
buildup and spread of microbial contaminants in the facility as well as on manufacturing equipment. 
The quality of the laboratory water should meet the needs of analytical methods and technologies, 
which may require compendial-quality laboratory water. Table 6.8-1 lists the pharmacopeial water 
GMP specifications used for manufacturing water and distribution system for pharmaceutical use.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


36
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Table 6.8-1		
Examples of measurements critical to water for Injection manufacturing and distribution process
Critical Parameters Measurement 
Quality Attributes
US Pharmacopeia (USP) 
2021
European 
Pharmacopeia (EP) 9:8 
2019, and 10,
Japanese 
Pharmacopeia (JP) 17, 
2016
Chinese Pharmacopeia (ChP) 
2015
Source water 
Drinking water source, 
Purified water 
Suitable for Human 
Consumption
JP Drinking water 
specification or purified 
water 
Purified water
Purification Process
Distillation or equivalent/superior process
 Distillation
pH
N/A
5.0-7.0
Conductivity at 25°C
1.3 µS/cm In-line Stage 1 (Stage 2-3 offline)1,2
WFI Microbial Limit Specification 
NMT 10 CFU/100 mL
Maximum TOC 
500 ppb or 0.5 mg/L3
Bacterial Endotoxin Limit
< 0.25 (EU/mL)
Nitrates Limit (ppm)
NA
0.2
NA
0.06
Nitrites Limit (ppm)
N/A
0.02
Ammonia Limit (ppm)
N/A
0.2
Heavy metals Limit (ppm)
N/A
0.1
1	 In-line/stage 1 conductivity specification at 25°C with other values at other temperatures. For usual WFI, the USP additionally has off-line stage 2 and 3 specifications which may alternatively be met. 
2	 Performed as an atmosphere and temperature equilibrium test. Alternatively, for JP Chapter 21, the test may be performed in-line with specified limit at 25°C and other values at other temperatures. There is no separate Stage 
3-like option in JP.
3	 There is no specification for in-line TOC test USP 2021 Issue 1, JP recommends Recommended levels of TOC ≤ 300ppb (in-line) ≤4 00ppb (off-line)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


37
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.8.1	 Sample Site Selection and Frequency of Monitoring 
The sampling and frequency of monitoring for water systems should be sufficient to ensure that the 
water quality meets its intended use specifications and appropriate regulatory requirements.
The frequency of monitoring and sampling site selection depends on the type of water and manu-
facturing process, system configuration, and facility design. The frequency of sampling should be de-
signed to facilitate detection and analysis of trends in chemical attributes, microbial flora, and bacterial 
endotoxin.
High-purity water systems should be validated to demonstrate that design requirements are consistent-
ly met and maintain a state of control. The site selection and frequency determination should be justi-
fied by thorough review of the water system validation performed and, using risk-based approaches, 
by type of product and manufacturing processes in concert with pharmacopeia and regulatory require-
ments. See Section 10.0 (Appendix 2) for suggested sites and sampling frequencies.
Once a water system is validated to be in a state of control, appropriate samples should be taken from 
the water source or generation system, holding and storage tanks, and distribution system to assess the 
microbiological quality for its intended use. Initial testing of water systems typically includes sampling 
after each process step. The testing of high-purity water systems should include the sampling of all 
point-of-use sites.
6.8.2	 Sample Collection and Testing
Water samples should be collected in a manner that is consistent with manufacturing practices. For 
example, if manufacturing flushes use points prior to use, samples should be collected with the same 
flush cycle. On the other hand, if manufacturing does not flush use points, there should be no flush 
prior to sample collection. All sample sites should be in a good state of repair and fully functional to 
support the monitoring program (including consideration for the use, maintenance, and proper drain-
age of flexible hoses). Distribution-system sample locations aside from the point-of-use sites should 
be chosen carefully to demonstrate microbiological quality throughout the distribution system. Ad-
ditionally, it is recommended to not use IPA on gloves or sample port prior to TOC sampling to not 
generate false positives.
Microbiological examination of water should be initiated as soon as possible after collection of the 
sample. If immediate processing is not possible, samples should be refrigerated at 2–8 °C. The time 
elapsed between collection and examination should be justified in terms of microbial survival or sta-
bility, including considerations for storage and shipping to third-party testing facilities. Table 6.8.2-1 
provides and overview of current guidelines for typical pharmaceutical water and clean steam distribu-
tion systems monitoring, methods, requirements, frequencies, and levels.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


38
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Table 6.8.2-1	 Typical Pharmaceutical Water and Clean Steam Distribution System Guidelines
Clean Steam
Purified Water
USP Water 
for Injection
EP Water for 
Injection
JP Water for 
Injection
ChP Water for 
Injection
Site
Sample at 
the point of 
generation and 
the furthest point 
of use
Representative 
use points in 
the distribution 
system
All accessible use ports in the distribution system.
Methods
Chemistry and 
LAL
Chemistry, pour 
plate (1.0 mL) or 
membrane filter 
(100 mL)
Chemistry, LAL, and membrane 
filter (200 mL)
Chemistry, LAL, and 
membrane filtration 
(100mL)
Chemistry, LAL, 
and membrane 
filtration (not less 
than 100 mL)
Microbiological 
test and 
incubation 
requirements  
(10 CFU/100 mL 
limit)
Not 
recommended
Plate Count Agar (PCA/TGYA)1 for 
48 – 72 hours2 at 30 – 35 °C3
R2A agar, 
incubated at 30 – 
35 °C for not less 
than 5 days
Standard agar media, 
incubated at 
30 – 35 °C for  
48 – 72 hours, or R2A 
agar, incubated at 20 – 
25 °C or 30 – 35 °C for 
4 – 7 days
R2A agar, 
incubated at 30 – 
35 °C for not less 
than 5 days
1	 For optimum recovery, an alternative medium may be more appropriate (e.g., m-HPC, TSA/SCDA, R2A).
2	 For optimum recovery, alternative incubation times may be needed.
3	 For optimum recovery, alternative incubation temperatures may be needed.
6.9	
Compressed Gas Monitoring 
The use of compressed air and compressed gas in the aseptic ISO 5 environment may adversely affect 
the environmental conditions if appropriate precautions, routine testing, and critical assurances are 
not developed into a system. This section offers some points that should be considered.
Using a 0.2 μm filter on the compressed gas line prior to entry into the cleanroom is common practice. 
Integrity testing of the filter and sanitization of the line post-filtration may reduce the need for sam-
pling. The sampling equipment must be compatible for use with compressed gases. A pre-filter may 
be installed in the system to reduce the bioburden to the point-of-use filter that will extend its life and 
reduce the possibility of higher contamination reaching the area.
The particulate or bioburden level of any gas or air expelled into the environment should be equal to 
or better than the classification level of the room (10). 
7.0 
Environmental Monitoring Prerequisites
This section briefly describes the scope of prerequisites for EM, which includes the following:
1.	 Good facility and equipment design
2.	 Media vendor audit and qualification 
3.	 Selection of microbiological culture media 
for EM testing
4.	 Culture media release
5.	 Selection of microorganisms for growth 
promotion
6.	 Microbiological culture maintenance
7.	 Culture media shelf-life confirmation 
8.	 Sample holding studies and transport 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


39
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
9.	 EM sample incubation strategy and 
validation
10.	 PQ of all critical room parameters (e.g., 
temperature, air velocity, differential 
pressure, humidity)
11.	 Disinfection of the area and baseline 
sampling
12.	 EM monitoring equipment qualification
13.	 Analyst training and qualification 
14.	 IQ/OQ of HVAC/Building automation 
system 
15.	 Certification of HEPA filters
16.	 Airflow pattern measurements (at-rest and 
in-operation)
Note: Items 14-16 are fundamental prequalification activities that do not require further elaboration, 
so not discussed further in this section.
7.1	
Facility Design
As stated in regulations, separate or defined areas of operation in an aseptic processing facility should 
be appropriately controlled to attain different degrees of air quality depending on the nature of the 
operation. Design of a given area involves satisfying microbiological and particle criteria as defined 
by the equipment, components, and products exposed, as well as the operational activities conducted 
in the area. Facility design is a crucial component of a good environmental control. Documents like 
ISPE’s Baseline Guide, Vol. 3: Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities describe the design, construction, 
commissioning, and qualification of sterile manufacturing facilities (31,32). Similar baseline guides 
are available for other types of product manufacturing.
The two-part ISO 14698 series (superseded by BS EN 17141:2020) provides extensive guidance on 
contamination control, and ISO 14644-1 provides methods to assess the control of air, surfaces, and 
liquid contamination (8,25,33).
7.2	
Selection of Microbiological Culture Media for EM Testing
Microbiological growth medium, such as soybean-casein digest medium (SCDM) or trypticase soy agar 
(TSA) is suitable as it supports growth of a wide range of bacteria, yeast, and molds. This medium can 
be supplemented with neutralizing agents to overcome or to minimize the effects of sanitizing agents 
or antibiotics, especially for surface-monitoring purposes. Use of anaerobic growth media (e.g., TSA 
under anaerobic conditions) should be considered only in special circumstances. A general mycological, 
such as Sabouraud Dextrose or a modified Sabouraud Dextrose agar formulation, can be used as neces-
sary when fungal contamination of the facility is suspected, although SCDM will adequately support 
growth of both yeast and mold (34). The media selected should be demonstrated to promote growth of 
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, yeast, and mold. Anaerobic agar media can be used for the 
recovery of microaerophilic and anaerobic organisms as needed based upon risk assessments, prior re-
covery of anaerobes, or sterility and/or APS failure as a result of anaerobes. Tryptic soy broth is typically 
used as the growth medium for swabs performed in Grade A environments (i.e., qualitative results). 
Alternatively, organisms can be recovered from swabs on suitable solid media (i.e., quantitative results). 
Culture media storage conditions and expiration dating should follow vendor recommendations. Each 
media lot should undergo release testing according to relevant pharmacopeial requirements including 
such quality control testing as appearance, growth promotion, and sterility. 
Performing initial media qualification
• 
Validate the media to demonstrate that the fertility is not affected by desiccation at the end of 
the maximum allowed exposure period
• 
Where media require neutralizers, insure they are suitable for the applied disinfectants/agent.
• 
Ensure its suitability for use over the supplier’s shelf life
• 
Perform growth promotion testing of media using low levels of microorganisms isolated from 
the manufacturing environment and obtained from recognized or national culture collections. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


40
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
• 
Document the use of microorganisms isolated from the manufacturing environment in an 
approved rationale. 
Performing routine media testing
• 
Justify and document the quality control strategy for media used for environmental monitoring, 
including the need to perform sterility checks and negative controls.
• 
Perform growth promotion testing on each delivery of a given batch of media. Consider reduced 
testing based on risk assessment, including appropriate supplier control confidence and supplier 
quality agreement.
• 
Perform growth promotion testing of medium using micro-organisms as per requirement above
7.3	
Selection of Microorganisms for Growth Promotion
Selection of microorganisms for growth promotion should be established according to relevant phar-
macopeial guidance, and with consideration of USP <61>, based on the media to be evaluated (35). 
Microorganisms selected should include those required by the appropriate compendial chapter and 
representative environmental isolates. Selection of the environmental isolates should be based on mi-
crobial profiling assessment using the data from the framework of routine trending reports. For a new 
facility, organisms initially recovered from cleanroom qualification activities can be used. A microbio-
logical culture maintenance program should be established that includes a procedure for testing and 
release with appropriate documentation of used passages (see USP <1117>) (36).
7.4	
Sample Holding Studies and Transport
EM samples are sensitive to handling and storage conditions, which are deemed critical parameters. 
These conditions are affected by time of sampling and temperature of storage. Sample hold studies 
should be performed to validate the sample handling from end of sampling through initial incuba-
tion. Care should be used if transferring EM media using sanitizing airlocks (e.g., through sanitizing 
airlocks equipped with UV lights).
7.5	
Environmental Monitoring Sample Incubation Strategy and Validation
Guidance documents and practices within the industry differ regarding incubation conditions. Informa-
tion is available regarding selection of a suitable microbiological growth medium, but information about 
appropriate incubation times and optimum temperature conditions is limited or sometimes conflicting.
Typically, the total aerobic bacterial count can be obtained by incubating at 30–35 °C for 48–72 
hours. Total combined yeast and mold count can generally be obtained by incubating at 20–25 °C 
for 5–7 days. Longer incubation times may be considered when contaminants are known to be slow 
growing. Industry surveys have shown a majority of companies using a two-temperature incubation 
with the lower temperature first.
Multiple incubation schemes can be employed if scientifically justified and validated to provide an ap-
propriate level of sensitivity. These are typically laboratory-based in-vitro studies using cultured micro-
organisms, a combination of reference cultures such as ATCC strains and in-house isolates recovered 
from the production environment. Studies, such as those published by Gordon, et.al., demonstrate 
that there may be a difference between in vitro and in situ testing (37).
7.6	
Environmental Monitoring Equipment Qualification 
Assessment may be required to determine gaps in equipment qualification. The following items should 
be considered as prerequisite:
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


41
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
• 
Equipment and instrument listing
• 
Documentation requirements 
• 
Maintenance and calibration (e.g., air volume accuracy requirements)
• 
Tube length requirement for total airborne particulate monitoring equipment
• 
Data collection, transmission and storage, alarm conditions
• 
Installation and Operational qualification of EM equipment
7.7	
Microbiology Analyst or Operator Training and Qualification 
Appropriate training curricula and qualification requirements should be established for EM analysts 
or operators. That entails relevant, cohesive standard operating procedures, including gowning and 
gowning qualification for aseptic areas, and a good understanding of the procedures, their importance 
in aseptic manufacturing operations, and the impact or risk to quality for not adhering to these 
procedures.
8.0 
References
1.	
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report 
No. 69: Bioburden and Biofilm Management 
in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Operations; 
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2015.
2.	
U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General 
Chapter <1072> Disinfectants and 
Antiseptics. In USP 43–NF 38, USP: 
Rockville, Md., 2004; p 7608.
3.	
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 30 (Revised 2012): Parametric 
Release of Pharmaceutical and Medical 
Device Products Terminally Sterilized by 
Moist Heat; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2012.
4.	
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report 
No. 62: Recommended Practices for Manual 
Aseptic Processes; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2013.
5.	
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 44: Quality Risk Management 
for Aseptic Processes; Bethesda, Md., 2008.
6.	
International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q9: Quality Risk 
Management; ICH: Geneva, 2005.
7.	
International Organization for 
Standardization. ISO 14937:2009 
Sterilization of Health Care Products — 
General Requirements for characterization 
of a Sterilizing Agent and the Development, 
Validation and Routine Control of a 
Sterilization Process for Medical Devices; 
ISO: Geneva, 2009.
8.	
International Organization for 
Standardization. ISO 14644-1:2015 
Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled 
Environments — Part 1: Classification of air 
cleanliness by particle concentration; ISO: 
Geneva, 2015.
9.	
U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General 
Chapter <1116> Microbiological Control 
and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing 
Environments. In USP 42–NF 37, USP: 
Rockville, Md., 2019; Vol. USP 42–NF 
37, p 7701.
10.	 European Commission. Annex 1: 
Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products 
(corrected), EudraLex – Volume 4 – EU 
Guidelines to Good Manufacturing Practice, 
Medicinal Products for Human and 
Veterinary Use European Commission: 
Brussels, 2008(rev).
11.	 Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/
Cooperation Scheme (PIC/S). Annex 1: 
Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


42
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Guide to GMP for Medicinal Products; 
PIC/S: Geneva, 2018.
12.	 World Health Organization. Annex 4: 
WHO Good Manufacturing Practices for 
Sterile Pharmaceutical Products, WHO 
Technical Report Series 957; WHO: 
Geneva, 2010.
13.	 Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of 
Japan. Microbiological Examination of Non-
sterile Products–4.05: Microbial Examination 
of Non-sterile Products. In The Japanese 
Pharmacopoeia, 17th Edition (English version), 
MHLW: Tokyo, 2004; pp 2486-87.
14.	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug 
Products Produced by Aseptic Processing—
Current Good Manufacturing Practice; 
U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services: Rockville, Md., 2004.
15.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 70: Fundamentals of Cleaning 
and Disinfection Programs for Aseptic 
Manufacturing Facilities; PDA: Bethesda, 
Md., 2015.
16.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 54-4: Implementation of Quality 
Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and 
Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations, 
Annex 3: Case Studies in the Manufacturing 
of Biotechnological Bulk Drug Substances; 
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2014.
17.	 Sandle, T. Environmental monitoring risk 
assessment. Journal of GXP Compliance 
2006, 10 (2), 54-75.
18.	 Biophorum Operations Group (BPOG). 
Environmental Monitoring (EM): 
Harmonized Risk-Based Approach to 
Selecting Monitoring Points and Defining 
Monitoring Plans; BPOG: London, 2019.
19.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Elements of 
a Code of Conduct for Data Integrity in 
the Pharmaceutical Industry; PDA. PDA: 
Bethesda, Md., 2016. https://www.pda.
org/scientific-and-regulatory-affairs/
regulatory-resources/code-of-conduct/
elements-of-a-code-of-conduct-for-data-
integrity-in-the-pharmaceutical-industry 
(accessed Aug 15 2019).
20.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 80: Data Integrity Management 
System for Pharmaceutical Laboratories; 
PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2018.
21.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 59: Utilization of Statistical 
Methods for Production Monitoring; PDA: 
Bethesda, Md., 2012.
22.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 33 (Revised 2013): Evaluation, 
Validation and Implementation of 
Alternative and Rapid Microbiological 
Methods; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2013.
23.	 Council of Europe. Alternative Methods 
for Control of Microbiological Quality, 
Chapter 5.1.6. In European Pharmacopoeia 
10.0, 10th Edition, Council of Europe: 
Strasbourg, 2019; p 628.
24.	 U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General 
Chapter <1058> Analytical Instrument 
Qualification. USP 42-NF 38: Rockville, 
Md., 2017; p p. 7522.
25.	 International Organization for 
Standardization. ISO 14698-1:2003 
Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled 
Environments — Biocontamination Control 
— Part 1: General Principles and Methods; 
ISO: Geneva, 2003.
26.	 Dalmaso, G, et al. Qualification of 
High-Recovery, Flocked Swabs as 
Compared to Traditional Rayon Swabs 
for Microbiological Environmental 
Monitoring of Surfaces. PDA J Pharm Sci 
and Technol 2008, 62 (3), 191-99.
27.	 Council of Europe. Total Organic Carbon 
in Water for Pharmaceutical Use, Chapter 
2.2.44. In European Pharmacopoeia, 
Council of Europe: Strasbourg, France, 
2008; Vol. 6th Edition.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


43
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
28.	 Ministry of Health, L a W o J. General 
Information–G8 Water: Quality Control 
of Water for Pharmaceutical Use. In The 
Japanese Pharmacopoeia, 17th Edition (English 
Version), MHLW: Tokyo, 2016; p 2543.
29.	 U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General 
Chapter <643> Total Organic Carbon; 
USP: Rockville, Md., 2012; p 6795.
30.	 U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General 
Chapter <1231> Water for Pharmaceutical 
Purposes. In USP 42–NF 37, USP: 
Rockville, Md., 2016; p 8121.
31.	 Gaison, E. Controlling Microbiological 
Contamination: Standards, Techniques, 
and a Case Study. Med Dev Diag Ind 
1998, 10 (2), 34–39, 66.
32.	 International Society for Pharmaceutical 
Engineering. Baseline Guide, Volume 3: 
Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities, 
Third Edition; ISPE: Bethesda, Md., 2018.
33.	 International Organization for 
Standardization. ISO 14698-2:2003/
COR 1:2004 Cleanrooms and 
Associated Controlled Environments 
— Biocontamination Control — Part 
2: Evaluation and Interpretation of 
Biocontamination Data — Technical 
Corrigendum 1; ISO: Geneva, 2004.
34.	 Marshall, V, et al. Comparative Mold and 
Yeast Recovery Analysis (The Effect of 
Differing Incubation Temperature Ranges 
and Growth Media). PDA J Pharm Sci and 
Technol 1998, 52 (4), 165-69.
35.	 U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. 
General Chapter <61> Microbiological 
Examination of Nonsterile Products: 
Microbial Enumeration Tests. In USP 
43–NF 38, USP: Rockville, Md., 2013; p 
6457.
36.	 U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General 
Chapter <1117> Microbiological Best 
Laboratory Practices. In USP 39–NF 34, 
USP: Rockville, Md., 2016.
37.	 Gordon, O, et al. Comparison of Different 
Incubation Conditions for Microbiological 
Environmental Monitoring. PDA J Pharm 
Sci and Technol 2014, 68 (5), 394-406.
9.0 
Appendix 1: Qualification of Cleanrooms (Classified Areas) 
Used for Manufacturing and Filling of Sterile Products
9.1	
Purpose
This appendix provides a consistent methodology for qualification of cleanrooms (classified areas) as 
defined in this technical report and used for the manufacture, processing, packaging, holding, and 
testing of active pharmaceutical ingredients, bulk, intermediates, and finished dosage forms of sterile 
drug products, biologics, and medical devices for human use. 
European Union and World Health Organization (WHO) designations for cleanroom classifications 
are used throughout, as these are widely used and specific to their application as described in Section 
4.0. Applicable ISO classifications are added where appropriate. 
9.2	
Scope
Section 9.0 (Appendix 1) focuses on the activities necessary to provide a high degree of assurance 
that cleanrooms used meet the requirements necessary to ensure product quality. Provided that ap-
propriate environmental monitoring (EM) and/or alarm systems are in place, HVAC mechanical and 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


44
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
control systems have an indirect impact on product quality. These HVAC systems should be commis-
sioned to ensure that they are suitable for their intended purpose and have been installed according 
to applicable engineering standards and specifications. Formal qualification activities (i.e., following 
standards and practices dictated by good manufacturing practices (GMP)) should center on final 
HEPA filtration, including ductwork beyond the final filter, and on monitoring of area parameters 
to ensure that the cleanroom requirements are met. Applicable tests for these activities are described 
in Section 4.0.
Areas designated as controlled (non-classified) are sometimes employed as peripheral areas of sterile 
product manufacturing facilities. (This class of cleanroom may also be known by other names, e.g., 
clean non-classified (CNC) and pharmaceutically controlled area (PCCA).) These areas do not involve 
exposure of materials or components that will be sterile and are separated from critical zones by several 
cleanliness levels. Qualification of these areas may not be required but ensuring that their design crite-
ria have been met and they are fit for the purpose specified is recommended.
Isolators and unidirectional (laminar) airflow units that provide Grade A air to local areas within 
a larger cleanroom are included in the scope. Other locally controlled environments (e.g., freezers, 
refrigerators, stability chambers) that are self-contained and where the environment is provided by 
dedicated specialized equipment rather than by traditional HVAC systems are excluded. While steril-
ization tunnels or other devices that use unidirectional or HEPA-filtered air are not covered by Section 
9.0 (Appendix 1), the test methods described for the airflow, filter testing, and air classification may 
be directly applied.
9.3	
Procedure
At a minimum, the following inspections and tests should be considered and applied based on risk 
to product quality. In general, these are recommended for all cleanrooms described in this technical 
report.
9.3.1	 Installation Qualification (IQ)
Installation qualification (IQ) verifies that critical system components meet user requirements and 
have been properly identified, installed, and calibrated (instruments). Critical components are identi-
fied by component risk analysis as those that have a direct effect on product quality. IQ requirements 
may be confirmed through inspection or by referencing commissioning or factory acceptance test 
documentation, including:
Items to address during IQ include:
• 
Description, location, and use of the cleanrooms/classified areas to be qualified
• 
Verification of the type, range, and placement of sensors and alarms measuring, indicating, and/
or reporting environmental parameters having a direct effect on product quality (see Operational 
Qualification also)
• 
Verification of the location of final system filters where the environmental classification has 
airborne viable and/or total airborne particulate limitations (e.g., Grades A–D) 
• 
Verification of material and proper installation of ductwork downstream of the final HEPA filter
• 
Completion of a commissioning plan or document, including a test and balance report, 
approved by the system user and responsible engineering group
• 
Description, location, and use of the classified area including the defined boundaries and all 
relevant cleanrooms
• 
Verification of critical system components, including terminal air filters, instruments, and 
alarms identifying manufacturer, model number, size/range/efficiency (as appropriate), materials 
(product contact only, not typical for HVAC) and, where appropriate, material certification of 
components. (In cases where a room monitoring system (RMS) is employed that includes the 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


45
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
monitoring sensors, recording, and alarm functionality, those components may be documented 
in a separate protocol).
• 
Verification of instrument calibration certifications in compliance with site calibration 
procedures
• 
Software or firmware title/identification, version, and installation verification (may be in separate 
RMS protocol)
• 
Transfer of equipment, instrument, and information on maintenance, repair, and operating 
materials to the appropriate site maintenance records (e.g., computerized maintenance 
management system 
• 
Confirmation that maintenance procedures and/or manuals are in place
9.3.2	 Operational Qualification (OQ)
Operational qualification (OQ) verifies operational requirements that are critical to quality. These are 
limited to the environmental parameters to which product may be exposed (e.g., temperature) and the 
operation of final filters required to control airborne contamination. Operational characteristics hav-
ing indirect impact on the environment, including air handler operation (e.g., fan speed, pre-filters, 
coil performance) and control elements (e.g., variable air volume controls) should be included in com-
missioning.
Items to address during OQ include:
• 
Final air filter pressure differential
• 
Filter leak test (for H13 and H14 filters or better only)
• 
Air flow velocity (if unidirectional flow is required)
• 
Air flow visualization (smoke) study
• 
Room pressure differential 
• 
Temperature
• 
Relative humidity
• 
Alarm and interlock checks 
• 
Room air classification (total airborne particulate count)
• 
Air exchange rate
• 
Recovery time (correlated to air exchange rate)
OQ is to be performed at rest, with HVAC equipment installed, commissioned, and balanced. Other 
equipment in the room must be installed and functioning without product or material to the extent that 
is safe. Operating staff, except for require test personnel, are not present in the room. The operation of 
equipment verifies the ability of the system to control airborne particulate generated by the equipment. 
Instruments used to gather OQ data may be installed permanently in the system or may be test instru-
ments. They must be calibrated according to the site calibration standard operating procedures and 
must be identified in the OQ documents. OQ requirements may be confirmed by referencing the 
commissioning or factory acceptance test (FAT) documentation if the site practices for GMP docu-
mentation have been adhered to during those stages and the appropriate test methodology has been 
employed.
Prior to starting OQ, all relevant procedures, such as gowning and equipment operation, should be 
drafted and subject to interim approval for purposes applicable to OQ testing. (These may be modified 
prior to final approval for PQ.)
Unless otherwise noted, all testing in support of OQ should comply with the most current version of 
ISO 14644-1 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments — Part 1: Classification of air cleanliness 
by particle concentration. ISO 14644-3 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments — Part 3: Test 
Methods outlines the methodology to be followed for each test and provides acceptance criteria (1,2).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


46
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
The test matrix in Table 9.3.2-1 outlines requirements for qualification in various cleanliness zones. 
The tests are not required to be performed in any prescribed order. Performing certain tests in parallel 
(e.g., room pressure differential, temperature, and humidity) is common practice.
Note: All tables in appendices indicate values for start-up sites, not for facilities where historical data 
is available.
Table 9.3.2-1	 OQ Testing Requirements (At Rest)
Test
Grade A3  
(ISO 5 unidirectional)
Grade B  
(ISO 5)
Grade C  
(ISO 7)
Grade D  
(ISO 8)
Filter Pressure differential 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Filter Leak Test1
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Air Flow Distribution
N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Air Flow Velocity
Yes
N/A
N/A
N/A
Air Flow Visualization (smoke) 
Study
Yes
Yes
Optional2
Optional2
Differential room pressure
N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Temperature
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Relative Humidity
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Alarms and interlocks
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Room Air Classification (Total 
airborne Particulate Count)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Recovery time 
N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes
1	 Required for H13/H14 or better filters only 
2	 Air flow visualization studies in non-unidirectional areas are optional based on risk analysis. See Section 9.6 below
3	 OQ testing for Grade A air supplied for crimping of aseptically filled vials or for local assurance of particulate control (i.e., local 
unidirectional air flow devices) is the same as for Grade A, except for Unidirectional
The tests listed in Table 9.3.2-1 are all generally accepted for initial qualification. OQ following a 
change is determined by a risk analysis depending on the type of change, including area and equip-
ment configuration and change of conditions. For example, a change of HEPA filter does not im-
pact temperature, humidity, or room differential pressure. Therefore, the recommended tests for filter 
changes are limited to air velocity (Grade A), air flow distribution (Grade B, C, D), filter differential 
pressure (all Grades), filter leak test (of H13/H14 or better filters), and room classification. 
With the exception of the filter change described here, changes to equipment in critical areas (e.g., 
modifications or changes of the geometrical shape on an aseptic filling line in Grade A) require air flow 
visualization (smoke) studies.
9.3.3	 Routine Recertification
Requalification or recertification of cleanrooms may be driven by change (see Section 4.0). Where 
changes have not driven recertification of an area, providing evidence that the acceptance criteria 
indicated in the initial qualification are still met is recommended. This may be performed according 
to the schedule in Table 9.3.3-1 and its notes. It is important to regularly review results and trends of 
parameters that are continuously monitored or regularly recorded (e.g., temperature, humidity, room 
pressure differential, others based on risk analysis) and that frequencies are justified.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


47
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 9.3.3-1	 Routine Area Recertification1
Test2
Grade A
Grade B
Grade C
Grade D
Filter Leak Test3 
6 mos.
6 mos.
Annual
Annual
Air Flow Distribution
N/A
Annual
Annual
Annual
Air Flow Velocity
6 mos.
N/A
N/A
N/A
Room classification
6 mos.4 
Annual
Annual
Annual
Recovery5
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1	 All re-certification testing is performed “at rest”
2	 For all areas, the frequency of testing maybe extended to twice the initial frequency after three successive successful tests, i.e., Grade B 
may be done annually, and other Grades may be tested every second year. Installation of new filters requires the initial frequency for a 
minimum of three successive successful tests. 
3	 Filter leak test is required only for H13/H14 filters or better. 
4	 For Grade A where continuous fixed particulate monitoring is in place re-certification of area classification is not required provided that 
the particulate monitoring satisfies the requirements of ISO 14644-1. 
5	 Recovery testing for routine re-certification is not required except in cases where the Air Velocity test has shown a significant reduction 
(>20%) in the number of air changes per hour (ACH). For changes in HVAC design, room layout or equipment configuration, Recovery 
testing must be considered within the risk analysis associated with the change.
During EM PQ and PQ of physical parameters, data is to be generated during in-operation conditions 
(i.e., with personnel present, equipment in place, routine cleaning and disinfection, and operations 
ongoing). 
References
1.	 International Organization for Standardization. ISO 14644-1:2015 Cleanrooms and Associated 
Controlled Environments — Part 1: Classification of air cleanliness by particle concentration; 
ISO: Geneva, 2015.
2.	 International Organization for Standardization. ISO 14644-3:2019 Cleanrooms and Associated 
Controlled Environments — Part 3: Test Methods; ISO: Geneva, 2019.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


48
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
10.0 
Appendix 2: Risk Assessment Examples
Table 10.0-1 shows a real-life example provided by Gapp Associates of a review of an existing EM program at a closed RABS filling operation (vial filling; Grade B 
background). Note that only 5 risk items - from a total of 19 - are listed in the table below. 
Table 10.0-1	
Example: Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) 
Risk Item 
Problem Statement / Requirement
Risk Description 
/ Potential 
Failure Mode 
and Impact
Causes of 
process/ product 
failure
Current Controls and Preventive Actions/ Comments 
SEV: assess the risk and impact on sterility and regulatory compliance, 
in case of a deviation/ deficiency to this statement/ requirement
OCC: assess the probability, that the related locations and areas are - in 
fact- microbiologically contaminated
DET: assess the probability, that the implemented EM sampling plan/ 
frequency/ number of samples/ methods would detect - in fact- a 
potential contamination
SEV
OCC
DET
RPN
Risk Class
Risk Accepted
Mitigation 
Measures/
CAPAs
1
“High-risk areas” in Grade A are 
monitored: samples are selected which 
are:
• in close proximity to open product 
and critical surfaces
• linked with an increased number of 
activities and interventions
• linked with an extended time of 
critical interventions 
• linked with material flow into 
Grade A. 
These areas must be properly 
monitored and sampled in the EM 
program. 
Potential 
contamination 
is not detected 
in high-risk 
areas, which 
results in product 
contamination in 
Grade A. 
Ingress of 
particles and 
microbiological 
contamination into 
the high-risk areas 
by many activities 
and interventions/ 
extended 
activities/ material 
flow.
The high-risk areas in the RABS are a) the filling and stoppering area b) the 
stopper bowl and c) the turntable, where depyrogenated, open vials are exposed 
for an extended time. 
The above areas are well addressed by the surface monitoring program, but not 
by an active air monitoring/ surface monitoring at the stopper bowl. A settle plate 
is exposed. This is a deficiency, since high-risk interventions and aseptic activities 
are performed in the vicinity of the stopper bowl. (Note: active air monitoring is 
done during the set-up and once in a shift).
SEV: 3 (high impact on product sterility, in case that indirect product contact 
surfaces = stopper bowl is contaminated) 
OCC: 2 (there are several interventions performed, therefore there is a moderate risk)
DET: 2 (no active air monitoring, linked with interventions, therefore reduced 
detectability and moderate risk; no surface monitoring of critical surfaces, which 
is a regulatory requirement)
3
2
2
12
MAJOR
N
Introduce 
an active air 
monitoring 
location 
and surface 
monitoring at the 
stopper bowl.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


49
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Risk Item 
Problem Statement / Requirement
Risk Description 
/ Potential 
Failure Mode 
and Impact
Causes of 
process/ product 
failure
Current Controls and Preventive Actions/ Comments 
SEV: assess the risk and impact on sterility and regulatory compliance, 
in case of a deviation/ deficiency to this statement/ requirement
OCC: assess the probability, that the related locations and areas are - in 
fact- microbiologically contaminated
DET: assess the probability, that the implemented EM sampling plan/ 
frequency/ number of samples/ methods would detect - in fact- a 
potential contamination
SEV
OCC
DET
RPN
Risk Class
Risk Accepted
Mitigation 
Measures/
CAPAs
4
Is the air sampling timing and 
frequency meeting the current industry 
practices?
• Sampling must be done “in operation”.
• Set- up activities must be included 
(will be sampled separately to filling 
operation)
• a minimum of 1 active air 
monitoring sample per shift
• continuous passive monitoring 
(positions may be alternated)
Sampling is not 
done in operation 
and misses impact 
of operators and 
manufacturing. 
Ingress of 
particles and 
microbiological 
contamination 
operations, or 
material entry, 
HVAC failures.
EM program meets requirement.
SEV: 3 (high impact on product sterility if the required sampling is not done 
properly) 
OCC: 1 (it is unlikely product or critical surfaces become contaminated)
DET: 1 (active air monitoring is done during set-up and linked with interventions)
3
1
1
3
MINOR
Y
No action 
required
8
Are the selected surface monitoring 
sampling locations: 
• close to the open product or to 
product contact surfaces (< 5 cm)
• sterile product contact surfaces  
(= critical surfaces)
GMP deficiency, 
and potential 
contamination 
may not be 
detected and may 
result in product 
contamination 
within Grade A. 
Ingress of 
particles and 
microbiological 
contamination 
into the high-risk 
areas by aseptic 
operations or 
material entry, 
HVAC failures. 
RABS stopper bowl is not monitored. 
Other locations are monitored, e.g. filling needles.
SEV: 3 (high impact on product sterility if indirect product contact surfaces = 
stopper bowl is contaminated) 
OCC: 2 (there are several interventions performed, therefore there is a moderate risk)
DET: 2 (no surface monitoring of critical surfaces, which is a regulatory 
requirement)
3
2
2
12
MAJOR
N
Include 
additional surface 
monitoring 
locations, e.g. 
stopper bowl
(Table 10.0-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


50
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Risk Item 
Problem Statement / Requirement
Risk Description 
/ Potential 
Failure Mode 
and Impact
Causes of 
process/ product 
failure
Current Controls and Preventive Actions/ Comments 
SEV: assess the risk and impact on sterility and regulatory compliance, 
in case of a deviation/ deficiency to this statement/ requirement
OCC: assess the probability, that the related locations and areas are - in 
fact- microbiologically contaminated
DET: assess the probability, that the implemented EM sampling plan/ 
frequency/ number of samples/ methods would detect - in fact- a 
potential contamination
SEV
OCC
DET
RPN
Risk Class
Risk Accepted
Mitigation 
Measures/
CAPAs
16
Is the glove monitoring done correctly 
to recover potential contamination on 
the fingertip (requires no overlap and a 
defined minimum contact time) 
EM samples 
of gloves are 
leading to false 
negative results 
and important 
information will 
be missed
Important/risky 
locations are 
missed due to a 
wrong location or 
timing, e.g. RABS 
gloves fingers 
close to open 
product. 
Previously, small Rodac plates have been used; based on recommendation, settle 
plates are now used.
Minimum contact time has been defined, no overlap of fingers.
SEV: 3 (high impact on product sterility if the glove sampling is not done 
properly; contamination may be missed) 
OCC: 1 (it is unlikely that the operator gloves are contaminated because good 
disinfection practices are followed)
DET: 1 (glove monitoring is done after the set-up and as exit monitoring) 
3
1
1
3
MINOR
Y
No action 
required
18
Growth promotion must be supported 
by batchwise growth promotion 
testing (GPT).
Settle plates should not be desiccated 
after incubation.
Transfer of settle / Rodacs plates into 
Grade A/B should be done by a one- or 
two-bag transfer method. Disinfectant 
spraying on the settle plates should not 
be done, as this may negatively impact 
the microbial recovery. 
EM samples 
lead to false 
negative results 
and important 
information will 
be missed.
Desiccated/ 
cracked plates, 
or disinfectant 
residues prevent 
recovery of in-
house strains. 
Supplier has been changed, fewer cracks in the medium now at the site. 
EM isolates included now in the GPT.
Introduction of plates into Grade A RABS will be changed as per training video, 
within one bag. 
SEV: 3 (high impact on product sterility or Grade A if the media plates do not 
support microbial growth; contamination may be missed) 
OCC: 1 (it is unlikely that surfaces within Grade A are contaminated)
DET: 1 (GPT is done batchwise) 
3
1
1
3
MINOR
Y
Add more details 
in EM SOPs
(Table 10.0-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


51
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Figure 10.0-1	 Example: BioPhorum Model for a Typical Filling Line
Depyrogentation Tunnel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Stoppering 
8 
station
9
10
Filling Station 
11
12
13
14
15
16
Risk levels:
Low Risk
Medium Risk
High Risk
6 Risk Factors
1.	 (C) Cleaning/Sanitization access
2.	 (P) Personnel presence and flow
3.	 (M) Material flow
4.	 (O) Proximity to open product or contact material
5.	 (CI) Interventions/ operations by personnel and their complexity
6.	 (FI) Frequency of interventions
Washer
Accumulation 
Table
Accumulation Table
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


52
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Table 10.0-2	
Filling Line Activities and Associated Risk Rankings for a Closed RABS or isolator filling line
Grid Number
Process Step Description (activities in this grid)
C – Access for Cleaning  
(if not automated)
P – Personnel Presence
M – Material Flow
O – Proximity to O Product or 
Exposure to Direct Product 
Contact Materials pen
CI – Complexity of 
Interventions
FI – Frequency of 
Interventions
Risk Score  
(x2 weight for Proximity)
Rank  
(Heat Map Coloring)
1,5, 9, 13
Turn table has open vials however no interventions are performed in this grid
1
1
2
8
1
1
16
2
Within 12 inches of open vials, alpha beta port for material transfer, no interventions with direct product
2
1
2
8
1
1
32
3,7
Behind dosing vessel within 12-24 inches of open product, no interventions or material transfer
1
1
1
4
1
1
4
4
Behind stopper station. Some material flow for EM plates. 
1
1
2
4
1
1
8
6
Within 12-24 inches of open vials, behind infeed conveyor, no material transfer or interventions
1
1
2
4
1
1
8
8, 12
Stoppering station and outfeed star wheel. Material flow for EM plates. Clearing stopper jams with poker 
less than 1 batch. 
1
1
2
8
2
1
32
10
Part of the needle docking station, needle holder, and stoppering station. Material flow for EM. Clearing 
stopper jams with sterilized tool occurs less than 1 per batch.
1
1
2
8
2
1
32
11
Conveyor belt with harder to clean areas. No personnel interventions. Intervention conducted thru glove 
ports. Material introduced via alpha/beta ports, < 12 inches from open product. Correction of vial jam or 
line stoppage. Interventions performed with sterile equipment more than 1 time during a batch.
4
1
2
8
2
4
512
14
In front of starwheel and conveyor. Material flow for EM plates. 
1
1
2
4
1
1
8
15
In front of needle holder and docking station. Material flow for EM plates. No interventions
1
1
1
4
1
1
4
16
In front of stoppering station. Within 12-24 inches of product. Material flow for EM plate.
1
1
2
4
1
1
8
	
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


53
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Table 10.0-3	
EM Table Template example
Results of air 
flow studies
Historical data 
(incl. data on total 
particulates)
Recent changes 
which may be 
relevant
Notes
Recommended Monitoring
ZONE DECISION
During Set-Up
During process 
(2 times during each batch  
-beginning and end)
End of Process 
(Surface)
Total particulates
Viables
Total particulates
Viables
Viables
10.1	 Example of an HACCP
Hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCP) is a formal qualitative risk assessment technique that is designed to identify critical steps in a process that require 
control and monitoring to ensure that hazards are not realized, with the goal of developing a comprehensive monitoring plan. For the purposes of this example, the 
types of hazards analyzed are biological (i.e., viable monitoring) and physical (i.e., total airborne particulates). 
Figure 10.1-1 outlines the seven principles of HACCP as well as how the principles can be applied to develop an EM program. Table 10.1-1 provides a practical 
example of an HACCP exercise applied to a Grade C cell culture room with an occupancy of twelve operators. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


54
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Figure 10.1-1	 HACCP Principles and Application
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


55
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Table 10.1-1	
Application of HACCP Methodology to Pharmaceuticals (from WHO Technical Report Series, No. 908, 2003, Annex 7)
Room Sector
Hazard Identification Controls Evaluation
Risk Analysis and risk Evaluation
Critical Control Points Determination
Risk Control
Potential source of 
microbial contamination
Hazard
Current  
Controls
Likelihood
Likelihood rationale
Severity
Severity rationale
Overall risk level
Risk Acceptable? 
(Yes/No)
Q1: Is sampling 
at this location 
required for 
cGMP?
Q2: Is sampling 
at this location 
critical to protect 
patient safety or 
product quality?
Q3: Will 
monitoring at 
this location 
provide data 
needed to 
inform a robust 
investigation?
Q4: Is this 
location a 
Critical Control 
Point?
Mitigations
1
Phone  
(touch point)
Computer 
workstation 
(touch point)
Bioreactor 
(×3)
Exceed the 
EM alert 
level/ action 
limit (viable)
Examples of 
controls to 
list include: 
personnel, 
waste, and 
material flow 
SOPs; 
training on 
cleanroom 
behavior; 
EMPQ results; 
etc. 
Occasional
One action level 
excursion reported 
in last two trended 
periods.
Critical
Impact to 
Grade B/C 
area.
High
No
No
Yes
N/A
Yes
CAPA 12245
1
Exceed the 
particulate 
alert level/ 
action limit 
(nonviable)
Remote
No alert or action 
level excursions 
during last two 
trended periods.
Critical
Impact to 
Grade B/C 
area.
Low
Yes
No
Yes
N/A
Yes
N/A
2
Exceed the 
EM alert 
level/ action 
limit (viable)
Unlikely
Two alert level 
excursions reported 
in the last two 
trended periods.
Critical
Impact to 
Grade B/C 
area.
Medium
Yes
No
Yes
N/A
Yes
N/A
2
Exceed the 
particulate 
alert level/ 
action limit 
(nonviable)
Remote
No alert or action 
level excursions 
during last two 
trended periods.
Critical
Impact to 
Grade B/C 
area.
Low
Yes
No
Yes
N/A
Yes
N/A
3
Exceed the 
EM alert 
level/ action 
limit (viable)
Unlikely
Two alert level 
excursions reported 
in the last two 
trended periods.
Critical
Impact to 
Grade B/C 
area.
Medium
No
No
Yes
N/A
Yes
N/A
3
Exceed the 
particulate 
alert level/ 
action limit 
(nonviable)
Unlikely
Two alert level 
excursions reported 
in the last two 
trended periods.
Critical
Impact to 
Grade B/C 
area.
Medium
No
No
Yes
N/A
Yes
N/A
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


56
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 13 (Revised 2022)
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
• Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an 
Authorized User 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
• Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other 
than an Authorized User 
• Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available 
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
• Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic 
Publication 
• Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA 
Electronic Publication 
• Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication 
or its content 
• Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or 
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose 
• Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any 
text or graphics 
• Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information 
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication 
• Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material 
To License or purchase Reprints
• Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a fee.  
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact: 
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, 
ext. 133. Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, 
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
• Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.  
To order reprints, please contact:  
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133. 
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150, 
Bethesda, MD 20814.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


Fundamentals of an Environmental Monitoring Program
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside 
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are 
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials. 
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the 
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a 
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s 
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Biotechnology Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality 
Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and deter-
mines whether to publish or not publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged 
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be 
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org. 
PDA Officers and Directors 
Officers 
Chair: Susan Schniepp, RCA
Chair-Elect: Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck 
Treasurer: Melissa Seymour, Biogen, Inc.
Secretary: Emma Ramnarine, Genentech/Roche
Immediate Past-Chair: Jette Christensen, Novo Nordisk A/S
President: Richard Johnson
Directors 
Barbara M. Allen, PhD, Eli Lilly and Company
Bettine Boltres, PhD, West Pharmaceutical Services
Tia Bush, Amgen, Inc.
Javier Camposano, Celltrion
Mirko Gabriele, PhD, Thermo Fisher Scientific
Ghada Haddad, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Andrew Hopkins, Abbvie
Stephan O. Krause, PhD, AstraZeneca Diagnostics
Amy McDaniel, BMS
Mary Oates, PhD, Emergent Biosolutions
Mathias Romacker
Osamu Shirokizawa, Life Scientia
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Josh Eaton, Director, Scientific Affairs
Glenn Wright, VP, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing and Press Relations
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer
Sanctioning Advisory Board: SAB
Greg Bassett, Amgen, (Chair)
Gabriele Gori, Thermo Fisher Scientific, (Vice-Chair)
John Ayres, Consultant
Marcia Baroni, Emergent BioSolutions Inc
Rebecca Brewer, Quality Executive Partners
Tom Damratoski, Bristol-Myers Squibb
David Exline, Gateway Analytical, LLC.
Rhonda Ezell 
Guenther Gapp, Gapp Quality GmbH
Mauro Giusti, Eli Lilly & Co.
Gabriele Gori, GlaxoSmithKline
Marc Glogovsky, ValSource LLC
Dennis Guilfoyle, Johnson & Johnson
Beth Haas, Haas Pharma Consulting LLC
Kenneth Hinds, Johnson & Johnson
Ken-ichi Izutsu, National Institute of Health Sciences, 
Japan
Austin Kuo, Eli Lilly and Company
Gitte Letting, Novo Nordisk A/S
Martine Nolan, Sanofi
Vincent O’Shaughnessy, Amgen
Ivy Louis, Vienni Training & Consulting LLP
Matthew Schmidt, Merck & Co., Inc.
Luca Tamarindo, Akka Life Sciences
Kristin Valente, Merck & Co., Inc.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.