25
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7.1.2.1	 Air Patterns, Air Movement, and Air Changes
Airflow patterns in critical zones and the background environment need to be studied during qualification 
to show that air turbulence does not interfere with aseptic processes during static or dynamic conditions. 
There are two types of air flow patterns: turbulent flow and unidirectional flow.
Turbulent airflow is used in most classified areas other than Grade A environments; it is designed to 
dilute particles and microorganisms in cleanrooms and keep them suspended in the air until they are 
removed with new “clean” air. The number of air changes per hour of a cleanroom is related to the 
extent to which potential contaminants can be removed from the room. Each grade of cleanroom 
should meet a preset number of air changes per hour based on a risk assessment performed as part of 
the EMPQ. Airflow visualization studies may be conducted in areas of turbulent airflow such as clean-
rooms to optimize the layout, use and monitoring locations.
Unidirectional airflow is applied in higher classified areas (i.e., Grade A) and is designed to sweep 
particles and microorganisms away from critical operations, ensuring that the “first air” is never con-
taminated before it comes in contact with the product (the critical zone). Airflow visualization studies 
are designed to demonstrate that unidirectional airflow is delivered to the working position by the 
BSC or barrier system, and that the product is only exposed to “first air” during operations.  Airflow 
visualization studies are also performed in areas that adjacent to the critical zone to ensure air is not 
moving into the aseptic area, e.g., air entering through the mouseholes or depyrogenation tunnel into 
a barrier system, or air passing through the air curtain of a BSC. PDA Technical Report No. 62: Recom-
mended Practices for Manual Aseptic Processes and EU GMP Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal 
Products also discuss airflow in aseptic manufacturing areas.
7.1.2.2	 Differential Air Pressure 
Air pressurization will ensure airflow from a higher to a lower cleanliness level by maintaining positive 
pressure in the areas of higher classification. Air visualization performed in both static and dynamic 
conditions will demonstrate appropriate pressure differential. In viral-vector manufacturing, guidance 
on differential pressure between rooms of different classification can be found in U.S. FDA Guidance 
for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Processing — Current Good Manufacturing Prac-
tice, EU GMP Annex 1 Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, and PDA Technical Report No. 13 
(Revised 2021): Fundamentals of an Environmental Monitoring Program. 
In the case of high-potency products, both active egress from the area and contamination of the prod-
uct should be prevented. This can be achieved by applying air locks with different pressures between 
areas of different classification. Pressure differentials should be monitored with an alarm mechanism 
for minimum and maximum pressure limits. 
7.1.2.3	 Temperature and Relative Humidity
Products may be affected by temperature and humidity, and these parameters are important for opera-
tor comfort as well. Shivering or excess perspiration on the part of an operator may result in the release 
of a higher number of particles into the cleanroom than an operator’s garments can retain, which may 
contaminate the environment. Temperature and humidity levels also have an impact on microbial 
proliferation. Both parameters should be monitored against their set limits. 
7.2	 Environment and Utility Disruption and Recovery Plan 
When a disruption occurs in a controlled, classified environment or to a critical utility, the risk of 
contamination is inherently higher than during daily operations. For this reason, a containment 
strategy for disruptions and a recovery plan should be established with the aim of reducing the con-
tamination risk. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
26
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
A disruption to the controlled, classified environment or critical utility may be planned or unplanned: 
•	
Planned disruptions are deliberate, scheduled events, for example, construction projects, annual 
shutdown, preventive maintenance, equipment installation
•	
Unplanned disruptions are unexpected events, such as leaks in critical utilities, loss of power, or 
equipment repair, and should be addressed immediately 
The level of containment and recovery should be commensurate with the risk. It is useful to define tiers 
of risk and outline the appropriate containment strategy and response plan for each tier. An example 
is presented in Section 17.0–Appendix III. 
8.0 
Personnel Training and Qualification
Before individuals can enter manufacturing areas, they should have received appropriate training in a 
standard curriculum for manufacturing personnel. The curriculum should be designed to the role the 
trainee will be expected to perform. Personnel training and qualification programs should include at a 
minimum an explanation of the underlying principles and rationale for the controls regarding: 
•	
Basic Microbiology (see Section 8.1)
•	
Personnel, personnel flow, and associated requirements (see Section 5.2; Section 15.0, Table 6)
•	
Material and waste flow (see Section 5.3; Section 15.0, Table 4) 
•	
Environmental controls (see Section 7.0)
•	
Cleaning and Disinfection (see Section 5.1.4)
•	
Process design (see Section 4.0)
A key element of a microbial contamination control strategy is a routinely scheduled, validated clean-
ing and disinfection process. The microbiology training program should encompass a clear explanation 
of the difference between cleaning and disinfection in that the former is purposed to remove physical 
and chemical residues and the latter is purposed to kill microorganisms. The training program should 
include an overview of the different cleaning and disinfectant agents and why each are used. 
Basic microbiology, personal hygiene, gowning, and cleanroom behavior are core topics within a robust con-
tamination control training program. Operators performing activities in the aseptic processing areas should 
have additional aseptic operator training and meet qualification requirements, including reviewing the air-
flow visualization studies. Table 8.0-1 highlights the mindset shift toward holistic CCS relating to personnel.
Table 8.0-1		
Holistic Approach to Personnel Considerations
Non-Holistic Approach
Holistic Approach
Contamination cannot occur if SOP 
instructions and batch records are precisely 
followed by personnel
Contamination can be prevented by understanding and reducing the specific hazards 
throughout the process, through a combination of strong CCS practices, quality culture, 
and continuous improvement
8.1	 Basic Microbiology
Microbiology is the science and study of microorganisms. Microorganisms can potentially impact 
pharmaceutical facilities, manufacturing processes, and finished drug products. An education program 
of basic microbiology should be integrated into the employee training that explains the various types 
of microorganisms (minimally, bacteria, yeasts, and molds). This would describe how microorganisms 
may cause an impact through contamination, including proliferation, and their potential to release 
toxins (including endotoxins), and why this can impact patient safety based on the types of finished 
drug products, patient population and the route of drug administration. The program should explain 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
27
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
the main sources of microorganisms, including people, utilities (e.g., water, gases), the environment, 
and raw materials. A comprehensive microbiology training program would also include a description 
of viruses and prions, their origins, their sources, and how and where they might impact the manufac-
turing process and finished drug product quality. This should also include any requirements for TSE 
and BSE statements for all materials that pose a potential risk of contamination from prions.
When employees understand the sources and potential consequences of contamination from microor-
ganisms, they are more capable to prevent contaminations and build practices that support a proactive 
quality culture related to contamination control.
8.2	 Personal Hygiene
The training program should explain how people and their actions are recognized as one of the greatest 
sources of microbiological contamination within the pharmaceutical industry. Therefore, the program 
should stress the requirements for maintaining a high standard of personal hygiene and how to ef-
fectively perform handwashing. The topic of hygiene should list health conditions that would restrict 
personnel from operating in a cleanroom. 
8.3	 Gowning
Appropriate garments and the process of gowning provides a barrier between personnel and the clean-
room and, therefore, it should be covered in detail within a training program. The program should 
detail observing wear and tear, use of non-shedding materials, number of uses, frequency of changes, 
sterilization program, etc. A description of the types and layers of garments to be worn and an explana-
tion of how gowning prevents contamination are necessary components. Personnel assigned to execute 
cleaning and disinfection SOPs should regown prior to conducting aseptic operations in critical areas. 
Importantly, instructions for the process of gowning that would permit successful qualification of 
personnel in gowning should be described explicitly. 
For detailed gowning requirements, refer to EU GMP Annex 1 Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal 
Products and PDA Points to Consider for Aseptic Processing: Part 1 (2015)
8.3.1	 Gowning Qualification
Gowning qualification is the demonstration that a person is capable of consistently donning cleanroom 
garments and maintaining the barrier properties to ensure the exterior of the garment is not contami-
nated with microorganisms. Qualification should include multiple observations of the person donning 
the gown and taking multiple samples from the exterior of the garment after gowning to demonstrate 
the presence or absence of any microorganisms. Sample sites of the gown should be determined by a 
risk assessment that considers the specific operation. A documented rationale should explain the ac-
ceptance criteria for the personnel gowning qualification process. Personnel are prohibited from Grade 
A and Grade B cleanroom entry without having successfully completed gowning qualification. 
8.3.2	 Gowning Disqualification and Requalification
A documented program should also be established to provide the criteria that disqualifies personnel from 
cleanroom entry based on insufficient gowning technique and/or exceeding established microbial counts 
and/or trends from personnel monitoring. A matrix approach should be considered in developing the plan 
for disqualification, such as multiple alert-level excursions in a prescribed period, multiple action-level devia-
tions in a prescribed period, or a combination of both. Operators can also be disqualified for observation 
of poor aseptic/cleanroom behavior. If disqualified, a return to accessing cleanrooms would be contingent 
upon appropriate corrective actions being taken and successful completion of qualification (see Section 
8.3.1). Additionally, requalification of gowning should be performed routinely on an annual basis or return 
from a long leave / extended absence for personnel to demonstrate their continued capability in gowning.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
28
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
8.4	 Cleanroom Behavior 
To successfully prevent contamination in manufacturing areas, it is critical for operators to always ob-
serve appropriate cleanroom behaviors, including, but not limited to, the list below. It should be noted 
that these behaviors apply even when using barrier technologies:
•	
Move carefully: Moving slowly and deliberately will prevent unnecessary air turbulence in a criti-
cal area thus minimizing the risk of particle-generation or shedding. The principle of slow, careful 
movement should be followed throughout the cleanroom, including awareness of engineering 
controls and locations of air returns.
•	
Minimize conversation: Speaking should only occur when necessary and never in a critical area.
•	
Maintain unidirectional airflow (“first air”): Unidirectional airflow is designed to protect sterile 
equipment surfaces, container-closures, and product. Disruption of the path of unidirectional 
flow air in the critical area can pose a risk to product sterility. 
•	
Perform interventions carefully: Using the correct tools and equipment and performing inter-
ventions in a manner that does not compromise sterility of the product ensures that unidirectional 
airflow over sterile product and sterile components will not be interrupted. When using a re-
stricted access barrier system (RABS) system, barrier doors should be opened only when necessary 
and for the shortest time possible.
•	
Position body: Keeping the entire body out of the path of the unidirectional airflow will prevent 
airflow from being blocked over critical surfaces. Personnel should not reach across open contain-
ers, exposed product, or components and product contact parts/surfaces. 
•	
Maintain proper gown control: Prior to and throughout aseptic operations, operators should 
not engage in any activity that poses an unreasonable contamination risk to the gown, such as 
unnecessary contact with walls, floors, and cleaned surfaces. After initial gowning, sterile gloves 
should be regularly sanitized or changed, as appropriate, to minimize the risk of contamination. 
If damage (e.g., hole, tear) is detected when donning the gown, the gown should be replaced im-
mediately. If damage is detected during manufacturing, the operator should exit the cleanroom 
and regown.
•	
Protect sterile parts: Parts should be staged and grouped for setup to allow for consistent 
setup order—from top to bottom, back to front—for the protection of all sterile parts. Dur-
ing setup, sterile product contact parts should remain protected until setup is completed. 
Between uses, sterile tools should be held under Grade A conditions and maintained in 
a manner that prevents contamination (e.g., placed in sterilized containers) or should be 
replaced. Parts should be sterilized together, whenever possible, to minimize aseptic connec-
tions during setup.
•	
Minimize surface contact: Personnel should not come in direct contact with sterile product, con-
tainers, closures, or critical surfaces with any part of their gowns or gloves. Sterile tools should 
always be used, where possible. 
•	
Manage gloves: Regular glove sanitization techniques and frequency and re-gloving activities 
should always be followed. At a minimum, single gloves should be worn in supporting areas; 
sterile double-gloves should be worn in all conventional aseptic processing areas. A fresh pair of 
sterile gloves should be worn upon each entry to Grade A clean room. Gloves should be checked 
for integrity upon donning and prior to performing an intervention. If damage (e.g., hole, tear) is 
detected when donning the glove, the glove should immediately be replaced. If damage is detected 
during manufacturing, the operator should follow an established risk-based procedure to replace 
the glove while limiting any contamination hazard to the operation. 
8.4.1	 Aseptic Operator Training and Qualification
Aseptic processing depends on personnel operating in a manner that does not disturb airflow, mini-
mizes the generation of particles, and does not introduce bioburden into the process through inap-
propriate handling of product contact equipment or components. Aseptic operator trainees should 
only be permitted to perform interventions upon successful participation with a process simulation. 
Participation in the process simulation requires that the operator perform a pre-identified set or sub-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
