6
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
•	
Quality Risk Management principles (PDA Technical Report No. 54: Implementation of Quality 
Risk Management for Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology Manufacturing Operations; ICH Qual-
ity Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Management)
3.1.2	 Quality Risk Management Foundational Element
To achieve contamination control, the design of new and existing manufacturing processes and facili-
ties should employ QRM principles to identify and assess risk with the intent to prevent and control 
contamination. 
The CCS should be designed with redundant individual control elements so that no single fail-
ure in one element will result in contamination. If any contamination risks are not well-controlled 
through process design or engineered into the facility design, this will result in other CCS elements 
(e.g., procedural controls) being built up to compensate, thereby increasing the overall cost and com-
plexity of manufacturing throughout the life of the product.
For example, a process step that is designed to be manual and open (exposed directly to the environ-
ment) requires all the surrounding CCS elements to be more robust than if the process were closed, 
including additional technical and procedural measures (e.g., local unidirectional flow protection, 
personnel and material movement controls, environmental controls such as cleaning, disinfection, 
environmental monitoring, in-process testing of that step, and validation).
For new processes, existing contamination control technologies and procedures that have proven ef-
fective in processes with similar risk profiles can be used as a model (e.g., connections, sanitization or 
sterilization practices, sampling methods). New contamination control technologies and procedures 
that are not yet proven effective in a relevant CCS, should be designed and assessed using QRM prin-
ciples to reduce the risk of contamination.
New construction or renovation of production areas are ideal opportunities for innovation. This should 
involve an evaluation of the existing CCS for any ways to improve contamination control through in-
novative technologies, such as closed or barrier systems, automation, and advanced monitoring and 
detection methods.
3.1.3	 Personnel Awareness and Quality Culture Foundational Element
The health of the quality culture and level of personnel awareness around contamination controls have 
a direct and significant impact on the success of the CCS. 
Contamination control should be a priority that is reflected in the goals of the firm. A dedicated 
champion or team should oversee the performance of the CCS (see Section 11.7 Governance and 
Oversight). 
The hallmarks of a robust quality culture that promotes contamination control are:
•	
Focus on preventing contamination and other quality hazards 
•	
Willingness to proactively invest time and resources to improve quality and prevent contamination
•	
Strong response to contamination events that corrects true root cause(s) and prevents reoccurrence 
•	
Management that appreciates and values the contributions and skills of employees
•	
Strong, supportive community of practices and network of subject matter experts (SMEs) who 
focus on continuous improvement—good cross-department and cross-site communication and 
application of best practices and lessons learned 
•	
Employees who feel ownership over the quality of the product and process, including contami-
nation prevention
•	
Employees who understand their responsibility to highlight quality risks and work toward solutions
•	
Non-blaming culture
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
7
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Firms should maintain an ongoing campaign to promote contamination control awareness among all 
employees engaged in GMP activities, including shop floor and management staff. One-time or an-
nual training does not ensure ongoing awareness.
Shop floor personnel are the true guardians of contamination control because they directly perform 
processes and operate equipment according to procedures to deliver contaminant-free process inter-
mediates and products. 
Personnel awareness is achieved through a combination of training, education, and ongoing diligence. 
Training addresses what a task is and how it is done; education addresses why it is done.
Table 3.1.3-1 outlines an example set of roles and responsibilities related to CCS.
Table 3.1.3-1	 Example: Personnel Roles and Responsibilities Related to CCS 
Leadership Role
Makes contamination prevention a priority
Advocates and practices non-blaming culture
Assigns personnel with appropriate knowledge and mindset 
Understands the benefit of contamination prevention
Expert Role Sterility Assurance / Contamination Control (Governance)
Oversees the performance of contamination controls
Escalates contamination hazards 
Provides technical leadership to continuously improve 
Shop Floor Operator / Technician Role
Performs contamination control and acts as guardians
Escalates contamination hazards
Provides technical expertise on individual CCS elements
4.0  Process Design, Microbial Control, and Monitoring
Manufacturing processes should be designed, commissioned, qualified, and monitored by personnel 
with appropriate process, engineering, and microbiological knowledge. The manufacturing process 
should be designed and validated to prevent potential contamination from microorganisms, microbial 
byproducts (e.g., endotoxins), and foreign particulate matter.
CQAs can include a broad range of characteristics that must be controlled during the process. In this 
TR only microbiological and particulate attributes are addressed (see TR 60 for further discussion on 
establishing CQAs). The following sections address the location for testing and setting appropriate 
limits for assessing critical control points (CCPs).
Controlling the potential ingress of microbial contaminants throughout the drug substance and sterile 
drug product manufacturing processes is a key element to any contamination control program be-
cause contaminants can alter the process performance and adulterate the final product (e.g., clogging 
of process filters, degradation of process solutions or product molecule, unexpected impurities). For 
nonsterile drug products, elevated levels of microorganisms can lead to unwanted degradation and 
impurities; also, the presence of specific objectionable organisms can directly impact patient safety. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
8
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Risk-based process and monitoring plans for microbial control should be in place to address the spe-
cific product, process, and facility design. These plans may vary based on the type of product produced 
(e.g., sterile, nonsterile, biologic, small molecule), the stage of manufacturing (e.g., drug product, 
intermediate, drug substance), and the design of the facility (e.g., isolator, RABS, single-use, stainless 
steel, multiuse). The three main microbial contamination considerations for the risk assessment within 
the manufacturing facility, equipment, and processes are:
•	
Microbial Ingress: What are the sources of contamination and how are they gaining access to 
the manufacturing environment?
•	
Proliferation: Are there environmental factors or processing conditions that may increase the 
risk or extent of a contamination?
•	
Persistence: Are the cleaning, sanitization/disinfection/sterilization, and monitoring programs 
appropriate for all the product, contact equipment, systems, and facilities to ensure bioburden is 
being eliminated or kept in check? 
PDA Technical Report No. 69: Bioburden and Biofilm Management in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing 
Operations provides further guidance on these three considerations. 
These risk-based process and monitoring plans should consider that microorganisms may enter the 
manufacturing process from multiple sources—from incoming raw materials, facility design and in-
puts, and drug substance manufacturing, culminating in the final packaging of drug product. Figure 
4.0-1 displays a diagram of possible microbial contamination sources, and Section 15.0, Table 15.0-2 
and Table 15.0-7 provide further points to consider on bioburden controls for multiuse versus single-
product facilities. In addition, Section 4.1.1.2 provides an extensive listing of resources that address 
sterilization processes and other aspects of the diagram below. 
4.1	 Low-Bioburden Drug Substance Process Control 
Drug substances (DS) are active ingredients with pharmacological activity for the prevention and 
treatment of diseases. DS undergo additional manufacturing steps that may include formulation, ster-
Figure 4.0-1 Potential Sources of Microbial Contamination to Consider when Conducting a Microbial Control Risk Assessment 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
9
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
ilization, and filling; those that undergo sterile filtration are generally not monitored for the presence 
of foreign particulate matter. Maintaining microbial control while processing the DS is critical be-
cause, although potential bioburden may be filtered out in subsequent manufacturing steps, microbial 
contamination during the initial processing can introduce product variability. Inconsistency of the 
DS could impact (a) safety, due to the release of toxic by-products, including bacterial endotoxins; (b) 
potency, due to degradation or modification of the product by microbial enzymes; and (c) purity, due 
to changes in the impurity profiles from microbial by-products. 
DS and other process intermediates should be handled and stored under conditions that consider mi-
crobial ingress and proliferation and minimize the risk of microbial contamination. The probability of 
microbial ingress and its impact on product quality should be assessed case by case. The risk of impact 
on products stored frozen is low because organisms will not proliferate during storage. Microbial in-
gress in refrigerated products, however, may result in unacceptable bioburden levels during storage, so 
appropriate procedural controls should be in place to minimize it. For example, steps where a process 
stream is directly exposed to the environment may be performed under unidirectional Grade A air 
supply and a Grade C background may be sufficient based on the overall CCS.. 
Bottles containing the DS should be closed with a predefined torque that ensures the integrity of the 
seal and, at the same time, prevents cracking or damaging the bottle; in addition, sampling that in-
troduces a pipette into the bottle should be avoided to prevent microbial ingress. Single-use-systems 
(SUS) should be certified sterile by the vendor; single-use bags should be handled in a manner that 
prevents leaks, and the bags containing the product should be inspected for leaks before use. Bags that 
are frozen during storage may warrant additional integrity checks. Mobile stainless-steel vessels should 
be sterilized; vessel integrity may be validated using a hold study with a growth-promoting solution. 
The length of the hold may be included in the risk assessment, as it may be impractical to conduct the 
study for the complete length of the proposed storage time. 
4.1.1	 Viral and Mycoplasma Considerations 
Viral and mycoplasma contaminations in cell cultures (where applicable) are much less common than 
bacterial or fungal contaminations, but they can significantly interrupt manufacturing operations that 
result in a facility shutdown and product supply shortage. 
Virus contamination of biological products can originate from contaminated cells with endogenous 
retroviruses or a latent infection or from cells contaminated during manipulation. Adventitious viruses 
can also be introduced from extraneous sources, including personnel, poorly designed processes or 
facilities, contaminated raw materials, and cross-contamination. For example, contamination with 
minute mouse virus has been traced to the presence of rodents in the facility. Since virus particles are 
not retained by 0.1-µm or 0.2-µm filters, filtration of the media or culture is not effective in removing 
them. Absence of adventitious viruses contaminating the final product is achieved by a combination 
of preventive measures, for instance, the use of appropriate sources of raw materials, heat inactiva-
tion or irradiation of the media, virus detection measures such as adventitious agent testing, and viral 
clearance measures in the process. PDA Technical Report 41(Revised 2022): Virus Retentive Filtration 
provides further guidance on this topic. 
Most of the sources of mycoplasma contamination are the same as viruses, so contamination control 
measures against viral contamination also reduce the challenges of mycoplasma contamination. In-
discriminate use of antibiotics during cell culture has also been reported to increase the probability 
of mycoplasma contamination because it may lead to less rigorous aseptic technique. Mycoplasmas 
are resistant to commonly used antibiotics, and they cannot be detected by turbidity or standard mi-
croscopic techniques. Of note, 0.1-µm filters are effective at reducing mycoplasma and have become 
commonplace for media filtration.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
