33
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
9.4.1	 Use of Single-Use Equipment
Single-use bags and product flow paths are increasingly being incorporated into manufacturing pro-
cesses because they can provide a closed-system manufacturing environment. For example, they can 
be used for raw materials and sterile drug substance and as part of the sterile filtration process to drug 
product. These systems may be irradiated and designed to allow processing to occur without exposure 
to the external environment. Checking the sterilization cycles for this equipment upon receipt is very 
important (10). Observations for leaks or holes before and during use is very important. These systems 
are often linked with tube welders to connect different single-use systems (SUS) without breaching 
the sterile product pathway. It is essential the welders are used properly with the correct technique and 
maintenance (correct blades, wafers, etc. changed at appropriate intervals) and welds inspected prior 
to use. The risk to the process from this equipment is that leak/integrity testing often cannot be per-
formed prior to and after use. Therefore, vendors for this equipment work to develop such safeguards 
to reduce these risks. More information on SUS can be found in PDA Technical Report No. 66: Ap-
plication of Single-Use Systems in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing.
Single-use rapid-transfer ports can be used to dock isolators for the transfer of sterile materials. For ex-
ample, stoppers may be sterilized directly into these single-use containers and subsequently transferred 
into a Grade A isolator. 
9.4.2	  Use of Barrier Technology
Barrier separation technology is preferred for use in a CCS for operations that are not fully closed, as 
it is increasingly important to separate the operator from the process. The use of isolators and RABS 
units support this practice, as interventions occur using special RABS or isolator gloves integrated 
within the system. The design of such equipment is important; for instance, the gloves should be 
placed appropriately where the interventions to be performed do not require the operator to reach 
over sterile product or components. A glove test strategy, combining visual and physical leak tests, 
should be defined for isolators and RABS. Where RABS are used, the timing, frequency, and duration 
of door-openings are restricted to limit risk of contamination. 
9.4.3	 Product Pathways
The product pathway is the environment in which the product is exposed within the system; it may 
include piping, vessels, and other equipment. Assessment of the control of contamination includes a 
closure risk analysis of the product pathway. Closed systems offer the lowest risk. Any open steps in 
the product pathway should be evaluated for improvements that may reduce or eliminate the risk. This 
may involve the use of SUS or rapid transfer ports, sterile-to-sterile connections, or equipment that is 
designed for closed-system dispensing and sampling. 
9.5	 Maintenance
Regular equipment maintenance is the key to preventing failures of the cleanroom environmental 
control systems (HVAC) and production equipment and ensuring the cleanrooms and equipment 
are operating in their validated state. Maintenance is a risk management practice used to maximize 
production and minimize loss and waste (see Section 15.0, Table 5). Section 17.0: Appendix III 
contains case studies of contamination related to the lack of adequate maintenance.
Maintenance activities can also pose contamination risks if not done correctly, starting with making 
appropriate design choices that reduce the amount of, or increase the ease of, maintenance based on 
failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA). The best design practice is to build a gray space adjacent 
to the classified areas that allows access to the equipment to minimize maintenance and calibration 
personnel working in the classified areas. For example, autoclave, dry heat tunnels, or ovens could 
be installed in a manner that provides remote access to the equipment spaces. These gray spaces may 
comprise adjacent corridor access spaces or an interstitial space above the equipment and systems.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
34
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Maintenance sometimes involves opening areas that are not cleaned routinely (e.g., behind HEPA 
filters, electrical panels). If performed during operations, maintenance activities may increase the risk 
of product, environment, and equipment contamination. Routine maintenance reduces unexpected 
failures which, in turn, reduces the risk of contamination. Developing a control strategy for preven-
tive and corrective maintenance is important to ensure that the validated state, product sterility, or 
contamination control is not compromised. The design of the equipment (single-use disposable versus 
multiuse) and the validated cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization processes, in conjunction with a 
comprehensive preventive maintenance plan, are critical components of the microbial control strategy.
If certain sections of the cleanroom need to be segregated for maintenance, temporary gray space 
enclosures (TGSE) can be considered instead of shutting down the entire cleanroom. TGSE requires 
careful planning and specific procedures to ensure controls are in place and being followed by mainte-
nance personnel and contractors. Planning needs to define traffic patterns into and out of the TGSE 
area, include monitoring for pressure differential to ensure the enclosure is maintained at a pressure 
lower than the surrounding classified areas, and provide specific instructions to personnel for gowning 
and degowning as they enter and exit the TGSE area. The frequency and type of cleaning and sanitiza-
tion activities performed around the TGSE could be increased to control contamination that may be 
associated with the TGSE and activities occurring there. Section 16.3 discusses a related case study. 
Minimizing traffic in and around the TGSE area during operations is also important. Heightened EM 
around this area should be considered to provide information about whether the containment process 
is working as planned. Environmental data, such as airborne monitoring, that shows increased levels 
in the adjacent classified areas would indicate that the containment, personnel pathways, and gown-
ing enhancements should be reassessed to improve the contamination control. Prior to setting up a 
maintenance TGSE, a process should be established to recover the area upon completion of those ac-
tivities. This would typically include cleaning to remove any construction or gross contamination that 
may have occurred, followed by a comprehensive disinfection process to reestablish the environmental 
control. Depending on the specific maintenance or contamination activity, a specific cleaning and 
disinfection plan should be considered before releasing the areas for routine operation. For standard 
shut-down situations, it is common practice to perform a triple-cleaning and disinfection cycle fol-
lowed by EM before releasing the areas for routine operation. 
Devising a comprehensive preventive maintenance plan for parts that are reused, including elastomeric 
components (e.g., hoses, diaphragms, gaskets, O-rings), probes, agitators, valves, and filters, is crucial. 
Routine visual inspection of surfaces, including product contact surfaces, should be performed; such a 
program enables the early detection of rouging or any other deterioration of process equipment, which 
can prevent particulate contamination in the product and avoid the loss of cleaning effectiveness. The 
design of piping and valves should prevent steam condensate from collecting and possible backflow 
that might lead to contamination. Continuous assessments of change control, work orders, and other 
process improvements should be conducted to ensure that their individual or cumulative effects do 
not impact the CCS.
10.0 
Product Containers and Closures
Container closure systems are an essential means of controlling microbial and foreign-particulate con-
tamination of excipients, APIs, DS, process intermediates, and finished DPs (19). In the case of sterile 
products, a failure of container closure systems integrity may impact patient safety due to the potential 
for microbial ingress and product contamination. Throughout Section 10.0, the term container clo-
sure (CC) and packaging are used interchangeably.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
35
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
A CC system is required to “not be reactive, additive, or absorptive so as to alter the safety, identity, 
strength, quality, or purity of the drug beyond the official or established requirements.” In addition, 
the CC system should “provide adequate protection against foreseeable external factors in storage and 
use that can cause deterioration or contamination of the drug product” (20).
Therefore, the CC system should be designed to ensure that the material is protected from factors that 
may impact product quality over its shelf life, including light, evaporation, product loss, exposure to 
gases, absorption of water, or microbial and particulate contamination (21).
CC system for finished DP are frequently composed of primary and secondary container closures. The 
primary CC comes in direct contact with the DP and represents the main physical barrier prevent-
ing interaction of the product with the exterior environment. The CC system may include a delivery 
device assembled into the primary container closure for product functionality. Secondary packaging 
may help protect the primary CC system from microbial or foreign particulate contamination due to 
physical damage during handling and shipping. 
CC system and the associated container closure integrity (CCI) is critical for the prevention of product 
contamination throughout the shelf life of a finished DP. Figure 10.2-1 provides an overview of CCI 
considerations. 
Degrazio described in detail the main factors to consider when developing a CC system platform for sterile 
product packaging (22). Establishment of this framework is based on the six main aspects defined in a typi-
cal Ishikawa or fishbone diagram—materials, equipment, process, measurement, environment, and people 
(Figure 10.2-1). Degrazio clearly states that establishing a well-designed, comprehensive framework offers 
the opportunity to minimize redundant CCI studies when expanding to incorporate new or additional 
products. Considering all these details within a CC system and a CCI program is recommended. For ad-
ditional information, refer to EU GMP Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products (2022).
Figure 10.2-1	 Fishbone Diagram Conveying a Comprehensive View of the Factors that have an Impact on Assuring Adequate CCI (Reprinted with 
permission, ©2018 Degrazio (22)) 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
36
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
10.1	 Primary Container Closures
Components attached to the CC system and those frequently used to seal it, ensuring a continuous 
physical barrier to microorganisms, are frequently polymeric (e.g., vial stoppers, administration ports 
on IV bags); however, other materials of construction (e.g., metal syringe needles and injector pens) 
are also used. The potential for microbial and particulate contamination of CC materials should be 
understood and controlled. 
10.2	 End-to-End Container Closure and Container-Closure Integrity 
Comprehensive, holistic, and end-to-end control of the CC system  and CCI is essential in sterile 
products because of the critical role they play in the physical prevention of microbial or particulate 
ingress into the finished DP. The main aspects and controls associated with CC system and CCI fit 
together cohesively within the overall contamination control architecture (Figure 3.0-1) and are de-
scribed in this section. CC system integrity testing is normally reserved for DP but may also be war-
ranted for DS or intermediates as a one-time qualification. (20)
10.2.1	 Design and Development of Container Closure
CC system design and development should begin in the development phase of the product and include 
a justified selection of container components. Early development of the CC system will ensure safety 
during clinical studies and minimize noncompliance to specifications during the first formal stability 
studies. Many selection criteria are based upon the chemical considerations and compatibility of the CC 
system; however, functional integrity preventing microbial ingress should also be considered, and the 
selection and suitability of a robust CCI test should be started during the product development phase. 
10.2.2	 Container-Closure Integrity Test Method Development and Method Validation 
In designing and developing the CC system and CCI specifications, the dimensional and material 
requirements, with any acceptable tolerance, are generated for all container components. Document-
ed assessments of microbial ingress risks and any failure mode-associated microbial risks should be 
completed to ensure the establishment of appropriate processes and procedures for the preparation, 
handling, processing, and shipping. Prior historical experience, knowledge, and proven performance 
should be leveraged to determine and develop the CC system, CCI, and CCIT. Providing a rationale 
that supports the choice of CC system, CCI, and CCIT design control decisions to the eventual 
commercial manufacturing facility is imperative as these data will assist in resolution of any potential 
noncompliance and in any change controls. Although CCI is most important for the prevention of 
microbial ingress, the CC system should be adequate to prevent water vapor transmission from raising 
the water activity of the product to levels that may support microbial proliferation in low-bioburden 
products and affect the quality of lyophilized products (23). 
PDA Technical Report No. 27: Pharmaceutical Package Integrity and USP General Chapter <1207.2> 
Package Integrity Leak Test Technologies provide a thorough comparison of various test methods, includ-
ing the advantages and limitations of different testing techniques. In addition, the CCIT method 
should be validated in the equipment that will be used during routine testing.
10.2.3	 Container Closure Integrity During Process Validation 
Functional CCI should be demonstrated throughout the shelf life of the finished product and should 
consider how the manufacturing process may impact the container, the closure, or the container-closure 
combination. The process should be designed to accommodate normal dimensional variances. The im-
pact of the different elements of the manufacturing process should be considered, including the elements 
outlined in Table 10.2.3-1, and CCI should be demonstrated at worst-case manufacturing operations.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
