ANNEX 1

Contamination
Monitors
Environmental
Monitoring 
Systems
Training and
Education
Services
STERILITY
ASSURANCE
D
A
T
A
 
M
A
N
A
G
E
M
E
N
T
D
A
T
A
 
I
N
T
E
G
R
I
T
Y
Complete Contamination  
Monitoring Solutions For Annex 1
pmeasuring.com        
info@pmeasuring.com
For more information contact:
Paid Advertisement
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
42
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
12.0 
CCS Governance and Effectiveness Review
The CCS should include a governance structure to oversee the effectiveness of the contamination con-
trols and to escalate control issues. The person(s) or body governing the CCS should have:
•	
Appropriate microbiology and process expertise to understand the meaningfulness of the data out-
puts, for example, quality control in-process and product-release testing, EM, and utility monitoring 
•	
Clear responsibility to perform regular assessments of the contamination controls related to 
process, product, personnel, and facility/utility and to drive proactive improvement
•	
Authority to respond to potentially adverse trends or events, both proactively and reactively
•	
Clear pathways for escalation to the top site management
The CCS lifecycle begins during the design of the facility and process. Further, the CCS should be 
considered during quality-by-design activities and formally documented as a prerequisite to GMP 
manufacturing. Thereafter, the quality systems as outlined in Section 11.0 drive refinement and con-
tinuous improvement in the CCS over the life of a product. 
The CCS should also be reviewed periodically (preferably reviewed annually) for effectiveness to en-
sure it remains current with the process and aligned with industry standards, specifically the potential 
need to adopt new, more effective technologies. The periodic review should be done by a multi-depart-
mental team to monitor the effectiveness of contamination controls related to the process, product, 
personnel, and facility/utilities, including, but not limited to, evaluating quality trends, contamination 
events, change control, and validation activities. A practical way to achieve this and reduce the admin-
istrative burden is to formally monitor these elements throughout the year in regular meetings of the 
multi-departmental team that will be involved in the periodic review. 
13.0 
References
1.	 U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General 
Chapter <1072> Disinfectants and Anti-
septics. In USP 43–NF 38, USP: Rockville, 
Md., 2004; p 7608.
2.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Re-
port No. 61: Steam In Place; PDA: Bethesda, 
Md., 2013; p 61.
3.	 International Council for Harmonisation. 
Quality Guideline Q9: Quality Risk Manage-
ment; ICH: Geneva, 2005.
4.	 European Commission. Guidelines of 19 
March 2015 on the Formalised Risk Assess-
ment for Ascertaining the Appropriate Good 
Manufacturing Practice for Excipients of 
Medicinal Products for Human Use; Official 
Journal of the European Union. European 
Commission: Brussels, 2015.
5.	 International Pharmaceutical Excipients 
Council of the Americas & IPEC-Europe. 
The IPEC Risk Assessment Guide for Pharma-
ceutical Excipients, Part 1– Risk Assessment 
for Excipient Manufacturers. IPEC: Arling-
ton, Va., 2017; p 43.
6.	 U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General 
Chapter <85> Bacterial Endotoxins Test. 
In USP 41-NF 36, USP: Rockville, Md., 
2018; p 6011.
7.	 European Medicines Agency. Minimising 
the Risk of Transmitting Animal Spongiform 
Encephalopathy Agents via Human and Vet-
erinary Medicinal Products; EMA: Amster-
dam, 2011.
8.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical 
Report No. 71: Emerging Methods for Virus 
Detection; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2015.
9.	 Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Re-
port No. 83 Virus Contamination in Bioman-
ufacturing: Risk Mitigation, Preparedness, and 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
