51
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 15.0-9	
	
Environmental Monitoring (Viable and Total Particulate Monitoring)
What It Is
Provides immediate information on the status of an area from a particle perspective
Provides a snapshot of the bioburden profile of an area at a specific time
Provides an ongoing assessment of the routine flora in the manufacturing environment, if an appropriate identification 
program is followed
What It Is Not
Viable monitoring generally does not provide real-time results 
Particle monitoring is a discrete measurement does not provide a genus/species of microbes in the area
Zero CFU results are not a guarantee that no microorganisms are present in the environment since microorganisms are 
not distributed uniformly, and the detection is limited by sample size
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	
EM provides a snapshot of the state of control of the areas and materials sampled at a given time; it allows reaction to adverse trends 
and individual excursions, albeit as at a later point in time.
•	
Because microorganisms can be attached to particles suspended in air, it is beneficial to understand the relationship between 
airborne particulates and active air sampling for viable microorganisms in each manufacturing area. 
•	
Attention should also be paid to monitoring the recovery of microorganisms during production of low-bioburden products. 
•	
When an atypical organism is recovered, the potential risk of product impact should be assessed. 
Table 15.0-10	 Testing Controls or Alert Levels/ Action Limits
Setting Levels
Alert levels and action limits for impurities and contaminants serve to reinforce that purification steps are effective 
control measures in removing untoward substances at each step of the manufacturing process
Alert levels and action limits for EM allow signals to be monitored and appropriate corrective action to be taken
Trending
Process trending below the action level is a highly sensitive measure for the consistency and effectiveness of cleaning 
and disinfection practices
Benefit to Preventing Contamination
•	 Testing controls allow an understanding of the materials introduced and the environment in which the process is occurring.
•	 Timely trending provides valuable information for decisions on EM programs and contamination risks.
•	 Caveat: Laboratories should not be relied upon to detect contamination as a control of the process. Process and engineering controls 
should be put in place to control bioburden; laboratory testing only verifies the continued performance of those controls.
16.0 
Appendix 2: Examples for Assessing Impact of  
Microbial Excursions
Limiting the ingress and proliferation of microorganisms in the manufacturing process is the most 
effective approach to preventing microbial failures. This can be effectively achieved through a holistic 
CCS as described in this technical report. Detailed information and guidance on conducting micro-
bial deviation investigations can be found in PDA Technical Report No. 88: Microbial Data Deviation 
Investigations in the Pharmaceutical Industry.
For nonsterile process intermediates, where microbial control is important, the presence of bioburden 
above the established limits often requires a product quality impact assessment impact assessment. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
52
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
The assessment should be scientifically sound and consider the potential for microbial proliferation, 
potential microbial by-products, impact to the quality of the material at the affected process step(s), 
and the removal capability of the process to determine if the product is safe. Two detailed examples of 
this type of impact assessment are presented in this appendix.
A product quality impact assessment impact assessment is not appropriate for in-process steps that 
are expected to be free of bioburden, even where sterility testing is not performed, for example, in a 
cell-culture step.
Microbial by-products are produced during cellular metabolism and secreted extracellularly in the 
late exponential or post-exponential (stationary) phases in a cell-density-dependent manner. For ex-
ample, pathogenic strains of Staphylococcus aureus secrete exotoxins in the late exponential or stationary 
growth phases at a minimum concentration of 105–106 CFU/mL, and Bacillus cereus secretes exotoxins 
at a minimum concentration of 105 CFU/g. Supporting documents are presented in Section 16.2.
Assessing the process removal capability of potential by-products can be achieved by comparing the 
characteristics of microbial by-products against the downstream process-removal steps. This includes 
molecular size of by-products against size-exclusion steps, heat tolerance of by-products against pro-
cess-heating steps, and isoelectric point of by-products against validated-chromatography steps.
16.1	 Example 1: Microbial Impact Assessment 
This example presents a methodology for impact assessment of in-process action level bioburden events, 
described first in a workflow diagram (Figure 16.1-1), then using a detailed example (Table 16.1-1). 
Establishing the affected process steps is a key part of the assessment. Recommended actions to take are:
•	
Establish the boundary for impacted process steps using worst-case assumptions where informa-
tion is lacking.
•	
Include the process steps between the known ingress point and the next bioburden removal/
reduction step.
•	
If the ingress point is not clearly known, evaluate the process step(s) between the previous and 
next bioburden removal/reduction steps, OR between the previous sample point and next 
sample point that yields acceptable results.
Figure 16.1-1	 	
Microbial Impact Assessment Methodology
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
53
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
In this hypothetical example, action level Stenotrophomonas maltophilia was recovered from a chroma-
tography eluate at the end of a three-day hold step and directly before 0.2-µm filtration (Result: 120 
CFU/10mL, Action level >100 CFU/10mL).
The eluate had been 0.2-µm filtered into a stainless-steel hold-vessel, stored at 2–8 °C for three (3) days 
and then sampled for bioburden and endotoxin before being 0.2-µm filtered at the start of the next step.
The root cause was identified to be stagnant condensate in a stainless-steel filter-housing between 
the chromatography skid and the elute hold-vessel. Preventive actions were identified to replace the 
stainless-steel filter-housing with a single-use, gamma-irradiated filter cartridge. 
The quality impact assessment of the affected batch included three risk factors:
•	
Likelihood of Proliferation to Late Exponential Phase in the Process Stream: This is considered 
because microorganisms secrete by-products in a cell-density-dependent manner; the worst-case 
minimum density is 105 CFU/mL. Supporting documents are presented in 16.2.
Low likelihood: The eluate matrix and temperature prevented growth of S. maltophilia in the process stream 
(documented in Table 16.1-1). This is supported by the low-cell density seen in the bioburden result, which 
is four orders of magnitude below the minimum level associated with exotoxin secretion. Endotoxin levels 
were confirmed to be <0.05 EU/mL, confirming low-cell density of this endotoxin-producing microbe. 
•	
Microbial By-Product Potential: This is considered because microbial proliferation is a higher 
risk if the microorganism is capable of producing toxins or proteases.
Yes for by-product potential: S. maltophilia is capable of generating undesired by-products, such as 
endotoxins, exotoxins, and proteases, based on a search of the KEGG BRITE database (documented 
in Table 16.1-1).
•	
Severity Based on Downstream Process Removal Capability: The severity of impact is based on 
whether the subsequent process steps can reduce or eliminate the contaminating cells and poten-
tial by-products.
Low: The downstream process removes S. maltophilia microbial cells and there is direct evidence that 
potential microbial by-products are not affecting product quality (documented in Table 16.1-1).
In conclusion, this event was determined to be “acceptable” meaning it did not impact product quality or 
patient safety. The rationale is that the organism could not grow to late exponential phase in the process 
stream; therefore, it would not secrete negative by-products before the microbial cells were removed via 
filtration. The downstream bioburden results also demonstrated the removal of the microbial cells and 
absence of endotoxin, and an accelerated stability results demonstrated no damage from protease activity.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
54
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
Table 16.1-1	
Microbial Impact Assessment Example 1
Vulnerability Scoring: Microorganism Characteristics 
Characteristics of Microorganism 
Microorganism Identified:
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia a
CFU per sample volume:
120 CFU/10 mL 
Estimated CFU/total working volume  
(50 L):
6.0 x 105 CFU/50 L
Common Source: 
☐ Human microbiota 
☐ Environmental, soil
☒ Water-borne microorganism
Gram stain:
☐ coccus Gram +  ☐ Mold
☐ coccus Gram –  ☐ Yeast
☐ rod Gram + 
  ☐ Other
☒ rod Gram –
Is the microorganism able to produce by-
products: endotoxin, exotoxin, mycotoxin, 
protease, or penicillin?
☒ Yes, list here: 
Endotoxin, Flagellar proteins, 
Exotoxins, Proteases a,b 
☐ No	
☐ Unknown
Spore-forming?
☐ Yes	 ☒ No
Cell size: 1.5 x 0.5 μm a Spore size: N/A
May pass 0.2-μm filter (cell or spore)? 
☐ Yes	 ☒ No	
☐ Unknown 
Vulnerability Scoring: Process Growth Potential
To determine the Likelihood of Proliferation, evaluate if the specific microorganism’s growth requirements are met by the process conditions, 
e.g., temperature, pH, time, antimicrobial properties. Production of extracellular microbial by-products is growth-phase dependent, occurring 
in late exponential or stationary phases. Scientific references should be included in the impact assessment files as appropriate to support the 
information entered below.
Parameter
Process Conditions*
Microorganism Growth 
Requirements
Late Exponential 
Growth Permitted? 
(Yes / No)
Previous Step(s) 
☒ N/A if steps are 
separated by bioburden 
removal operation
Step that Yielded 
Excursion:
Eluate end of hold
Temperature
N/A, 0.2-µm filtered 
directly before step 
that yielded excursion
2–8 °C
10°C to 40 °C,
35 °C (optimal) a
No
pH
N/A
Neutral
Neutral a
Yes
Duration of Potential Growth 
N/A
3 days
Doubling time**
30 min (optimal)
Yes
Microstatic/Microcidal 
Conditions? 
N/A
Yes, eluate solution is 
bacteriostatic c
N/A
No
Other Consideration
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Conclusion: Do the process conditions allow growth to late exponential phase?
Enter “No” here if an answer to any question above is “No” 
No
*	
For process conditions, consider the step where organism was found, including operations between the last bioburden removal step or specific 
ingress point, if known via investigation, and the next bioburden removal step.
**	 Doubling time may be a scientific estimate based on similar conditions or closely related organisms, or a worst-case estimate based on 
common microorganisms at ideal growth conditions (30 min). 
Citations for Vulnerability scoring section
a.	 Bergey’s Manual, Stenotrophomonas, 2015. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118960608.gbm01237
b.	 KEGG BRITE Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. https://www.genome.jp/brite/sml02042
c.	 Based on internal study (footnote to next page)
Vulnerability Scoring: Process Growth Potential
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
55
Technical Report No. 90
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Likelihood of Late Exponential Growth Score
☒ Low
By-product-generating growth of the microorganism(s) Not permitted by process conditions (a conclusion of “No” above) 
☐ High
By-product-generating growth of the microorganism(s) Is permitted by process conditions (a conclusion of “Yes” above)
Vulnerability Score
By-product Potential: Toxin Producer? Protease Producer? 
Penicillin Producer? 
No
Yes
Likelihood of Late Exponential Growth
Low
☐ V1
☒ V1
High
☐ V2
☐ V3
Severity Scoring of Downstream Removal Capability
Severity Score
☒ Low
Downstream process Will remove or kill the microorganism(s) and clear any possible by-products from the specific 
microorganism(s), OR
Downstream process May not remove or kill the microorganism(s) and/or clear possible by-products from the specific 
microorganism(s), but there is direct evidence that potential by-products are not affecting product quality, e.g., endotoxin 
results, accelerated stability results.
☐ High
Downstream process May not remove or kill the microorganism(s) and/or clear any possible by-products from the specific 
microorganism(s)
Document Rationale for Severity Score
Cell removal: S. maltophilia are removed by downstream 0.2-μm filtration, and downstream bioburden results demonstrate reduction to 0 CFU/10 mL 
By-product removal: Downstream purification steps may not remove all microbial by-products but there is direct evidence that potential by-
products are not affecting product quality. Endotoxin results demonstrate endotoxin was below the detectable level at the step being assessed.
Accelerated stability results demonstrated acceptable results, indicating there was no detectable damage from potential microbial protease activity.
Overall Score
Overall Risk Matrix
Severity Score
Likelihood of Proliferation Score
Low
High
V1
Acceptable
Acceptable with Action
V2
Acceptable
Unacceptable
V3
Acceptable
Unacceptable
Overall Risk Score
Impact(s)
Remediation Action
☒	Acceptable
•	 No patient impact
•	 No product quality impact
Action required to prevent recurrence unless justification 
approved by the Quality unit
☐	Acceptable with Action 
•	 No patient impact
•	 No product quality impact
Action required to prevent recurrence
☐	Unacceptable
•	 Potential impact on the patient 
•	 Unacceptable potential for impact on product quality
Action required to reject product lot and prevent recurrence 
Refer to Deviation for product disposition
16.2	 Microbial Impact Assessment Supporting Documents
Example 1 citations are embedded in the tables above. The following documents informed the creation 
of the tool methodology in Example 1 above.
Yarwood, J M, et al. Quorum Sensing in Staphylococcus aureus Biofilms. J Bacteriol 2004, 186 (6), 
(Table 16.1-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
56
© 2023 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 90
1838-1850. doi:10.1128/jb.186.6.1838-1850.2004.
Miller, M B; Bassler, B L. Quorum Sensing in Bacteria. Annual Review of Microbiology 2001, 55 (1), 
165-199. doi:10.1146/annurev.micro.55.1.165>1. 
Janštová, Jr., B, et al. Staphylococcus aureus Growth and Enterotoxin Production in Different Types 
of Milk. Acta Univ Agric et Silvic Mendel Brun 2012, LX (5), 103–108. 
Agata N, et al. Production of Bacillus cereus Emetic Toxin (Cereulide) in Various Foods. Intl Journal 
of Food Microbiology 2002, 73 (1). doi:10.1016/S0168-1605(01)00692-4.
Pearson, F M., et al. Pyrogens: Endotoxin, LAL Testing and Depyrogenation. Mercel Deckker: New York, 1985. 
Raynaud, M; Alouf, J. Intracellular versus Extracellular Toxins. In Microbial Toxins, Volume I: Bacte-
rial Protein Toxins, Ajil, S J, et al., Eds. Academic Press: New York, 1970; pp 67- 117.
Alouf, J; Raynaud, M. Isolation and Purification of Bacterial Toxic Proteins. In Microbial Toxins, 
Volume I: Bacterial Protein Toxins, Ajl, S J, et al., Eds. Academic Press: New York, 1970; pp 119-82.
Evans, T M, et al. Rapid Determination of Bacteriological Water Quality by Using Limulus Lysate. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1978, Feb 35 (2), 376-82. doi: 10.1128/aem.35.2.376-382.1978. 
Malizio, C, et al. Purification of Clostridium botulinum Type A Neurotoxin. Methods Mol Biol 
2000, 145, 27-39. doi: 10.1385/1-59259-052-7:27.
Haggblom, M, et.al. Quantitative Analysis of Cereulide, the Emetic Toxin of Bacillus cereus, pro-
duced under Various Conditions. J Applied and Environmental Microbiology 2002, 68 (5), 2479-2483.
16.3	 Example 2: Microbial Impact Assessment 
Action level Sphingomonas paucimobilus was recovered from a UF/DF equipment-rinse sample directly 
before the UF/DF operation, which includes 0.2-µm filtration (Result: 20 CFU/100 mL, Process limit 
at this step is >10 CFU/100 mL).
The quality impact assessment of the affected batch included the Severity, Probability and Down-
stream Controls for three risk factors as outlined in Table 16.3-1: number of microorganisms, endo-
toxin potential, and other metabolites including exotoxins. 
The conclusion was that the overall risk is Low based on the rationales that the microorganisms were 
not expected to grow to a high number due to the short hold time, there are downstream purification 
steps, and the product showed acceptable results in all subsequent testing.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
