=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-Dec-2020
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-F4A59725-7A27-4ED2-ADBD-6576F1FCA832_6_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99140_06_01
DOI Ref:
fjb0h
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
Change to read:
〈381〉 ELASTOMERIC 
▲
COMPONENTS IN INJECTABLE
PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCT P
ACKAGING/DELIVERY SYSTEMS
1. INTRODUCTION
2. SCOPE
3. TEST SAMPLES
4. PROCEDURES
4.1 Biological Reactivity
4.2 Physicochemical Tests
4.3 Functionality Tests
1. INTRODUCTION
Packaging systems, also referred to as container–closure systems, are de«ned in Packaging and Storage Requirements 〈659〉; these
systems are the sum of components that together contain and protect the drug product. Elastomeric components are formulated with
elastomeric substances and can be either thermoset or thermoplastic in nature.
Every elastomeric component used in a pharmaceutical packaging/delivery system should be proven suitable for its intended use. The
purpose of this chapter is to provide baseline chemical and biological reactivity requirements for the selection of elastomeric injectable
packaging/delivery system components.
The establishment of the potential suitability of an elastomeric component does not rely on a single testing strategy. No single strategy
can cover all elastomeric component attributes that have the potential to impact suitability. The chemical testing prescribed includes
physicochemical tests. Extractable elements may also be relevant to the selection of a packaging system’s materials of construction and
therefore a relevant aspect of material characterization. Materials of construction can vary widely in terms of their intentionally and
unintentionally added elements and their potential use. Because of this, it is challenging to provide universally effective and e­cient test
methodologies, lists of target elements, and repor ting requirements. It is the material user’s responsibility to evaluate the need for
extractable elements testing and, if such testing is necessary, to establish and justify the means by which testing is accomplished, taking
into account extraction conditions, target elements, and repor ting requirement. Elastomeric components can vary widely in terms of their
intentionally and unintentionally added elements as well as the components' potential use. Because of this, it is challenging to provide
universally effective and e­cient test methodologies, lists of target elements, and repor ting requirements. It is the elastomeric
component user's responsibility to evaluate the need for extractable elements testing and, if such testing is necessary, to establish and
justify the means by which testing is accomplished, taking into account extraction conditions, target elements, and repor ting
requirements. The physicochemical tests are also augmented with biological reactivity tests.
If elastomeric components comply with the requirements outlined in this chapter, studies should follow to determine their suitability as
recommended in Assessment of Extractables Associated with Pharmaceutical Packaging/Delivery Systems 〈1663〉 and Assessment of Drug
Product Leachables Associated with Pharmaceutical Packaging/Delivery Systems 〈1664〉.
In summary, establishing chemical suitability of elastomeric components for injectable product packaging/delivery systems involves
multiple tests and testing procedures including:
Elastomeric component screening—baseline requirements for biological reactivity and physicochemical tests described in this
chapter.
Controlled extraction studies—studies as described in 〈1663〉 to create extractables pro«le(s) of par ticular pharmaceutical
packaging/delivery systems and/or packaging components.
Pharmaceutical product assessment—Actual-case measurement of con«rmed leachables in the pharmaceutical product in the
packaging/delivery system intended for the commercial market. (For additional information, see 〈1664〉.)
Additional information about elastomeric components, such as their composition, manufacturing processes, considerations for use,
and testing procedures is found in 〈1381〉.
2. SCOPE
Elastomeric components within scope are those used in the packaging systems of products described in Injections and Implanted Drug
Products 〈1〉.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:44 PM
USP-NF 〈381〉 Elastomeric Components in Injectable Pharmaceutical Product Packaging/Delivery Systems


=== PAGE 2 ===
Elastomeric components utilized for injectable products within chapter scope include, but are not limited to, those used for vials and
bottles (stoppers and cap liners), pre«lled syringes (plungers, needle shields, and tip caps), car tridges (plungers and seal liners), ¬exible
bags (injection por ts), and blow-«ll-seal containers (cap liners). The speci«ed procedures and requirements outlined in this chapter are
not applicable to elastomeric components used in products regulated by the Center for Devices and Radiological Health. All elastomeric
components in direct or indirect contact with the pharmaceutical product are within scope. An example of indirect contact is an
elastomeric layer of a multilayer cap liner that does not directly contact the product but may leach into the product via migration through
the product contact layer. Another example is an elastomeric cap liner that may contact the product after being punctured to attain
product access.
Also within scope are elastomeric components of systems or packages that are intended for transient product storage and/or product
delivery intended for speci«c pharmaceutical products.
Elastomeric components outside of scope include those components of containers and closures that do not have direct or indirect
contact with the pharmaceutical product or hold intermediate compounds, active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), and excipients. Also
outside chapter scope are elastomeric components of containment and/or transpor t systems used in product, intermediate compound,
API, or excipient manufacturing. Although outside of the chapter scope, chapter tests and requirements may be applied.
Chapter procedures and requirements are speci«ed for physicochemical and biological reactivity tests. Elastomeric component
identi«cation tests fall beyond the chapter scope. Elastomeric components are made of a wide variety of elastomeric materials and
optional polymeric coatings. For this reason, it is not possible to have identi«cation tests that encompass all possible elastomeric
component presentations.
Elastomeric component functional suitability tests described in this chapter are within scope until Elastomeric Component Functional
Suitability in Parenteral Product Packaging/Delivery Systems 〈382〉 is fully implemented. As par t of a «nished product packaging system,
elastomeric components must appropriately function to seal the container and, in some cases, aid in safe and effective product delivery.
The essential principles and demonstrated best practices for such assessments for injectable product packaging/delivery systems can
be found in 〈382〉 and Assessment of Elastomeric Component Functional Suitability in Parenteral Product Packaging/Delivery Systems
〈1382〉.
3. TEST SAMPLES
Test samples should mimic «nished elastomeric components after the completion of all manufacturing and processing steps (e.g.,
molding conditions, sterilization, etc.), and surface modi«cations (such as siliconization, chlorinated surface treatments, ¬uoropolymer
coatings and «lms).
4. PROCEDURES
4.1 Biological Reactivity:
Elastomeric components (Type I and Type II) meet the requirements of Biological Reactivity Tests, In Vitro 〈87〉.
1
 If
components do not meet the requirements of 〈87〉, they can be subjected to in vivo testing set for th in Biological Reactivity Tests, In Vivo
〈88〉, Systemic Injection Test and 〈88〉, Intracutaneous Test. Components that meet the requirements of 〈87〉 are not required to undergo 〈88〉
testing.
Type I and Type II closures must both conform to the requirements of either the in vitro or the in vivo biological reactivity tests.
Acceptance criteria:
Test selection and results are consistent with 〈87〉 and/or 〈88〉.
4.2 Physicochemical Tests
Sample solution:
Place whole, uncut elastomeric components corresponding to a surface area of 100 ± 10 cm
2
 into a borosilicate glass,
wide-necked ¬ask (see Containers—Glass 〈660〉). If it is not possible to achieve the prescribed closure surface area (100 ± 10 cm
2
) using
uncut elastomeric components, select the number of components that will most closely approximate 100 cm
2
 and adjust the volume of
water used to the equivalent of 2 mL/1 cm
2
 of the actual elastomeric component's surface area. Add 200 mL of Puri«ed Water or Water for
Injection to the elastomeric components, and weigh. Cover the mouth of the ¬ask with a borosilicate glass beaker, or similar non
interacting container. Immerse the temperature probe for the autoclave program control in water in a container comparable to that used
for the sample. Heat in an autoclave so that a temperature of 121 ± 2° is reached within 20–30 min, and maintain this temperature for 30
min. Cool to room temperature over a period of about 30 min. Add Puri«ed Water or Water for Injection to bring it up to the original mass.
Shake, and immediately decant and collect the solution. [Note—This solution must be shaken before being used in each of the tests.]
Blank:
Prepare a blank solution similarly, using 200 mL of Puri«ed Water or Water for Injection, omitting the elastomeric components.
Elastomeric component categories, Type I and II:
Elastomeric components may be classi«ed in two types: Type I elastomeric closures
meet the strictest requirements and are preferred; Type II elastomeric closures have mechanical proper ties suitable for special uses (e.g.,
multiple piercing) but cannot meet the Type I acceptance criteria for 4.2.1 Appearance, 4.2.4 Absorbance, and 4.2.5 Reducing Substances.
For these tests, Type II elastomeric closures have alternative acceptance criteria that must be met. The intended «nal product application
will determine whether a Type I or Type II elastomeric component is more appropriate.
4.2.1 Appearance (Turbidity/Opalescence):
The determination of turbidity may be performed using either a visual or instrumental
comparison. For a discussion of turbidimetry, see Nephelometry and Turbidimetry 〈855〉. Instrumental assessment of clarity provides a
more discriminatory test that does not depend on the visual acuity of the analyst.
Hydrazine sulfate solution:
Dissolve 1.000 g of analytical grade hydrazine sulfate in par ticle-free water and dilute with par ticle-free water
to 100.0 mL. Allow this solution to stand for 4–6 h.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:44 PM
USP-NF 〈381〉 Elastomeric Components in Injectable Pharmaceutical Product Packaging/Delivery Systems


=== PAGE 3 ===
Hexamethylenetetramine solution:
Dissolve 2.5 g of analytical grade hexamethylenetetramine in 25.0 mL of par ticle-free water in a 100-
mL glass-stoppered ¬ask.
Formazin stock suspension:
Add 25.0 mL of Hydrazine sulfate solution to the Hexamethylenetetramine solution in the 100-mL ¬ask. Mix,
and allow to stand for 48 h at 25 ± 1° before using. This suspension is stable for 2 months, provided it is stored in a glass container free
from surface defects. The suspension must not adhere to the glass and must be well mixed before use.
Formazin standard suspension:
Prepare a suspension by diluting 15.0 mL of the Formazin stock suspension with par ticle-free water to
1000.0 mL. It is stable for about 24 h after preparation.
Reference suspensions:
Prepare according to Table 1. Mix and shake before use. [Note—Stabilized formazin suspensions that can be used
to prepare stable, diluted turbidity standards are available commercially and may be used after comparison with the standards prepared
as described.]
T
able 1. Reference Suspensions
Reference Suspension A
Reference Suspension B
Reference Suspension C
Reference Suspension D
Standard of
opalescence
5.0 mL
10.0 mL
30.0 mL
50.0 mL
Par ticle-free water
95.0 mL
90.0 mL
70.0 mL
50.0 mL
Nephelometric turbidity
units (NTU)
3 NTU
6 NTU
18 NTU
30 NTU
Procedure A (Visual Comp
arison 〈630〉):
Use identical test tubes made of colorless, transparent, neutral glass with a ¬at base and an
internal diameter of 15–25 mm. Fill one tube to a depth of 40 mm with Sample solution, one tube to the same depth with water, and 4
other tubes to the same depth with Reference suspension A, Reference suspension B, Reference suspension C, and Reference suspension
D. Compare the solutions in diffuse daylight 5 min after preparation of the Reference suspensions, viewing ver tically against a black
background. The light conditions must be such that Reference suspension A can be readily distinguished from water, and Reference
suspension B can be readily distinguished from Reference suspension A.
Acceptance criteria:
Type I—Sample solution is not more opalescent than Reference suspension B. Type II—Sample solution is not more
opalescent than Reference suspension C.
Procedure B (instrumental comparison):
Measure the turbidity of the Reference suspensions in a suitable calibrated turbidimeter (see
Nephelometry and Turbidimetry 〈855〉). The Blank should be run and the results corrected for the Blank. Reference suspension A,
Reference suspension B, Reference suspension C, and Reference suspension D represent 3, 6, 18, and 30 NTUs, respectively. Measure the
turbidity of Sample solution using the calibrated turbidimeter.
Acceptance criteria:
Type I—The turbidity of Sample solution [in nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) or formazin turbidity units (FTUs)
corrected for the blank] is NMT that for Reference suspension B (6 NTU/FTU). Type II—The turbidity of Sample solution (in
nephelometric turbidity units or formazin turbidity units, corrected for the blank) is NMT that for Reference suspension C (18 NTU/FTU).
4.2.2 Color
Color standard:
Prepare a solution by diluting 3.0 mL of Matching Fluid O (see Color and Achromicity 〈631〉) with 97.0 mL of diluted
hydrochloric acid (10 ± 0.5%).
Procedure:
Use identical tubes made of colorless, transparent, neutral glass with a ¬at base and an internal diameter of 15–25 mm. Fill
one tube to a depth of 40 mm with Sample solution, and «ll the second tube with the Color standard. Compare the liquids in diffuse
daylight, viewing ver tically against a white background.
Acceptance criteria:
Sample solution is not more intensely colored than the Color standard.
4.2.3 Acidity or Alkalinity
Bromothymol blue solution:
Dissolve 50 mg of bromothymol blue in a mixture of 4 mL of 0.02 M sodium hydroxide and 20 mL of alcohol.
Dilute with water to 100 mL.
Test solution:
To 20 mL of Sample solution add 0.1 mL of Bromothymol blue solution.
Procedure:
If the solution is yellow, titrate with 0.01 N sodium hydroxide until a blue endpoint is reached. If the solution is blue, titrate with
0.01 N hydrochloric acid until a yellow endpoint is reached. If the solution is green, it is neutral and no titration is required.
Blank correction:
Test 20 mL of Blank similarly. Correct the results obtained for Sample solution by subtracting or adding the volume of
titrant required for the Blank, as appropriate. (See Titrimetry 〈541〉.)
Acceptance criteria:
NMT 0.3 mL of 0.01 N sodium hydroxide produces a blue color or NMT 0.8 mL of 0.01 N hydrochloric acid produces a
yellow color, or no titration is required.
4.2.4 Absorbance
[Note—Perform this test within 5 h of preparing Sample solution.]
Procedure:
Pass Sample solution through an iner t «lter of 0.45-µm pore size, discarding the «rst few milliliters of «ltrate. Measure the
absorbance of the «ltrate at wavelengths between 220 and 360 nm in a 1-cm cell using the Blank in a matched cell in the reference
beam. If dilution of the «ltrate is required before measurement of the absorbance, correct the test results for the dilution.
Acceptance criteria:
Type I—NMT 0.2 Type II—NMT 4.0.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:44 PM
USP-NF 〈381〉 Elastomeric Components in Injectable Pharmaceutical Product Packaging/Delivery Systems


=== PAGE 4 ===
4.2.5 Reducing Substances
[Note—Perform this test within 4 h of preparing Sample solution.]
Procedure:
To 20.0 mL of Sample solution add 1 mL of diluted sulfuric acid and 20.0 mL of 0.002 M potassium permanganate. Boil for 3
min. Cool, add 1 g of potassium iodide, and titrate immediately with 0.01 M sodium thiosulfate using 0.25 mL of starch solution TS as
the indicator. Perform a titration using 20.0 mL of Blank and note the difference in volume of 0.01 M sodium thiosulfate required.
Acceptance criteria:
Type I—The difference between titration volumes is NMT 3.0 mL of 0.01 M sodium thiosulfate. Type II—The difference
between titration volumes is NMT 7.0 mL of 0.01 M sodium thiosulfate.
4.2.6 Volatile Sul«des
Procedure:
Place elastomeric components, cut if necessary, with a total surface area of 20 ± 2 cm
2
 in a 100-mL ¬ask, and add 50 mL of a
20-g/L citric acid solution. In the same manner and at the same time, prepare a control solution in a separate ¬ask by dissolving 0.154
mg of sodium sul«de in 50 mL of a 20-g/L citric acid solution. Place a piece of lead acetate paper over the mouth of each ¬ask, and hold
the paper in position by placing an inver ted weighing bottle over it. Immerse the temperature probe for the autoclave program control in
water in a container comparable to that used for the sample. Heat the ¬asks in an autoclave so that a temperature of 121 ± 2° is reached
within 20–30 min, and then maintain this temperature for 30 min. Cool to room temperature over a period of about 30 min.
Acceptance criteria:
Any black stain on the paper produced by the test solution is not more intense than that produced by the control
solution.
4.2.7 Ammonium
Alkaline potassium tetraiodomercurate solution:
Prepare a 100-mL solution containing 11 g of potassium iodide and 15 g of mercuric
iodide in water. Immediately before use, mix one volume of this solution with an equal volume of a 250-g/L solution of sodium hydroxide.
Test solution:
Dilute 5 mL of Sample solution with water to 14 mL. Make alkaline, if necessary, by adding 1 N sodium hydroxide, and dilute
with water to 15 mL. Add 0.3 mL of Alkaline potassium tetraiodomercurate solution and close the container.
Ammonium standard solution:
Prepare a solution of ammonium chloride in water [1 ppm of ammonium (NH4
+
)]. Mix 10 mL of the 1 ppm
ammonium chloride solution with 5 mL of water and 0.3 mL of Alkaline potassium tetraiodomercurate solution. Close the container.
Acceptance criteria:
After 5 min, any yellow color in the Test solution is no darker than the Ammonium standard solution [NMT 2 ppm of
ammonium (NH4
+
) in Sample solution].
4.3 Functionality Tests
[Note—Samples treated as described for preparation of Sample solution and air-dried should be used for the functionality tests of 4.3.1
Penetrability, 4.3.2 Fragmentation, and 4.3.3 Self-Sealing Capacity. Functionality tests are performed on closures intended to be pierced by a
hypodermic needle. The 4.3.3 Self-Sealing Capacity test is required only for closures intended for multiple-dose containers. The needle
speci«ed for each test is a lubricated, long-bevel (bevel angle 12 ± 2°) hypodermic needle with an external diameter of 0.8 mm (21 gauge).
2
]
4.3.1 Penetrability
Procedure:
Fill 10 suitable vials to the nominal volume with water, «t the closures to be examined, and secure with a cap. Using a new
hypodermic needle as described above for each closure, pierce the closure with the needle perpendicular to the surface.
Acceptance criteria:
The force for piercing is no greater than 10 N (1 kilogram-force) for each closure, determined with an accuracy of
±0.25 N (25 gram-force).
4.3.2 Fragmentation
Closures for liquid preparations:
Fill 12 clean vials with water to 4 mL less than the nominal capacity. Fit the closures to be examined,
secure with a cap, and allow to stand for 16 h.
Closures for dry preparations:
Fit closures to be examined into 12 clean vials, and secure each with a cap.
Procedure:
Using a hypodermic needle as described above «tted to a clean syringe, inject into each vial 1 mL of water while removing 1
mL of air. Repeat this procedure 4 times for each closure, piercing each time at a different site. Use a new needle for each closure,
checking that it is not blunted during the test. Filter the total volume of liquid in all the vials through a single «lter with a nominal pore
size NMT 0.5 µm. Count the rubber fragments on the surface of the «lter visible to the naked eye.
Acceptance criteria:
There are no more than 5 fragments visible. This limit is based on the assumption that fragments with a diameter >50
µm are visible to the naked eye. In case of doubt or dispute, the par ticles are examined microscopically to verify their nature and size.
4.3.3 Self-Sealing Capacity
Procedure:
Fill 10 suitable vials with water to the nominal volume. Fit the closures that are to be examined, and cap. Using a new
hypodermic needle as described above for each closure, pierce each closure 10 times, piercing each time at a different site. Immerse the
10 vials in a solution of 0.1% (1 g/L) methylene blue, and reduce the external pressure by 27 kPa for 10 min. Restore to atmospheric
pressure, and leave the vials immersed for 30 min. Rinse the outside of the vials.
Acceptance criteria:
None of the vials contain any trace of blue solution.▲ (USP 1-Dec-2020)
1
Biological reactivity testing in suppor t of elastomeric components used for «nal pharmaceutical product packaging/delivery systems (drugs
and drug/device combination products) provides baseline information and will often not be su­cient to assess the «nal suitability for use
expectations of regulatory authorities. Thus, it is impor tant to work with the appropriate regulatory authority for guidance regarding a product-
speci«c application.
2
Refer to ISO 7864: Sterile Hypodermic Needles for Single Use.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:44 PM
USP-NF 〈381〉 Elastomeric Components in Injectable Pharmaceutical Product Packaging/Delivery Systems


=== PAGE 5 ===
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<381> ELASTOMERIC COMPONENTS IN
INJECTABLE PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCT
PACKAGING/DELIVERY SYSTEMS
Desmond G. Hunt
Principal Scienti«c Liaison
GCPD2020
General Chapters - Packaging and
Distribution
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. 50(4)
Current DocID: GUID-F4A59725-7A27-4ED2-ADBD-6576F1FCA832_6_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99140_06_01
DOI ref: fjb0h
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 2:44 PM
USP-NF 〈381〉 Elastomeric Components in Injectable Pharmaceutical Product Packaging/Delivery Systems
