=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-Aug-2022
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-CC94B030-F0F8-417C-99FB-B59F0DD8DB11_2_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7412_02_01
DOI Ref:
l6zlc
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
〈1229.3〉 MONITORING OF BIOBURDEN
Change to read:
INTRODUCTION
Monitoring of in-process bioburden of pharmaceutical components and products is an essential element of the overall contamination-
control program for appropriate sterilization process control. Bioburden monitoring should be designed for the recovery of a broad range of
microorganisms that are likely to be present in the material being processed. Sterilization processes are implemented in order to eliminate
bioburden in materials and the products, ensuring both adequate process control and end-user safety.
Bioburden is a potential risk to the patient not only because the sterilization process might not be completely effective, but also post-
processing because of the possible presence of residual materials such as allergens, endotoxins, and exotoxins. It may also have adverse
impact on product quality and stability. Therefore, although bioburden may be con«dently killed by destructive sterilization processes or
removed by retentive processes («ltration), as summarized in the ensuing sections, its proliferation before sterilization should be avoided.
Process controls and cleaning, sanitization, and disinfection programs provide active means for the control of bioburden population and
suppor t the sampling, enumeration, and characterization of bioburden necessary to ▲
ensure▲ (USP 1-Aug-2022)
that sterilization processes are
effective.
Destructive Processes
Destructive sterilization processes, e.g., moist and dry heat sterilization, are developed and validated to kill microorganisms. It is critically
impor tant to the quality control aspects of the sterilization program to fully understand the bioburden. The microorganisms that are most
resistant to widely used destructive processes are spores of cer tain Gram-positive bacteria (note that mold spores are less resistant to these
destructive processes than are bacterial spores). As a result of the resistance proper ties of these organisms, some species are commonly
used as biological indicators for the evaluation of sterilization process performance. In their vegetative state, microorganisms that form
spores do not exhibit extraordinary resistance to sterilization processes.
Processes that rely on ionizing radiation are an exception to typical resistance pro«les because some non-spore-forming microorganisms
exhibit higher resistance than do spore formers. Bioburden within materials and products subjected to radiation processes is evaluated as
par t of dose setting activities and is explained in the Radiation section that follows.
The sterilization process, the development of a thorough understanding of the process, and its microbiological impact are major elements
in con«rming that an acceptable level of sterility assurance is established. Understanding the inactivation kinetics of the typical bioburden as
well as other potential bioburden microorganisms is critical to successful implementation. The new process should have a documented risk
assessment outlining its monitoring and control aspects. The establishment of a new sterilization process requires the evaluation of the
suggested biological indicator resistance (1,2).
Retentive Processes
The microorganisms least likely to be retained by a sterilizing «ltration process are those that are potentially smaller than the smallest
pores in the «lter matrix. Although size exclusion is an impor tant factor, «lters do not retain microorganisms solely by sieve retention.
Adsorption, wherein microorganisms are retained within the «lter matrix by entrapment or electrostatic forces, also is an impor tant retention
mechanism. The control of pre«ltration bioburden is an impor tant risk-mitigation factor in retentive processes, and this is par ticularly true
when adsorption may be a signi«cant retention mechanism. Bioburden removal capability therefore depends on the size and number of the
bioburden microorganisms, the pore size distribution of the «lter, the proper ties of the solution being «ltered, and the «ltration process
parameters.
Change to read:
MONITORING AND SAMPLING
Statistical and analytical limitations complicate the evaluation of bioburden from both liquid and solid materials. Many products are
inherently antimicrobial, and some formulations contain antimicrobial preservatives, both of which can limit bioburden recovery. Products
that are outside of the pH range of approximately 4–9, are strongly hyper tonic or strongly hypotonic, or have low water activity, may reduce
the level of recoverable microorganisms.
The collection of multiple samples from the same bulk often gives varying results due to temporal and spatial differences in microbial
distribution. Samples from varied components and different formulations will give different results because of different nutritional and
cultural requirements, environmental stress to microorganisms, sampling methods, sample size, sampling pattern, species heterogeneity,
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:42 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.3〉 Monitoring of Bioburden


=== PAGE 2 ===
and shifting microbial populations. Because of the technical challenges associated with bioburden analysis, results will be dependent upon
sample-speci«c and method-speci«c variables when attempting to recover, grow, or enumerate organisms. Sampling frequency and
maximum time delay between sampling and testing should be established based on previous data.
Presterilization bioburden analysis should be conducted on samples that are representative of materials produced during routine
preparation and processing. Sampling frequency should be established based on previous data, known variability, batch size, material,
process, and environmental in¬uences. Bioburden should be recovered and enumerated from samples that are representative of the process
material. When the material is stored in separate containers, analysts should consider testing multiple or composite samples. Bioburden
evaluation should focus on microorganisms that represent a greater concern in the sterilization process. Total count methods should
consider the proper ties of both the product under evaluation and the characteristics of the process that may affect recovery. Cultivation
methods, diluents, and media selection must be based on past experience with the manufacturing process and test material (3). The
methods listed in Microbial Enumeration Tests 〈61〉 and Mycoplasma Tests 〈63〉 may be appropriate for bioburden evaluation, although they
may require modi«cation to the methods and quali«cations in order to meet the requirements of speci«c test materials.
Bioburden Screening
Materials and products that are to be sterilized should be examined to determine the level of bioburden in the ar ticle. Determining the
microbial population level is an essential element in ensuring process e­cacy. For lethal processes other than radiation, the presence of
gram-positive spore-formers represent the greatest potential for survival. The potential resistance of the bioburden to the speci«c
sterilization process is an impor tant consideration and can be evaluated by a screening process. Isolates that are identi«ed as gram-negative
rods have the potential to cause high levels of endotoxin. Figure 1 illustrates one possible bioburden screening program.
Fig. 1. Typical bioburden screening program.
Destructive Processes (except Radiation)
Microorganisms can be recovered after exposure to heat screening or shock at 100°, which eliminates vegetative cells and also triggers
the germination process in spore-forming bacteria ▲
(see Methods for Determination of Resistance of Microorganisms to Sterilization
Processes 〈56〉)▲ (USP 1-Aug-2022)
(4). Heat shock treatment is an effective means to reduce the amount of bioburden microorganisms to be
evaluated because spore-formers are the most resistant to all lethal processes other than radiation. Heat screening eliminates vegetative
cells that lack resistance to sterilization and encourages germination, thus making it easier to isolate spore formers.
Published repor ts compare the resistance of recovered microorganisms to that of prede«ned bioindicators for many common (4,5)
sterilization processes. Analysts should evaluate the isolated spore-forming bacteria to determine their resistance D-value to speci«c lethal
sterilization processes and thus to ensure the validity of the sterilization method. The available data describe the lack of resistance of
medically and environmentally isolated bacteria, mold, and yeast species to the more commonly used sterilization methods, so analysts may
«nd only limited value in repeating these resistance studies.
Radiation
Sterilization by radiation processes is based on the bioburden in the presterilized material. Analysts commonly use bioburden-based
sterilization processes as described in ANSI/AAMI/ISO 11137 (6). To ensure consistent sterility assurance, lot-to-lot variability of bioburden
must be controlled. Data should be collected and analyzed for raw materials, intermediates, and/or products to ensure process control.
ANSI/AAMI/ISO 11137 provides detailed information about radiation sterilization practices, including cycle development, validation
approaches, and dose-auditing methodologies including expectations for initial and periodic bioburden assessment. ANSI/AAMI/ISO 11737
provides guidance for establishing methods to estimate bioburden levels on medical devices prior to irradiation (7).
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:42 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.3〉 Monitoring of Bioburden


=== PAGE 3 ===
Sterilizing Filtration
Bioburden screening for sterilizing «ltration processes not yet subjected to formal validation can be performed by passing the material
through a 0.45-µm-rated «lter and examining the «ltrate for viable microorganisms. Only those microorganisms that pass the 0.45-µm «lter
are of interest because they present the greatest potential challenge to the sterilizing «ltration process. They should be evaluated against the
upstream bioburden. Bioburden of greatest concern includes Pseudomonas, Brevundimonas, Ralstonia, and Mycoplasma.
Identi«cation
Recovered microorganisms can be identi«ed to an appropriate level using the methods described in Microbial Characterization,
Identi«cation, and Strain Typing 〈1113〉. Only those microorganisms that present a potential risk to the product or the patient require
identi«cation to the species level or beyond. For a detailed discussion of the methods used to grow and identify microorganisms, see 〈1113〉.
It is not necessary for the purposes of evaluating presterilization bioburden to identify all isolates to the species level, although this can be
helpful in some investigations. Analysts must conduct all evaluative work with pure cultures, and they must apply normal microbiology
laboratory procedures for the selection and maintenance of pure cultures.
Bioburden Control
A typical bioburden-control program includes review and analysis of potential sources of contamination as well as sound process design
and preventive and monitoring measures. The microbiological contamination-control program should be developed to identify and control
bioburden and to assess product risk based on a formal assessment of risk modalities. The bioburden risk assessment should result in the
establishment of critical control points and should include consideration of the following elements:
Microbiological attributes of materials before sterilization and the manufacturing process used for the materials (if applicable)
Inherent antimicrobial proper ties of the materials
Time limits for process execution
Water activity of the material
Environmental conditions within the facility
Equipment design and cleaning
Sanitization, decontamination, and other active microbial control processes (such as pre«ltration, temperature, pH, osmolarity, etc.)
Controlling the bioburden of materials and products to be sterilized will ensure conformance to the levels required by the sterilization
process validation. Additionally, controlling the bioburden levels of the items to be sterilized assures that residuals (e.g., allergens,
endotoxins, and exotoxins) from that population will also be controlled. This is impor tant because direct detection of these materials is
challenging.
REFERENCES
1. 21 CFR 807, Subpar t E. Premarket Noti«cation Procedures.
2. US Food and Drug Administration. Updated 510(k) sterility review guidance K90-1; «nal guidance for industry and FDA. Rockville, MD:
FDA; 2002. http:/
/academy.gmp-compliance.org/guidemgr/«les/2301.PDF
3. Murray CJ. Sampling and data analysis for environmental microbiology. In: Manual of Environmental Microbiology, 2nd ed; Hurst CJ,
Knudsen GR, McInerney J, eds. Washington, DC: ASM Press; 2002:166–177.
4. P¬ug IJ. Microbiology and Engineering of Sterilization Processes. 7th ed. Minneapolis, MN: Environmental Sterilization Laboratory;
1990.
5. Block S. Disinfection, Sterilization & Preservation. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 2001.
Ã. ANSI/AAMI/ISO 11137-1:2006. Sterilization of Health Care Products—Radiation—Par t 1: Requirements for Development, Validation,
and Routine Control of a Sterilization Process for Medical Devices. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical
Instrumentation (AAMI); 2006.
7. ANSI/AAMI/ISO 11737-1:2006. Sterilization of Medical Devices—Microbiological Methods—Par t 1: Estimation of Population of
Microorganisms on Products. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI); 2006.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<1229.3> MONITORING OF BIOBURDEN
Huiping Tu
Director, Biologics
GCM2022
General Chapters - Microbiology
2022
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. 50(1)
Current DocID: GUID-CC94B030-F0F8-417C-99FB-B59F0DD8DB11_2_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M7412_02_01
DOI ref: l6zlc
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:42 PM
USP-NF 〈1229.3〉 Monitoring of Bioburden
