=== PAGE 1 ===
Status: Currently O­cial on 12-Feb-2025
O­cial Date: O­cial as of 01-Mar-2019
Document Type:
General Chapter
DocId:
GUID-D0610491-0F4D-429D-B613-B027FB979018_5_en-US
DOI:
https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99930_05_01
DOI Ref:
xf3ku
© 2025 USPC
Do not distribute
Change to read:
〈1211〉
▲
STERILITY ASSURANCE▲USP41
Change to read:
▲
INTRODUCTION
This informational chapter provides general information on the concepts and principles involved in the preparation of materials that must
be sterile. Within the strictest de«nition of sterility, an item is deemed sterile only when it contains no viable microorganisms. However, this
textual de«nition cannot be applied to actual items labeled as sterile because of irresolvable limitations in testing. Sterility cannot be
demonstrated without the destructive testing of every sterile unit. In a real sense, microbiological safety is achieved through the
implementation of interrelated controls that in combination provide con«dence that the items are suitable for use as labeled. It is the
controls that provide the desired assurance from microbiological risk rather than the results of any in-process or «nished goods testing. The
veri«cation of safety of products labeled sterile is generally known as “sterility assurance” and that nomenclature will be used throughout this
chapter.
The establishment of an effective sterility assurance program requires information about the material to be sterilized. An initial
determination should be made regarding the potential for terminal sterilization of the material in its primary container applying the principles
de«ned in Sterilization of Compendial Ar ticles 〈1229〉. As described, the appropriate process provides a balance between conditions that are
lethal to potential bioburden present in/on the item and those that preserve its essential quality attributes. Depending upon the results of that
determination, sterility of the item may be achieved by either aseptic processing or terminal sterilization. The potential for a process that
relies on both the protective measures inherent to aseptic processing and the lethal nature of terminal sterilization may offer advantages.
Regardless of the process selection decision, the establishment of design, operation, process controls, and monitoring systems is essential
to provide the necessary con«dence in the outcome.
The production of sterile products is subject to numerous factors that in¬uence the outcome (see Figure 1). The identi«ed factors in the
image should be considered for their impact on sterility of the «nal product, although not all of the in¬uencing elements are depicted.
Figure 1. In¬uences on sterile products.
The decisions made relative to the in¬uences shown in Figure 1 will determine the success of the sterility assurance program. Poor
choices, regardless of any successful process controls associated with them, must be acknowledged as fundamentally unsound. The
process design objective is related to contamination controls intended to obviate risk of microbial ingress. This focus is appropriate
regardless of whether the process used is aseptic processing or terminal sterilization.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:32 PM
USP-NF 〈1211〉 Sterilization Assurance


=== PAGE 2 ===
Recognition that operating personnel are the most signi«cant contributors of microbiological risk leads to design preferences and
operating principles that should be adhered to with respect to sterile operations. This knowledge underscores the impor tance of separating
personnel from the aseptic environment and limiting their interaction with sterilized components and product(s). The means for
accomplishing these goals are embodied in two complementary practices (1):
The use of automation technology—to reduce or eliminate personnel interventions and thus personnel-borne contamination
The use of separative technologies—to eliminate, to the extent technically possible, human sourced contamination
Thus the implementation of appropriate contamination control procedures is paramount in design and operation of sterile product
manufacturing systems.
Consideration of these principles adapts the Quality by Design (QbD) approach widely adopted in regulatory standards (2–3). Using QbD
concepts in sterile operations is markedly different from the applications in the typical formulation, pharmaceutical, chemical, or biological
synthesis process. The establishment of direct linkage between a monitored condition and process outcome with respect to sterile
manufacturing is statistically di­cult and analytically uncer tain. The situation with respect to the de«nition of physical design elements is
similar. Given the great variation in sterile product manufacturing with respect to scale, con«guration, and complexity, it follows that the
design alternatives and operating practices must also be ¬exible. Thus, the recommendations provided in this chapter are entirely non-
numeric, because there are no ready means with which to demonstrate the suitability of speci«c values. Instead, QbD for sterile processing
should be driven toward a singular goal of optimizing contamination control with a par ticular focus on the microbial risk impact of personnel.
The speci«c means vary but should be of prime consideration in process design. Figure 2 outlines the elements that contribute to sterility
assurance, as described in the remaining sections of this chapter.
Figure 2. Elements contributing to sterility assurance.
Aseptic Processing
There are a substantial number of sterile products that cannot be terminally sterilized because of adverse impact on the
product/package’s essential proper ties and must be prepared by aseptic processing. Aseptic processes are designed to prevent the
introduction of viable microorganisms into/onto separately sterilized materials during their assembly into a sealed sterile package. Aseptic
processes can vary in complexity from comparatively simple «lling/sealing to challenging and lengthy manufacturing sequences required for
complex items. Regardless of process scale, all of the individually sterilized materials must be protected from contamination from the point
of sterilization through closure of the primary package. This is accomplished through adherence to the principles described below in which
an International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 5 condition is maintained when materials are exposed to the environment (see
Microbiological Control and Monitoring of Aseptic Processing Environments 〈1116〉). Exclusive to aseptic processing is the execution of
process simulations that suppor t batch or campaign duration (4–6).
Terminal Sterilization
Terminally sterilized products are the lowest risk category of sterile pharmaceutical products. Unlike products aseptically manufactured
under conditions designed to prevent microbial ingress, terminally sterilized products are subjected to a sterilization process that impar ts a
quanti«able safety level. Terminal sterilization processes achieve this by delivering measurable physical conditions that correspond to
microbial lethality. For terminally sterilized products, sterility assurance is de«ned in terms of the probability of nonsterility (PNS), or the
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:32 PM
USP-NF 〈1211〉 Sterilization Assurance


=== PAGE 3 ===
probability of the terminal sterilization process generating a nonsterile unit (PNSU). Terminal sterilization processes must achieve a
consistent validated performance of a PNSU of ≤10
−6
 (a probability of NMT 1 nonsterile unit in 1 million units produced) (see 〈1229〉). The
convention by which terminal sterilization cycles are developed and validated ensures that the actual PNSU is typically much lower (better)
than the minimum standard of <10
−6
.
Chapter 〈1229〉 summarizes the common requirements for sterilization process design, development, validation, and process control.
Terminal sterilization processes share common requirements of well-de«ned process parameters strictly controlled within de«ned operating
limits. Terminal sterilization must be suppor ted by a system of product disposition, which includes the assessment of critical physical
process parameters, presterilization product parameters (e.g., bioburden, container–closure integrity), and environmental parameters.
Terminal sterilization can rely on parametric release practices to obviate the need for sterility testing (see Terminally Sterilized
Pharmaceutical Products—Parametric Release 〈1222〉).
Post-Aseptic Processing Terminal Sterilization
An aseptic process followed by a terminal sterilization process provides superior control over the presterilization bioburden, such that the
subsequent sterilization process can be designed with less overall lethality, thereby making it possible to substantially extend the use of
terminal sterilization to products with greater sensitivity to the applied energy of the process. From a patient safety perspective, this
approach has the following distinct advantages:
An adventitious contaminant introduced during aseptic processing is easily killed by the terminal sterilization step, reducing the extent
of in-process environmental monitoring performed
Bioburden controls for the terminal process are simpli«ed because all units have been aseptically «lled
Where a product is made using either process alone, the limitations of each (no terminal lethal component in aseptic, more
degradation in terminal sterilization) would persist
Where bioburden is controlled through aseptic processing, terminal sterilization can be applicable at lower lethality levels
Classical F
, time-temperature, and radiation dose (kGy) targets for sterilization processes are arbitrarily selected and intended to simplify
process validation, but in reality serve to reduce the use of terminal treatments. Physical lethality data based on «xed numerical values are
inherently conservative and disregard the degradative impact of the sterilization process on the product. The focus must be on the ability of
the process to kill bioburden organisms rather than biological indicators (see 〈1229〉 and Moist Heat Sterilization of Aqueous Liquids
〈1229.2〉).
While product quality attributes can be impaired by “standard” sterilizing conditions, the combined process can utilize less aggressive
sterilizing conditions to minimize adverse effects upon the product and primary packaging materials. If the terminal treatment follows
aseptic processing, then the sterilizing conditions need not be excessive as there is essentially no risk from presterilization bioburden in the
«lled containers. Sterilization process conditions would be dictated by the speci«cs of the product in parallel with the establishment of
appropriate controls on presterilization bioburden derived from environmental and pre«ltration isolates.
Containers and Closures
The container and closure for a sterile formulation are integral par ts of the sterile product. The container materials provide essential
protection to the product throughout its shelf life and are chosen to minimize interaction with, preserve the quality attributes of, and facilitate
dispensing of the sterile product. The container materials should be readily sterilizable, either separately prior to «lling and/or together with
the formulation in a terminal process. Containers and closures should be selected for:
Reliability of container–closure integrity over the shelf life
Absence of interaction with formulation materials
Ease of handling in the processing environment and during administration
Tolerance of variation in equipment and other components
Cleanliness including freedom from par ticulates and absence of leachable or extractable chemicals
Compatibility with the product
Control over endotoxin content (where appropriate)
Protection of components prior to use (where appropriate)
Compatibility with preparation, sterilization, and depyrogenation processes (where appropriate)
The essential aspects of container–closure materials for sterile products are subject to numerous requirements elsewhere within USP–NF.
The reader must consider the content provided in Injections and Implanted Drug Products 〈1〉, Bacterial Endotoxins Test 〈85〉, Visible
Par ticulates in Injections 〈790〉, Package Integrity Evaluation—Sterile Products 〈1207〉, Depyrogenation 〈1228〉, and 〈1229〉.
Decontamination
Decontamination is a broadly de«ned term used to describe a variety of processes that reduce microbial populations without an
expectation for total kill.
1
 It is not a substitute for sterilization; a sterilization process should be used wherever possible. A variety of
chemical agents and methods are used that vary depending upon the application. Decontamination is used for bioburden reduction of
materials, equipment, and environments in suppor t of sterile product manufacture:
For materials and surfaces that cannot be sterilized
For materials and surfaces that do not require sterilization
0
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:32 PM
USP-NF 〈1211〉 Sterilization Assurance


=== PAGE 4 ===
Decontamination processes are ordinarily separated into two major categories based upon their effectiveness against spore-forming
microorganisms (see Disinfectants and Antiseptics 〈1072〉). Sporicidal treatments are used in critical applications such as isolator
decontamination, air-lock/pass-throughs, etc. Their toxicity to personnel and sometimes corrosive chemistry may preclude their exclusive
use for microbial control. Non-sporicidal agents have fewer safety and material impact concerns, and the occasional use of a sporicidal
agent is required to control spore populations. Applications for decontamination are diverse; among the more common uses are:
Decontamination of controlled environments and non-product contact surfaces
In conventional cleanrooms, including restricted access barrier systems (RABS), this is predominantly a manual process performed after
cleaning of the room/production line
Decontamination of items upon transition into an environment of higher classi«cation
Isolators commonly use an automated process
Periodic decontamination of operator gloves during processing
Decontamination of product contact surfaces
Large equipment (e.g., stopper bowls) can be manually sanitized on a frequent basis in addition to sterilization to avoid the extensive
manipulation required for their installation post-sterilization
2
Re-decontamination of sterilized equipment after aseptic assembly or intervention
Periodic decontamination of previously sterilized utensils prior to interventions
Depyrogenation
The minimization of pyrogen content is a requirement for injectable products. During the production of sterile products, depyrogenation
processes are used in a variety of ways to minimize pyrogenic contamination of surfaces, materials, and products. Details on depyrogenation
processes are provided in 〈1228〉.
Equipment
Equipment used for sterile product manufacturing varies in its impact on the manufacturing process and on product quality and should
have several impor tant characteristics. For example, the equipment should:
Operate reliably and produce products of consistent quality
Not adversely impact essential product quality attributes
Be easily cleanable and sterilizable, as necessary
Minimize human intervention during set-up and operation through such features as physical separation, automation, and robotics
Be tolerant of variations in container–closure materials
Designed to minimize product exposure to the background environment
The extent to which the equipment interacts with process materials and the product affects the level of impact. Process equipment can
in¬uence the quality of the «nished product in a variety of ways, and this can occur prior to and after sterilization and depyrogenation.
equipment in direct contact with components, containers, closures, and sterile products
This equipment category includes those items in direct contact with the drug substance, drug product, raw materials, and primary
packaging components, including, for example, mixing and storage vessels, piping systems and tubing, «lters, «lling pumps, lyophilizer
shelves, and feed hoppers. Product contact surfaces of this equipment are designed and may require additional treatment to minimize
adverse impact (microbial, par ticulate, and chemical) on the contacted materials. The procedures used for the cleaning and sterilization of
direct contact surfaces, including dir ty, clean, and sterile hold times, must be validated to ensure they do not adversely impact essential
product quality attributes as well as to verify the effectiveness of the cleaning procedure and that no microbial
recontamination/proliferation occurs during equipment storage. Direct contact utensils are subject to the same considerations. With
appropriate consideration of materials' compatibility, single-use disposable equipment (supplied sterile when necessary) may be utilized.
equipment having indirect contact with components, containers, closures, and sterile products
Equipment having a signi«cant impact on product quality, that does not contact components, primary packaging materials, and sterile
products, includes the electro-mechanical elements (non-product contact) of «lling machines, stoppering machines, and sterilizers. The
performance of this equipment can change «ll weight, par ticle size, moisture level, content uniformity, container–closure integrity, and other
essential quality attributes. This equipment is ordinarily located near exposed product contact equipment surfaces. For example, a pre-
assembled «lling set (product contact equipment) may be installed on a «lling machine (signi«cant impact without product contact), which
provides control over the «ll volume or weight. The surfaces of this equipment must be compatible with the cleaning and microbial
decontamination and/or sterilization agents employed.
other equipment
Some equipment has only an indirect impact on product quality, for example, conveyors, turntables, balances, air samplers, and car ts. The
in¬uence of this equipment is largely on the environments in which the product is made. The exposed surfaces of this equipment must be
compatible with the cleaning and decontamination agents used.
Facilities
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:32 PM
USP-NF 〈1211〉 Sterilization Assurance


=== PAGE 5 ===
Sterile manufacturing operations are suppor ted by administrative, laboratory, maintenance, and warehouse functions and other activities.
The impact of these operations on the location and overall design of the sterile manufacturing area must be considered. Emphasis should be
given in facility design to the ¬ows of materials, components, personnel, equipment, and waste streams throughout the facility and to the
orderly transition of items between environments of different classi«cations to prevent mix-up and avoid product contamination. Facility
environmental and utility systems must be designed to minimize microbial, chemical, and par ticulate contamination. The facility design must
be suppor ted by practices and procedures such as cleaning and decontamination, gowning, and material transfer. The architectural details of
the facility infrastructure must consider the means for cleaning and disinfection. Detailed design recommendations can be found in the
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering's Baseline Guide: Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities (7).
The core activities for sterile product manufacture are carried out in classi«ed environments operating in conformance with the ISO 14644
series of standards (8). A pressure cascade descending from the more critical areas to less critical is commonplace. In general, the more
protection that materials have from potential sources of contamination during holding or processing, the less impact the facility has on the
process outcome. Human operators within ISO 14644 classi«ed cleanrooms used in aseptic processing are the greatest risk to product
safety; therefore, no single risk mitigation factor in aseptic processing is more impor tant than minimizing risk emanating from gowned
operators.
Early-stage container–closure and equipment washing and preparation are carried out in lower classi«cation areas (ISO 7–8). Nonsterile
formulation is typically carried out in ISO 6–7 environments. The production materials are introduced into the processing area where
subsequent steps are performed. The bioburden level of the materials in¬uences the detailed design of the facility and its controls.
Nonsterile materials (e.g., formulation, containers, closures, equipment, and utensils) require subsequent sterilization and, where necessary,
depyrogenation. Sterile materials are introduced through airlocks and pass-throughs. The facility design controls for the background, and
processing environments should be chosen to preserve the intended microbial attributes of the in-process and «nished materials.
Table 1 provides some examples of formulation and «lling environments.
T
able 1. Examples of Environments for Processing
Processing Technology
Background Environment
Processing Environment
Reference
Conventional cleanroom
ISO 5–7
ISO 5
FDA AP 2004 (9), EMA Annex
(10)
Closed RABS
ISO 7
ISO 5
ISPE (11), PHSS (12)
Open RABS
ISO 5
ISO 5
ISPE (11), PHSS (12)
Closed isolators
CNC
a
ISO 5
FDA AP 2004 (9), PDA TR No.
34 (13), ISPE (7)
Open isolators
CNC-ISO 8
ISO 5
FDA AP 2004 (9), PIC/S (14),
PDA TR No. 34 (13), ISPE (7)
Blow-«ll-seal/form-«ll-seal
ISO 5–7
ISO 5
FDA AP 2004 (9), Baseman (15)
Closed systems
CNC
Not applicable
b
PDA TR No. 28 (5); Agalloco,
Hussong, et al. (16)
Terminal sterilization
ISO 8
ISO 5–7
EMA Annex (10)
a
Controlled non-classi«ed—a non-classi«ed controlled environment with «ltered air supply.
b
As the process occurs with a closed system, there is no separate processing environment.
[Note—Table values represent the operational condition and are adapted from the reference documents.]
conventional cleanroom
The critical activities are performed in ISO 5 environments suppor ted by surrounding ISO 5–7 environments where gowned personnel are
normally located. There may be only limited separation between gowned personnel and sterile materials and product contact surfaces. The
critical activities are performed within a unidirectional air¬ow environment. Decontamination of the cleanroom is commonly performed by
personnel.
restricted access barrier systems
The typical RABS provides ISO 5 unidirectional air within the barrier and is situated in a conventional ISO 5–7 cleanroom. RABS may be
designed to allow for opening of barriers to enable human intervention, or they may be designed to operate closed with the same
operational restrictions regarding operator access that applies to isolators (see below). Air overspill from within the barrier is designed to
prevent the ingress of contamination. Operator manipulation of sterile items is achieved using glove por ts, and material transfers are
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:32 PM
USP-NF 〈1211〉 Sterilization Assurance


=== PAGE 6 ===
accomplished without opening the system. A RABS that is opened mid-process should be treated as a conventional cleanroom (see above).
RABSs require decontamination prior to use. This may be accomplished either manually or using automated systems.
isolators
Isolators provide complete separation between personnel and the enclosed ISO 5 processing environment. A de«ned pressure differential
is maintained between the ISO 5 environment and the surrounding area. Air overspill provides an aerodynamic seal at points where the
product exits the isolator into an external environment of lesser classi«cation or no classi«cation. The use of unidirectional air is not
required in isolators. Isolators are commonly decontaminated using automated systems.
blow-fill-seal and form-fill-seal
These technologies form, «ll, and seal ¬exible walled containers in an ISO 5 environment. Blow-«ll-seal (BFS) and form-«ll-seal (FFS)
equipment con«gurations allow for installation in a variety of background environments. The critical activities are performed within a
unidirectional air¬ow environment. Decontamination is performed as is common for the background environment.
closed systems
These systems provide for complete separation of production materials from personnel and surrounding environment. Closed systems
can be single- or multiple-use vessels/chambers with means for materials ingress/egress. The designs avoid any human interaction or
environmental contact with sterile materials. These systems vary in complexity and are sterilized either in situ or prior to use.
terminal sterilization
Filling systems and environments for containers to be terminally sterilized can be accomplished in ISO 7 or better environments. The
critical activities are performed within a unidirectional air¬ow environment. Decontamination of the cleanroom is commonly performed by
personnel.
Materials (Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients, Excipients, and Process Aids)
The preparation of sterile products encompass a wide range of materials including active pharmaceutical ingredients (small and large
molecules), excipients, solvents (usually water), process gases and processing aids, all of which contribute to the microbiological quality
attributes of the product. Depending upon the product being manufactured, this can require consideration of bacterial, endotoxin, and
par ticulate contamination. Speci«c microbiological quality testing requirements for inactive and active ingredients testing is often speci«ed
in a relevant USP–NF monograph. Requirements for microbiological testing for total aerobic bacteria, yeast and mold counts, and speci«ed
organisms are given in Microbial Enumeration Tests 〈61〉 and Tests For Speci«ed Microorganisms 〈62〉, and the recommended but non-
mandatory enumeration targets for microbiological testing are given in Microbiological Examination of Nonsterile Products: Acceptance
Criteria for Pharmaceutical Preparations and Substances for Pharmaceutical Use 〈1111〉. Some speci«c products may require other testing for
speci«ed organisms, including viruses, as a requirement of their regulatory approval. Requirements for bacterial endotoxin testing in
injectable products are covered in 〈85〉, which describes quali«cation of Limulus amebocyte lysate testing for acceptable levels of bacterial
endotoxin. Raw material speci«cations must be appropriate to ensure that the manufacturing process consistently results, as demonstrated
through process validation, in products conforming to the microbiological critical quality attributes.
Microbial contamination may be present on/in active pharmaceutical ingredients, excipients, and primary packaging materials. Controlling
bioburden in materials and formulated product is a critical aspect of sterility assurance. The nature of the active pharmaceutical ingredient,
the excipients, and the compounded product intended to be sterile are critical elements of the product knowledge. Recognizing the potential
impact on critical quality attributes, the microbiological attributes of materials should be controlled through adequate supplier controls,
shipping, receipt, sampling, handling, and storage. These controls should be commensurate with the microbiological risks to process
controls and sterile product safety. Laboratory results should not be utilized to rationalize inadequate process controls on the par t of the
supplier.
The potential impact of the materials on the microbiological critical quality attributes of presterilized and «nished product must be
assessed by evaluating them with appropriate compendial assays or validated alternatives. Risk assessment should consider the origin of
the material (e.g., fermentation, chemical synthesis, biologically derived, enzymatic, semi-synthetic synthesis, natural origin). Materials of
biological origin may have higher inherent microbiological risk than materials derived solely from chemical synthesis. Materials may have
inherent physicochemical proper ties that mitigate microbiological risks (e.g., low water activity, extreme pH, inherent antimicrobial
proper ties) or increase microbiological risks (e.g., aqueous solution, growth suppor tive nutrients); this risk of suppor ting microbial
proliferation must be assessed.
Monitoring
Environmental monitoring is employed to qualitatively assess the effectiveness of the design and operational controls to provide suitable
facility hygiene. It is neither a substitute for good facility, equipment, and process design, nor compensation for de«cient practices and
behavior. There are inherent limitations with all forms of viable and non-viable monitoring in terms of sample size, sample location, and
recovery capability that preclude their use as anything more than an indication that a facility is operating within an acceptable state of
control. Monitoring provides only a snapshot in time of the actual environmental conditions and excessive sampling due to its potentially
intrusive nature can actually impair product safety or generate counts unrelated to process performance by increasing activity proximate to
the critical zone.
Independent of air, surface, and personnel monitoring, media «lls and sterility testing provide additional (albeit analytically and statistically
limited) means to evaluate the robustness of the cleanroom design, performance, and effectiveness of cleaning/decontamination
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:32 PM
USP-NF 〈1211〉 Sterilization Assurance


=== PAGE 7 ===
procedures, personnel gowning integrity, and aseptic practices.
Environmental control can be measured only by the monitoring performed. Satisfactory monitoring performance is the result of proper
design and operation as described in this chapter and not a means to establish that condition. Performance criteria are established
according to the classi«cation of the room and its usage (see 〈1116〉).
viable monitoring
Viable monitoring consists of detecting and estimating the level of culturable microorganisms in the air, on surfaces, and on personnel.
Sampling locations are de«ned following a risk assessment and sampling is executed by trained operators using a variety of methods
including:
Active air sampling
Passive air sampling
Viable par ticle counting using ¬uorescence technology
Contact-plate sampling of surfaces, gloves, and gowns
Swabbing of surfaces
Personnel monitoring
non-viable monitoring
Non-viable monitoring measures the number and size of par ticulates present in the air. It can be used to initially classify the cleanroom in
accordance with ISO 14644-1 and to assess routine manufacturing conditions (8). When used for the purposes of monitoring, it can be
performed under static conditions (no activity) and/or dynamic conditions (routine operation). Non-viable par ticle monitoring is performed
using calibrated par ticle counters.
media fills/aseptic process simulations
Process simulations are exercises in which the performance of an aseptic activity is evaluated using a sterile growth medium. The
medium can be directly substituted for the product or added to it. Aseptic process simulations are typically performed before the
introduction of new or revised process components (e.g., products, facilities, equipment, personnel, containers and closures, and
processes) and periodically thereafter (17). Process simulations should be fully representative of processing conditions and activities
utilized during routine production.
sterility testing
The sterility test is a harmonized compendial test. It must be understood that while execution of the test is required for the release of
sterile products where parametric release has not been approved, it cannot prove the sterility of the materials tested. It should be
recognized that parametric release is the default mode of sterile product release.
Personnel
Personnel play an essential role in the preparation of sterile products. The essential activities they perform include cleaning, assembly,
equipment operation, material transfer, environmental monitoring, and decontamination. While personnel are often necessary for the
performance of these activities, the contamination derived from them must be prevented from entering the production materials before and
after sterilization. The impor tance of the controls necessary to minimize exposure to and the release of human microbial contaminants in a
sterile product manufacturing environment cannot be overstated.
The personnel involved in the preparation of sterile products must:
Understand the principles of microbiology, sterilization/depyrogenation, aseptic processing, and contamination control
Be pro«cient and diligent in gowning practices. Personnel required to wear aseptic gowning should periodically demonstrate their
ability to properly gown
Adhere to proper aseptic technique during all aseptic activities even when these are performed in a RABS or isolator. Periodic
demonstration of these skills can be bene«cial
Be familiar with and adhere to standard operating procedures
Practice good personal hygiene to minimize contamination potential
Be trained in the proper and safe operation of necessary equipment
Be monitored microbiologically after performing aseptic operations
Procedures
Written procedures de«ne the operations that have been determined through validation studies and experience to be effective in
controlling and facilitating the manufacture and quality of pharmaceuticals and biopharmaceuticals. Procedures are especially impor tant for
the critical processes designed to assure the sterility of terminally sterilized and aseptically produced drug products. Procedures should be
periodically reviewed and evaluated to ensure they are effective and current.
interventions and intervention procedures
There are two types of interventions associated with the aseptic production of sterile drug products. Inherent interventions are those
activities that are an integral par t of the aseptic process and are performed during the production of every batch. They include set-up,
replenishment of components, weight and volume checks and adjustments, and environmental monitoring. Corrective interventions are
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:32 PM
USP-NF 〈1211〉 Sterilization Assurance


=== PAGE 8 ===
those activities that correct problems and might not be performed during the production of every batch. They can be minimized and should
be avoided through careful process design. Examples include stopper jams, broken and fallen glass, defective container seals, liquid leaks,
and mechanical failures requiring manual correction.
Each intervention, whether inherent or corrective, should be covered by written procedures su­ciently detailed to enable personnel to
perform the intervention correctly, and to perform the intervention the same way each time regardless of whomever performs it. For
example, procedures should specify the number of units, their locations, and how the units are to be removed, and personnel must be
trained so they can correctly execute the procedures. No intervention should be permitted for which there is not a de«ned procedure. The
following concepts should be considered during development, review, and implementation of intervention procedures.
1. Interventions performed during all forms of processing must be recognized as increasing the risk of contamination dissemination
and are to be avoided or designed out of the process to the extent possible
2. Procedures for interventions should be critically reviewed to eliminate and/or simplify aseptic processes by reducing the frequency
of inherent interventions and making all interventions easier to perform
3. Interventions should be designed for minimal risk of contaminating sterile and nonsterile materials
4. All interventions should be performed using sterilized tools whenever possible
5. Intervention procedures should be established in detail for all inherent interventions, and more broadly for corrective interventions
(where some ¬exibility is necessary due to greater diversity)
Ã. Interventions should be incorporated in periodic media «lls to evaluate the aseptic practices of the operators
Operators should initially, and periodically thereafter, be trained in all of the procedures they are expected to perform. Considerations for
operator activity during the non-aseptic «lling of containers should parallel those described above to minimize the potential for
contamination ingress with somewhat less rigor than those needed for aseptic operations.
Sterilization
The most effective means for the control of microbial population is sterilization, a process that either kills or removes viable
microorganisms. In the production of sterile products, sterilization processes are used to prevent microbial contamination. Terminal
sterilization processes that reproducibly destroy microorganisms in the «nal product container are the preferred means for the production of
sterile products. Sterile products that cannot be terminally sterilized rely on individual sterilization processes (e.g., steam, radiation gas,
«ltration) for the various materials that comprise an aseptically processed sterile product. In addition, sterilization processes are used for
product contact and other non-product contact items used in a variety of applications during the preparation of sterile products to provide
absolute control of bioburden. Details on sterilization processes are provided in 〈1229〉.
Utilities
The manufacture of sterile products requires utilities that can have a substantial impact on the «nal product. Some of the utilities in the
facility can become an integral par t of the formulated product (e.g., Water for Injection, Nitrogen) and appropriate design of the production
and distribution system for these is essential. The systems for these are tightly controlled and frequent monitoring of the utilities produced is
customary. These utilities may be also used in the process, and not become a par t of the sterile product. Other utilities (e.g., clean steam,
compressed air, Puri«ed Water) that are used in the cleaning/decontamination of facilities, and/or preparation of equipment, containers, and
closures can also be subjected to microbial control.
Utilities included in the product, in direct product contact, and in the preparation of equipment, containers, closures, and other items must
meet the requirements de«ned in the appropriate USP–NF monograph. The systems for their preparation should be subject to formalized
controls that maintain a controlled state over time. This is accomplished through a number of related practices essential for continued use
of the system over an extended time. The essential practices to maintain controlled status of the utility systems include: calibration, change
control, corrective and preventive maintenance, and ongoing process control.
There are other less impactful utilities (e.g., vacuum, cooling water) necessary for the operation of the facility and equipment. Although
these non-product contact utilities may lack monograph requirements, their reliable operation is necessary for consistent production of
sterile products.
SUMMARY
The safety of products labeled sterile requires that their critical quality attributes consistently meet speci«cations. Sterility is the most
essential quality attribute. Sterility is an unquali«ed concept in which an item is devoid of living microorganisms capable of reproduction.
Monitoring of all types, environmental (viable and non-viable; air, surface, and personnel), media «lls, and sterility tests are forms of
microbiological analysis that have been historically employed as proof of “sterility”. These assessment tools cannot provide de«nitive
evidence of either “sterility” or “nonsterility”, because the means to con«rm either of those conditions non-destructively is not scienti«cally
possible. Con«dence in sterile product manufacturing is realizable only by a holistic approach in which all of the suppor tive elements of the
operations are given due consideration and emphasis (17).
The absolute nature of sterility presents the practitioner with an inherent paradox—there is no ready means to demonstrate sterility of an
item in the absolute sense regardless of the means used to provide it. Test methods including those de«ned in this compendium (Sterility
Tests 〈71〉) utilize a number of samples taken from a large population to infer the “sterility” of the whole. Sterilization procedures including
those validated for parametric release can deliver a low probability of a nonsterile unit, but not absolute assurance that “sterility” actually
exists.
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:32 PM
USP-NF 〈1211〉 Sterilization Assurance


=== PAGE 9 ===
The uncer tainty associated with proof of “sterility” notwithstanding, the means by which sterility assurance is provided are reasonably well
de«ned. The “sterility” of any item is de«nitively established by the process controls summarized in this chapter rather than any form of
monitoring or sampling. For terminally sterilized products, greater weight can be placed on the sterilization process utilized than on any form
of testing. Con«dence in aseptic processing is a result of sound design, reliable equipment, quality materials, effective procedures (including
suppor tive sterilization processes), and personnel pro«ciency rather than through sampling dependent sterility testing, microbiological
monitoring, and process simulation.
REFERENCES
1. Agalloco J, Akers J. The future of aseptic processing. Pharm Tech. 2005;S16–23.
2. Nasr M. Quality by Design (QbD)—Modern system approach to pharmaceutical development and manufacturing—FDA perspective.
FDA Quality Initiative Workshop at International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering Meeting. 2007 Feb 28.
3. International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH).
Pharmaceutical development, Q8 (R2). Geneva: ICH; August 2009.
4. Parenteral Drug Association. Process simulation for aseptically «lled products. PDA Technical Repor t No. 22, revision. Philadelphia:
PDA; 2011.
5. Parenteral Drug Association. Process simulation testing for sterile bulk pharmaceutical chemicals. PDA Technical Repor t No. 28,
revised. PDA J Pharm Sci Technol. Vol. 60, Supplement S-2, 2006.
Ã. Parenteral Drug Association. Recommended practices for manual aseptic «lling. PDA Technical Repor t No. 62. Philadelphia: PDA;
2013.
7. International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. ISPE Baseline Guide, Volume 3: Sterile Product Manufacturing Facilities (latest
revision). Bethesda, MD: ISPE; 2011.
Ä. International Organization for Standardization. ISO 14644: Cleanrooms and associated controlled environments.
9. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry. Sterile drug products produced by aseptic processing. Rockville, MD: FDA; 2004.
10. European Medicines Agency. Annex 1, Sterile Medicinal Products; 2008.
11. International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering. Restricted access barrier systems (RABS) for aseptic processing, ISPE
de«nition; 2005.
12. Pharmaceutical and Healthcare Sciences Society. Restricted access barrier systems (RABS), Technical Monograph No. 15; 2011.
13. Parenteral Drug Association. Design and validation of isolator systems for the manufacturing and testing of health care products. PDA
Technical Repor t No. 34. Bethesda, MD: PDA; 2001.
14. Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention and Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme. PIC/S Isolators used for aseptic
processing and sterility testing (PI 014-2); 2004.
15. Baseman H. Sterile product manufacture using form «ll seal technologies. In: Agalloco J, Akers J, eds. Advanced Aseptic Processing
Technology. New York: InformaHealth; 2010.
1Ã. Agalloco J, Hussong D, Quick J, Mestrandrea L. Closed system «lling technology: introducing a new paradigm for sterile
manufacturing. PDA Letter. 2015; 51(11):26–28.
17. Agalloco J, Akers J. The myth called sterility. Pharm Tech. 2010 Supplement;34(3):S44–45.
▲2S (USP41)
1
Sterilization is preferred over decontamination and should be utilized wherever possible, consistent with minimization of handling post-
sterilization.
2
Sterilization out-of-place would be used on a less frequent basis.
Auxiliary Information - Please
check for your question in the F
AQs
before contacting USP
.
T
opic/Question
Contact
Exper t Committee
<1211> STERILITY ASSURANCE
Leslie Furr
Associate Scienti«c Liaison
GCM2022
General Chapters - Microbiology
2022
Most Recently Appeared In:
Pharmacopeial Forum: Volume No. PF 43(5)
Current DocID: GUID-D0610491-0F4D-429D-B613-B027FB979018_5_en-US
Previous DocID: GUID-D0610491-0F4D-429D-B613-B027FB979018_2_en-US
DOI: https:/
/doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M99930_05_01
DOI ref: xf3ku
OFFICIAL
2/12/25, 4:32 PM
USP-NF 〈1211〉 Sterilization Assurance
