Topic 4. Risk-Based Supplier Qualification 
ATMP material-supplier qualification is a risk-based approach. The level of oversight should be 
proportionate to the risks posed by the individual materials, taking into account their source, 
manufacturing process, supply chain complexity, and final use to which the material will be put in the 
ATMP.  
Note: For products that fall under PIC/S GMP regulation, Annex 2A provides additional requirements. 
Besides general requirements, which are applicable to all clinical stages and commercial manufacturing, 
several requirements differentiate between early- and late-stage clinical manufacturing to commercial 
manufacturing. 
Q 4.1. What are the key considerations when qualifying an ATMP material vendor or 
supplier? 
General Considerations 
• 
Material manufactured under GMP regulation 
̶ 
Paper audit (e.g., questionnaire) may be acceptable for lower-risk raw material, such as 
off-the-shelf material used in the upstream process of cell and gene therapies (early stage 
only). 
̶ 
Whether an on-site audit needs to be performed at a manufacturer’s or distributor’s 
premises should be defined based on QRM principles. Generally, audits need to be 
performed at vendors of all materials defined as critical for the manufacturing process 
according to its product risk profile.  
̶ 
Per PIC/S, Annex 2A, a regular qualification of the vendors (e.g., manufacturers, 
distributors) of all materials to confirm that they comply with the relevant GMP 
requirements should be performed. This regulation may not apply to one-time-use 
materials such as a master cell bank. 
• 
Material manufactured under non-GMP conditions 
̶ 
SME should conduct a technical visit to evaluate the risks, in case an audit is not feasible 
(or accepted) for the supplier, such as a standard supplier with a low-quality management 
system, for example, one using off-the shelf RUO material.  
• 
If, during technical visits or audits, gaps are identified, the sponsor should evaluate the risks of 
using the material and provide a justification in terms of safety and functionality by means of 
additional testing (e.g., product in-process testing, performance test, use of the same lot for 
manufacturing of toxicology-study sample and Phase 1 clinical-trial material).  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Points to Consider No. 13 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
24 
• 
For U.S. suppliers of approved or licensed therapeutic products, reports of past audits may be 
leveraged along with cross-reference of the Device Master File in lieu of a technical audit. 
Standard risk-reduction measures should still be applied to the receipt and release of these 
materials (14). 
• 
A written agreement for change notifications from the supplier of the critical raw material is 
recommended to be in place regardless of the clinical phase to evaluate potential impact.” (See 
Q1.1 and Topic 3 for the definition of critical raw material). 
Following the guidance of PIC/S, Annex 2A, Section 5.27, is recommended, as it states:  
“For starting material of human origin, the agreement between the ATMP manufacturer (or, as 
appropriate, the MAH) and the supplier (including blood and tissue establishments) should contain clear 
provisions about the transfer of information. In particular, this should include test results performed by 
the supplier, traceability data, and transmission of health donor information that may become available 
after the supply that may have an impact on the quality or safety of the ATMPs manufactured….” (6).  
Specific Consideration for Individualized Therapies 
For individualized therapies (e.g., autologous cell therapies), since each batch of product is manufactured 
for a specific patient, an error-free system for patient-derived materials (e.g., tumor samples or 
leukocytes) must be in place to maintain the chain of identity and chain of custody. 
Early Clinical Stage 
• 
A quality system should be in place. The level of quality standard should be adequate to the 
criticality of the raw material. To enable a clinical trial application, the following minimum 
requirements must be met: 
̶ 
Supplier quality system must be capable of providing safety-relevant documentation. 
̶ 
Traceability of materials and reagents (e.g., a unique material or catalogue number 
assigned). 
̶ 
Description of the origin and history of the material (e.g., donor tissue, chemically 
defined or recombinant, based on a cell bank). 
̶ 
For EU-regulated starting materials, GMP principles should be applied (5). 
• 
For customized materials (e.g., viral vector, custom-made media and buffers), a quality 
agreement should be in place.  
• 
For off-the-shelf or low-risk materials, it may be sufficient to have a change-notification 
agreement in place before comprehensive quality agreements are in place.  
Late Clinical Stage and Commercial 
• 
The quality system standard should be increased to meet GMP regulations or GMP principles 
defined by EMA whenever possible. The level of GMP adherence should be justified based on 
the risks of the gaps, with the understanding of material attributes and impact on manufacturing 
the final drug product. 
Note: Material grades are not standardized. The term “GMP grade" does not necessarily mean that 
material is manufactured and distributed under current GMP regulations. Instead, the supplier’s GMP 
should be confirmed through assessment by questionnaire or audit to verify the material is of GMP grade. 
• 
To ensure supply for confirmatory or pivotal clinical trials and the approved product, establishing 
second suppliers of materials, especially critical raw materials, is essential. Where high-risk 
materials (e.g., animal-derived, high-risk supplier) are determined to be critical to product 
availability and cannot be eliminated or substituted, risk assessments should be utilized to identify 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
25 
Points to Consider No. 13 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.  
and evaluate the specific risks posed by the material in relation to the production and availability 
of the finished product. Consideration of such factors as the number of suppliers and/or 
alternatives available, especially where materials are single-sourced, as well as the lead time and 
shelf life, for example, are crucial to ensuring the control measures applied are commensurate 
with the level of risk posed. Specific control measures sufficient to eliminate or mitigate to an 
acceptable level each risk scenario identified should be established, documented, and applied to 
each receipt of the respective material.  
• 
Having a second qualified supplier is preferred to reduce the risk of drug shortages and ensure 
business continuity. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 
Points to Consider No. 13 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
26 
