--- PAGE 19 ---
15
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
erator) should adjust equipment settings as necessary. Pay special attention to equipment which 
exhausts air (e.g., mixers, blenders, etc.) that could contaminate the environment. 
• 
 Utilize secondary and support operator(s) to supply/remove items to/from the enclosed envi-
ronment. Wherever possible materials being introduced into the process should be pre-measured 
into a tightly sealed container prior to sterilization and addition into the barrier.
• 
Liquid transfers should be made using peristaltic pumps outside the enclosure rather than through 
the use of automatic pipettes (due to concerns regarding exhausted air). 
• 
The process should be designed so that samples can be taken with minimal risk of contamina-
tion. When withdrawing samples from a sterile container, it is preferable to take all samples from 
the container in a single step, and then subdivide that sample as required in another appropriate 
location. Alternatively, the residual left in the original container post-production can be used as 
the test sample.
• 
Once the process design has been established, it should be rehearsed several times using all of 
the required items and placebo materials to refine the steps, location of items, etc. The use of 
engineering runs to develop the process is strongly recommended. 
• 
The manufacturing process should be documented in sufficient detail to allow the operators to 
understand and conform to the desired practices. 
• 
Environmental monitoring practices should be non-intrusive in order to avoid potential for con-
tamination in the enclosure. Air sampling during processing may be performed with specially 
designed equipment that does not compromise the environment and may include settling plates. 
Surface monitoring should be performed using contact plates or swabs after processing has been 
completed.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 20 ---
16
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
The following are the elements of a MAP simulation that involve extensive participation of person-
nel in the aseptic process. Details of study design provided in the APS reports on aseptic processing 
for either filling or sterile bulk production should be consulted for those activities that are essentially 
unchanged when manual procedures are employed (15).
8.1	 Simulation Design 
The development of a supporting rationale for the design of the manual aseptic process simulation 
is essential. The rationale must define the adaptations to the production process necessary for the 
execution of the simulation. The smaller scale of the manual process lends itself to these adaptations 
and in many instances only minimal changes to the process are required. In the event of a failure in-
vestigation, maintaining the sequence in which samples were filled during the APS can be beneficial in 
determining at what point contamination was introduced. Definition of these sample points should 
be included in the rationale. The simulation rationale should be kept current with changes to process, 
products, components, or equipment that could impact the acceptability of the process.
Manual aseptic processing can encompass a variety of activities which can be divided into 4 major 
categories. The evaluation of each category is addressed in a different manner.
8.1.1	 Compositing/Assembly Activities
Compositing/assembly activities involve repetitive actions in which sterile materials in smaller 
amounts are pooled. Such practices are common in vaccine manufacturing in which the contents 
of incubated eggs are composited early in the formulation process. Evaluation: For this category, 
adaptation of the validation methods for sterile filling and bulk materials may be appropriate for the 
simulation rationale.
8.1.2	 Formulation/Compounding Activities
Formulation/compounding activities in a manual setting might use different equipment than auto-
mated processes due to the smaller scale of the operation. For example, laboratory glassware and 
utensils may be used to produce a sterile bulk formulation. The smaller scale of the operation may also 
mandate alternative transfer methods than those utilized in larger, automated operations. Evaluation: 
The methods utilized for sterile bulk materials may be appropriate in these processes (1,4,15). 
8.1.3	 Filling/Subdivision Activities (Including Lyophilization if Needed) 
Filling/subdivision activities involve repetitive actions in which sterile materials are transferred from 
a bulk container into smaller containers, sealed and closed (or partially closed when lyophilization is 
planned). This practice is common in early development and early clinical stage manufacturing of 
sterile products, and in the manufacture of extremely small lot sizes. Evaluation: These activities may 
use methods defined for automated filling (1,6).
8.1.4	 Manual Manipulation Steps Performed in Conjunction with Other 
Processes 
Evaluation: Manual activities, such as sampling, aseptic connection, etc., are usually an integral part 
of other aseptic processes. As such there is no need to address them independently in the rationale 
for the study design.
Additional details on process-specific evaluation methods are to be provided in conjunction with each 
of the elements addressed within the overall process evaluation protocol/procedure. 
8.0	 Evaluation of Manual Aseptic Processing–
Process Simulation
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 21 ---
17
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
8.2	 Media Sterilization 
The preparation of media for use in a MAP simulation is normally managed with few problems. If the 
media bulk container is small enough it can be sterilized in an autoclave prior to introduction into the 
process. In other cases non-sterile bulk media may be filtered into the process in a manner similar to 
the drug product. Where possible, sterilization methods, such as autoclaving or irradiating, should be 
combined with filtration to remove mycoplasma contamination from media components (for a more 
detailed discussion, see PDA Technical Report No. 22). For compositing/assembly processes, suitable 
sterile materials to use in the process simulation may be unavailable. In such cases the choice may be 
to use the production materials themselves suitably sterilized/adapted (if possible and necessary) in 
the simulation, if they do not inhibit the growth of microorganisms. For the APS each of the liquid 
containers containing sterile materials for the process should have their contents replaced with media.
8.3	 Frequency and Number of APS Runs 
The recommendation for frequency and number of simulation studies (runs) for manual processing is 
that each operator (primary and secondary) should be qualified semi-annually (or in accordance with 
the applicable regulatory requirements). Typically, three replicate APS studies are performed to initially 
qualify an operator and process. The combined duration and size of the APS runs will support both op-
erator and process qualification. 
Note: Operator qualification is critical since the operators are the primary means of production. More 
frequent studies may be required for infrequent manufacturing operations.
8.3.1	 Duration of Runs 
Simulation studies should meet or exceed the expected maximum duration of a single working ses-
sion by a single operator. 
8.3.2	 Size of Runs
The size of the process simulation is largely dictated by the time period that a single operator would 
remain performing the same activity. The actual numbers of units produced in that time period 
should meet or exceed the production quantity that the operator(s) would normally handle in that 
time period. As the operator is an integral part of the process and a key variable in MAP, it may be 
that each operator will have to perform the whole process simulation for the process to be considered 
valid especially where only small numbers are filled. 
8.4	 Observation of the Process Simulation
Considerations for observation of MAP simulations are consistent with observations of automated 
simulations, as described in PDA Technical Report No. 22 (6): 
The process simulation should be observed to assure that all planned activities are properly executed and 
represent an appropriate challenge to the process capability. Observation may also be used to augment aseptic 
conduct and technique training.
Observation should commence upon the initiation of the process simulation, including equipment set-up, 
and continue until the process simulation has completed. Observation of the simulation should be per-
formed by individuals having the knowledge and competency to assess if operators have used proper aseptic 
conduct in their activities. These individuals should also be able to assess that aseptic interventions have been 
executed consistent with good practice so as to provide for realistic assessments of sterility control.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 22 ---
18
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
The process simulation observation should be documented and/or video recorded. The use of video re-
cording of the APS allows activities to be reviewed in detail to assist with training or failure investigation (6). 
8.5	 Media Fill Volume
In aseptic filling simulations the amount of media transferred during the simulation should be suffi-
cient to wet the product contact surfaces of the container and be sufficient to detect growth. In com-
positing simulations, the amount of media transferred should be identical to that normally handled in 
production to simulate the process duration more accurately. In manual manufacturing simulations, 
the volumes of media and other fluids (which should all be replaced with media) should be identical to, 
or greater than that in the process to be simulated. The goal is to assure that the sterile product compo-
nents (e.g., containers, closures, and media) are exposed for the maximum length seen during routine 
manufacturing, thus assuring the simulation represents a comparable risk as routine processing.
8.6	 Anaerobes/Inert Gassing 
The methods utilized for automated, machine-based aseptic processing can be adopted without 
change. Air should be substituted for inert gases in all systems, except in those rare instances where 
an isolator providing true anaerobic conditions is utilized for the production process environment. In 
such situations, the usual inert gas would be utilized and the appropriate media would generally be 
fluid thioglycollate media (FTM) or alternative FTM (if filtration of the media is necessary).
8.7	 Environmental Monitoring
Environmental monitoring for MAP uses methods generally the same as those for other highly con-
trolled (ISO 5/7) environments. The same cautions exercised with monitoring in other systems apply 
to MAP as well. Sampling activities must not introduce contamination into the environment or into 
the sample. Since the environmental systems utilized for MAP are of smaller size, the monitoring 
methods must be chosen for their lack of impact on the environment. A thorough understanding 
of the process should be used to ensure that areas of greatest risk are monitored at the appropriate 
frequency using the appropriate monitor (1,2,4,6,14).
8.8	 Execution of the Simulation
The process simulation should be performed in a manner that properly documents the activities. A 
batch record designed specifically for the simulation should be used. The presence of an observer who 
documents the simulation is recommended. The methods and principles defined for automated filling 
or sterile bulk chemical production can be utilized with relatively minor modifications. 
8.9	 Pre-Incubation Inspection
The pre-incubation inspection methods utilized for automated, machine-based aseptic processing can 
be adopted without change. As the containers in MAP are more likely to be hand stoppered and/or 
sealed, and subject to more variability, pre-incubation inspection must be performed with the same 
rigor as product inspection. The same caution should be applied to inspection of hand-sealed produc-
tion units for the same reasons. Units with defective seals should be removed from the materials sent 
for incubation. Units with cosmetic defects should be treated as integral and included in the incubation. 
Note: Generally, the number and type(s) of defective units should not exceed those generated during 
routine manufacturing.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
