7
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
isolator may transfer air directly to the surrounding environment through openings (commonly called 
“mouse holes”) that preclude the ingress of microbial contamination. All these environments provide 
appropriate conditions for the execution of MAP operations which are considered critical zones.
Biological Safety Cabinets (BSC) are designed to protect operators and the external environment 
from infected or dangerous materials inside the cabinet. All air to and from the BSC is HEPA filtered 
before entering the cabinet or exhausting to the external environment. Some BSC designs provide 
some measure of protection to the materials being handled. Since air flows into the BSC from the sur-
rounding environment, biosafety cabinets should be used only when worker safety from the material 
being handled is a meaningful concern. Worker safety must also be considered if the toxicity of the 
compound has not yet been determined.
The supporting clean environment outside the critical zone is typically ISO 7 when a UAFH or BSC 
is utilized for the manual process. The use of an isolator under appropriate risk-management proce-
dures may relax the requirements for the surrounding area; most new manufacturing installations 
employ an ISO 8 background environment in accordance with the 2004 FDA aseptic processing guid-
ance (1) or European GMP Annex 1 (2). 
Open isolators are typically installed in ISO 8 (Table 3.0-1) environments in order to maintain ISO 5 
conditions for material transfers and operations. The surrounding clean area is where the personnel 
performing the manual processes are located. Appropriate gowning facilities are required which are 
consistent with the background environment requirements. The execution of the MAP is ordinarily 
supported by various sterilization processes for the materials and equipment required, and these ster-
ilization processes may also be located in the support areas.
The overall flow of the MAP facility, personnel and equipment is consistent with large-scale environ-
ments utilized for equipment-based aseptic filling, whether in a cleanroom or an isolator, but on a 
much smaller scale. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

8
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
People are the most critical operational variable and represent the highest source of contamination 
in manual aseptic processing. Operational personnel must be highly proficient at their assigned tasks. 
Therefore, personnel training and qualification become critical to success.
4.1	 Personnel Training and Qualification
The training requirements for operational personnel typically include the usual elements of cGMP:
• Microbiological principles
• Sterility assurance
• Sterilization
• Gowning practices
• Good aseptic practices
  
Theoretical knowledge of these disciplines alone is insufficient. Operators must be able to adapt the 
classroom learning to the real world manufacturing environment. Operators must excel in the ex-
ecution of those tasks that directly impact sterility assurance: aseptic gowning, aseptic assembly and 
aseptic technique. They must be able to consistently perform precision tasks without introducing 
contamination to the materials with which they are working.
4.2	 Gowning Qualification 
Assessment of the operators’ proficiency in their assigned tasks can be established through practical 
exercises in which their skills are challenged and evaluated. The most basic of these tasks, and one of 
the first at which the operator must succeed, is aseptic gowning. This involves repetitive gowning in 
full aseptic garb under the observation of a fully qualified individual followed by monitoring of gown 
surfaces. The number of monitored gown surfaces varies with the company, but typically includes: 
gloves, forearms, and chest area, i.e., the body locations closest to any manual aseptic manipulations 
the operator must perform (6). The operator must successfully demonstrate his/her ability to meet 
the defined monitoring levels after each gowning exercise. Gowning certifications should be con-
ducted on a periodic basis to confirm that the operators maintain consistent gowning practices. Once 
the operators have passed initial gowning certification he/she is granted access to the aseptic core for 
the continued instruction in aseptic processing. 
Note: The need for operator gowning qualification is based on the nature of the isolator process and 
should be evaluated by a risk assessment. 
Following a long term absence, adverse trend or out of limits in gowning results (and based on inves-
tigation) operators should be requalified for gowning.
4.3	 Risk Management
The approach of Quality Risk Management (see also PDA Technical Report No. 54 (11) and its annex 
documents with case studies) is highly recommended for manual aseptic processes. As stated in PDA 
Technical Report No. 44: 
Process failures that can result in elevated endotoxin levels and lack of  sterility assurance pose a significant 
risk to patient safety. The ability to detect a process failure is low given the current methods for sterility testing. 
The probability of  a process failure that could adversely affect the sterility of  the product in aseptic processing 
is higher and less predictable than in terminal sterilization, given the inherent exposure to environmental con-
taminants. Quality risk management can be an effective method of  identifying and reducing aseptic processing 
risk, thus improving the assurance of  sterility, endotoxin control, and subsequent patient safety (12).
4.0	 Operational Personnel Training and Qualification
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

9
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Manual aseptic processing involves greater risks than automated aseptic processes. A risk-based qual-
ity management approach can be very helpful. It is therefore essential that there is a thorough and 
complete understanding of the process, including critical steps and risks, so that any risk assessment 
is appropriately informed.
4.4	 Aseptic Handling Challenges
The conventional means for establishing personnel proficiency in aseptic processing is through par-
ticipation in an APS, (also known as a media fill) (1, 6). The APS requires the operators to perform 
aseptic interventions during the normal course of the simulation that are typically conducted during 
manufacturing. Those charged with aseptic assembly will assemble the sterilized equipment prior to 
the media fill. These activities are important for several reasons:
• MAP is more susceptible to human contamination than automated aseptic processing
• Interventions on manual aseptic systems are frequent and may be complicated by suboptimal equipment design
Thus, an individual who has demonstrated proficiency at large-scale industrial aseptic processing 
must still demonstrate his/her proficiency in the more rigorous requirements of MAP. This is often 
accomplished by various challenge tests in which the operator must directly handle sterile equipment 
and materials (usually with media) to demonstrate his/her aseptic technique. These tasks should be 
representative of the actual process steps. The operators are required to demonstrate aseptic practice 
proficiency in these evaluations regardless of the technology utilized. 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

10
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
The equipment, raw material components, containers, closures and other items required for MAP 
vary with the requirements of the process. These items are typically reduced in size or quantity, 
which allows so they can be supplied to the processing environment in a sealed package after depyro-
genation/sterilization. The preparation methods for such sealed packages prior to depyrogenation/
sterilization are similar to those associated with automated aseptic processing though on a smaller 
scale of operation. The depyrogenation/sterilization methods for all of these items are required to 
be validated. When sterile containers/closures are purchased from a commercial source, procedures 
should be in place and implemented to ensure the sterility of these items are maintained when intro-
duced into an aseptic environment and used in production. Where sterilization or depyrogenation 
of processes for non-product contact surfaces cannot be utilized, a validated sanitization process is 
required to be performed.
5.0	
Equipment, Components and Container/Closure
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

11
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Personnel time limitations with MAP are usually more important than with automated aseptic pro-
cesses. In very short or nonrepetitive processes, such as an aseptic connection, time may be of little 
relevance (except as it may relate to material stability) and its impact lessened. Where operators must 
perform repetitive tasks such as container filling/stoppering, egg harvesting (as in vaccine manufac-
turing) or similar tasks, the effect of fatigue must be considered in both routine operation and process 
simulation. The operator’s aseptic technique may deteriorate with the passage of time. A “worst-
case” evaluation of fatigue would include a process simulation equal or greater in time duration 
to the longest period an operator might perform the task without interruption. Similarly, a process 
simulation conducted at the end of a normal day’s production can evaluate the effect of fatigue on the 
operator’s aseptic technique (1,5,6,13). 
Time limits for holding dirty/clean/sterile equipment and sterile/depyrogenated components shall 
also be validated. It is also necessary to validate the maximum time allowed between formulation 
(addition of the first ingredient, which includes water) to the point of sterilization (filtration consid-
ering filter grow-through) and the validation of holding sterile bulk through usage. These topics are 
discussed in PDA Technical Report No. 22 (6). 
Note: As part of the process risk assessment, personnel fatigue factors need to be considered, and 
where possible minimized/eliminated through improvement in ergonomics, an understanding of 
human factors, etc.
6.0	
Process Time Limitations
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

