11
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Personnel time limitations with MAP are usually more important than with automated aseptic pro-
cesses. In very short or nonrepetitive processes, such as an aseptic connection, time may be of little 
relevance (except as it may relate to material stability) and its impact lessened. Where operators must 
perform repetitive tasks such as container filling/stoppering, egg harvesting (as in vaccine manufac-
turing) or similar tasks, the effect of fatigue must be considered in both routine operation and process 
simulation. The operator’s aseptic technique may deteriorate with the passage of time. A “worst-
case” evaluation of fatigue would include a process simulation equal or greater in time duration 
to the longest period an operator might perform the task without interruption. Similarly, a process 
simulation conducted at the end of a normal day’s production can evaluate the effect of fatigue on the 
operator’s aseptic technique (1,5,6,13). 
Time limits for holding dirty/clean/sterile equipment and sterile/depyrogenated components shall 
also be validated. It is also necessary to validate the maximum time allowed between formulation 
(addition of the first ingredient, which includes water) to the point of sterilization (filtration consid-
ering filter grow-through) and the validation of holding sterile bulk through usage. These topics are 
discussed in PDA Technical Report No. 22 (6). 
Note: As part of the process risk assessment, personnel fatigue factors need to be considered, and 
where possible minimized/eliminated through improvement in ergonomics, an understanding of 
human factors, etc.
6.0	
Process Time Limitations
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

12
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
Sterility assurance requires a holistic approach to the entire manufacturing process, and encompasses 
appropriate facility/equipment/process design, aseptic practice/validation and a well thought out 
risk assessment to mitigate contamination. Considering the importance of personnel practices in 
MAP, the process should be designed to minimize the impact of personnel. General process design 
principles that will reduce the risk of contamination are outlined below.
7.1	 Manual Aseptic Process Design Principles in Unidirectional 
Air Flow Hoods
The list below elaborates on design principles for manual aseptic processing.
• Adequate space to perform the work.
• All exposed product and product-contacting components should continuously remain in First Air, 
i.e., the work location first in the path of HEPA-filtered air.
• Aseptic manipulations should be made in First Air, not having passed over any other components 
or blocked by the operator’s hands.
• The operators should decontaminate or change their gloves on a frequent basis.
• The operators should work as a team. The primary operator(s) should perform all tasks inside the 
ISO 5 environment. The secondary operator(s) assists in the introduction/removal of items from 
the ISO 5 environment, and may assist the primary operator(s) with less critical tasks inside that 
environment. Additional support operator(s) may be necessary to support activities exclusively in 
the surrounding environment.
• The primary operator should wear sterile gloves and sleeves and never contact a non-sanitized or 
non-sterilized item. 
• The primary operator(s) performs the critical aseptic manipulations within the ISO 5 environment. 
The secondary operator(s) acts as a support person to minimize the potential of the primary operator 
touching non-sterile or non-disinfected surfaces. The hands of the primary operator should remain 
in the ISO 5 environment at all times. (There may be exceptions to this related to positron emission 
tomography products or radioactive products.) The secondary operator(s) should put on sterile 
gloves/sleeves prior to any activity inside the ISO 5 environment, or in transfers of items to/from 
the primary operator. Anytime the primary operator is required to leave the ISO 5 environment, 
gloves and sleeves (if appropriate) should either be changed or gloves should be re-sanitized prior 
to reentry to ISO 5.
• Sterilized items should be introduced to the ISO 5 area by aseptic removal of the final wrap around 
the item as it is being introduced. 
• Extra subassemblies and utensils should be sterilized and available for immediate use in the event a 
replacement is needed.
• Sterile tools and utensils should be employed wherever possible to handle sterile materials during their 
processing, rather than the direct contact with the operator gloves. There should be sterile supports 
or hangers for tools inside the ISO 5 environment in order to minimize contact between the tool 
and surfaces of the workspace.
• The process should be designed so that samples can be taken with minimal risk of contamination. 
When withdrawing samples from a sterile container, it is preferable to take all desired samples from 
a container in a single step, and then subdivide that sample as required. Alternatively, the residual 
left in the original container post-production can be used as the test sample. The use of technologies 
such as sterile septum or connectors should be considered to minimize the risk during sampling.
7.0	 Design of Manual Aseptic Processes
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

13
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
• Wherever possible materials being introduced into the process should be pre-measured into a 
tightly sealed container prior to sterilization and addition.
• Electrical equipment and controls pose a contamination risk and should be located outside the 
processing environment, if possible. If that is not possible a second operator (not the primary 
operator) should adjust equipment settings as necessary. Pay special attention to equipment which 
exhausts air (e.g., mixers, blenders, etc.) that could contaminate the environment. 
• Liquid transfers should be made using peristaltic pumps located outside the aseptic environment, 
rather than through the use of automatic pipettes, due to concerns regarding exhausted air. In 
order to minimize equipment movement and the risk of contamination, containers can be pre-
marked to indicate the amount of material to transfer.
• Perform as much of the process inside the ISO 5 environment as possible in order to minimize the 
removal and reentry of in-process materials in suitable containers. This may require the placement 
of small equipment within the environment.
• When containers of in-process materials must be removed from, and later returned to, the ISO 5 
environment the containers should be aseptically wrapped in a pre-sterilized covering which should 
be properly removed and discarded prior to reentry. Alternatively, the exterior of the container(s) 
can be re-sanitized prior to reentry.
• Sanitize the operating environment when it is empty, and sanitize each nonsterilizable item/
equipment as it is first introduced and transferred into the next cleaner level of the aseptic processing 
environments. Do not introduce a large item into the environment in mid-process. Note: If sanitization 
of the operating environment/equipment is performed by the primary operator, sterile gloves/sleeves 
should be changed before aseptic manipulation of product is performed.
• Product contact surfaces shall be sterilized. Sterility should be maintained with protective layers 
which can be removed as materials are transitioned to cleaner environments.
• Significant aseptic assembly in the processing environment should be avoided through the use of 
sterilized pre-assembled items. This will reduce the extent of manual assembly required. 
• Process steps not required to be aseptic should be performed outside the ISO 5 environment by 
other operator(s). 
• Once the process design has been established, it should be rehearsed several times and documented 
in air flow studies using all of the required items and placebo materials to refine the steps, location 
of items, etc. This ensures the process design is practical and reduces risk of contamination to a 
minimum. The use of engineering runs to develop the process is strongly encouraged.
• The manufacturing process should be documented in sufficient detail to allow operators to 
understand and conform to the desired practices. The secondary or support operator(s) should 
complete the batch record.
• Environmental monitoring practices should be non-intrusive in order to avoid potential for 
contamination in the ISO 5 environment. Air sampling during processing may be performed with 
specially designed equipment that does not compromise the environment and may include settling 
plates. Surface monitoring should be performed using contact plates or swabs after processing has 
been completed. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

14
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
7.2	 Manual Aseptic Process Design Principles in Isolators  
and RABS
The use of an isolator for manual aseptic processing requires some adaptation to the methods de-
scribed above. Isolator characteristics include the following: 
An isolator is sealed or is supplied with air through a microbially retentive filtration system (HEPA minimum) 
and may be reproducibly decontaminated. When closed it uses only decontaminated (where necessary) inter-
faces or Rapid Transfer Ports (RTPs) for materials transfer. When open it allows for the ingress and/or egress 
of  materials through defined openings (“mouse holes”) that have been designed and validated to preclude the 
transfer of  contamination. Isolators can be used for aseptic processing activities, containment of  potent com-
pounds, or simultaneously for both asepsis and containment (14). 
Restricted access barrier systems (RABS) vary with respect to their design. Where items are intro-
duced using a rapid transfer port (RTP) their use resembles that of isolators described below. RABS 
lacking these features may have greater resemblance to manned clean rooms and their design and 
operation is more like that described above for Unidirectional Air Flow Hoods. 
Regardless of the type of isolator or RABS system employed, it should be recognized that these are 
aseptic, not sterile, process enclosures. Therefore good aseptic technique must be used at all aseptic 
steps of the process. First air principles should be adhered to where unidirectional flow is provided. In 
the absence of unidirectional flow, aseptic technique must still be followed consistent with the design 
of the system (enclosure). 
• 
The enclosure should be decontaminated according to a validated procedure.
• 
The operators should wear fresh sterile gloves prior to entering the enclosure gloves.
• 
Sterile tools and utensils shall be employed rather than the direct contact with the enclosure 
gloves. There should be sterile supports for tools and gloves inside the enclosure in order to mini-
mize contact between the tool and horizontal surfaces of the workspace.
• 
All items and equipment should be introduced into the enclosure using validated decontamina-
tion/sterilization methods and/or RTPs.
• 
It is preferable to perform as much of the process as possible inside the enclosure to minimize 
the removal and subsequent reentry of sterile items to the enclosure. This may require the place-
ment of small equipment within the enclosure. When containers of in-process materials must 
be removed from, and later returned to the ISO 5 environment, the containers should be rein-
troduced using validated decontamination/sterilization methods and/or RTPs. Alternatively the 
container can be aseptically wrapped in a pre-sterilized covering (e.g., sealable containers or pack-
ages) which should be properly removed and discarded prior to reentry.
• 
All exposed product and product-contacting components should always remain in First Air (if 
present). Aseptic manipulations should be made in First Air from the HEPA filters, not having 
passed over any other components or blocked by the enclosure gloves. Good aseptic technique 
must still be adhered to at all times.
• 
Significant aseptic assembly in the ISO 5 environment should be avoided through the use of steril-
ized pre-assembled items. This will reduce the extent of manual assembly required.
• 
Extra subassemblies and utensils should be sterilized and available for immediate use in the event 
a replacement is needed.
• 
Electrical equipment and controls pose a contamination risk and should be located outside the 
processing enclosure if possible. If that is not possible a second operator (not the primary op-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

15
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
erator) should adjust equipment settings as necessary. Pay special attention to equipment which 
exhausts air (e.g., mixers, blenders, etc.) that could contaminate the environment. 
• 
 Utilize secondary and support operator(s) to supply/remove items to/from the enclosed envi-
ronment. Wherever possible materials being introduced into the process should be pre-measured 
into a tightly sealed container prior to sterilization and addition into the barrier.
• 
Liquid transfers should be made using peristaltic pumps outside the enclosure rather than through 
the use of automatic pipettes (due to concerns regarding exhausted air). 
• 
The process should be designed so that samples can be taken with minimal risk of contamina-
tion. When withdrawing samples from a sterile container, it is preferable to take all samples from 
the container in a single step, and then subdivide that sample as required in another appropriate 
location. Alternatively, the residual left in the original container post-production can be used as 
the test sample.
• 
Once the process design has been established, it should be rehearsed several times using all of 
the required items and placebo materials to refine the steps, location of items, etc. The use of 
engineering runs to develop the process is strongly recommended. 
• 
The manufacturing process should be documented in sufficient detail to allow the operators to 
understand and conform to the desired practices. 
• 
Environmental monitoring practices should be non-intrusive in order to avoid potential for con-
tamination in the enclosure. Air sampling during processing may be performed with specially 
designed equipment that does not compromise the environment and may include settling plates. 
Surface monitoring should be performed using contact plates or swabs after processing has been 
completed.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

16
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
The following are the elements of a MAP simulation that involve extensive participation of person-
nel in the aseptic process. Details of study design provided in the APS reports on aseptic processing 
for either filling or sterile bulk production should be consulted for those activities that are essentially 
unchanged when manual procedures are employed (15).
8.1	 Simulation Design 
The development of a supporting rationale for the design of the manual aseptic process simulation 
is essential. The rationale must define the adaptations to the production process necessary for the 
execution of the simulation. The smaller scale of the manual process lends itself to these adaptations 
and in many instances only minimal changes to the process are required. In the event of a failure in-
vestigation, maintaining the sequence in which samples were filled during the APS can be beneficial in 
determining at what point contamination was introduced. Definition of these sample points should 
be included in the rationale. The simulation rationale should be kept current with changes to process, 
products, components, or equipment that could impact the acceptability of the process.
Manual aseptic processing can encompass a variety of activities which can be divided into 4 major 
categories. The evaluation of each category is addressed in a different manner.
8.1.1	 Compositing/Assembly Activities
Compositing/assembly activities involve repetitive actions in which sterile materials in smaller 
amounts are pooled. Such practices are common in vaccine manufacturing in which the contents 
of incubated eggs are composited early in the formulation process. Evaluation: For this category, 
adaptation of the validation methods for sterile filling and bulk materials may be appropriate for the 
simulation rationale.
8.1.2	 Formulation/Compounding Activities
Formulation/compounding activities in a manual setting might use different equipment than auto-
mated processes due to the smaller scale of the operation. For example, laboratory glassware and 
utensils may be used to produce a sterile bulk formulation. The smaller scale of the operation may also 
mandate alternative transfer methods than those utilized in larger, automated operations. Evaluation: 
The methods utilized for sterile bulk materials may be appropriate in these processes (1,4,15). 
8.1.3	 Filling/Subdivision Activities (Including Lyophilization if Needed) 
Filling/subdivision activities involve repetitive actions in which sterile materials are transferred from 
a bulk container into smaller containers, sealed and closed (or partially closed when lyophilization is 
planned). This practice is common in early development and early clinical stage manufacturing of 
sterile products, and in the manufacture of extremely small lot sizes. Evaluation: These activities may 
use methods defined for automated filling (1,6).
8.1.4	 Manual Manipulation Steps Performed in Conjunction with Other 
Processes 
Evaluation: Manual activities, such as sampling, aseptic connection, etc., are usually an integral part 
of other aseptic processes. As such there is no need to address them independently in the rationale 
for the study design.
Additional details on process-specific evaluation methods are to be provided in conjunction with each 
of the elements addressed within the overall process evaluation protocol/procedure. 
8.0	 Evaluation of Manual Aseptic Processing–
Process Simulation
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

17
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
8.2	 Media Sterilization 
The preparation of media for use in a MAP simulation is normally managed with few problems. If the 
media bulk container is small enough it can be sterilized in an autoclave prior to introduction into the 
process. In other cases non-sterile bulk media may be filtered into the process in a manner similar to 
the drug product. Where possible, sterilization methods, such as autoclaving or irradiating, should be 
combined with filtration to remove mycoplasma contamination from media components (for a more 
detailed discussion, see PDA Technical Report No. 22). For compositing/assembly processes, suitable 
sterile materials to use in the process simulation may be unavailable. In such cases the choice may be 
to use the production materials themselves suitably sterilized/adapted (if possible and necessary) in 
the simulation, if they do not inhibit the growth of microorganisms. For the APS each of the liquid 
containers containing sterile materials for the process should have their contents replaced with media.
8.3	 Frequency and Number of APS Runs 
The recommendation for frequency and number of simulation studies (runs) for manual processing is 
that each operator (primary and secondary) should be qualified semi-annually (or in accordance with 
the applicable regulatory requirements). Typically, three replicate APS studies are performed to initially 
qualify an operator and process. The combined duration and size of the APS runs will support both op-
erator and process qualification. 
Note: Operator qualification is critical since the operators are the primary means of production. More 
frequent studies may be required for infrequent manufacturing operations.
8.3.1	 Duration of Runs 
Simulation studies should meet or exceed the expected maximum duration of a single working ses-
sion by a single operator. 
8.3.2	 Size of Runs
The size of the process simulation is largely dictated by the time period that a single operator would 
remain performing the same activity. The actual numbers of units produced in that time period 
should meet or exceed the production quantity that the operator(s) would normally handle in that 
time period. As the operator is an integral part of the process and a key variable in MAP, it may be 
that each operator will have to perform the whole process simulation for the process to be considered 
valid especially where only small numbers are filled. 
8.4	 Observation of the Process Simulation
Considerations for observation of MAP simulations are consistent with observations of automated 
simulations, as described in PDA Technical Report No. 22 (6): 
The process simulation should be observed to assure that all planned activities are properly executed and 
represent an appropriate challenge to the process capability. Observation may also be used to augment aseptic 
conduct and technique training.
Observation should commence upon the initiation of the process simulation, including equipment set-up, 
and continue until the process simulation has completed. Observation of the simulation should be per-
formed by individuals having the knowledge and competency to assess if operators have used proper aseptic 
conduct in their activities. These individuals should also be able to assess that aseptic interventions have been 
executed consistent with good practice so as to provide for realistic assessments of sterility control.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.

