 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
12 
subjectiveness, focus on predetermined outcomes, and the lack of meaningful participation by those most 
involved in the performance of the activities being assessed (e.g., line operators, mechanics). Hence, the best 
practice for APS design is to include people who are directly involved in the process and have a good 
understanding of the actual variability in the execution of the manufacturing process and of the accumulated 
knowledge about the product and process in the organization.  
It is important to view the risk factors holistically, with their collective impact on the overall product and the 
process. The hazards and risks associated with an aseptic process can vary based on the specific process 
design and the context in which it is performed. For example, a similar human intervention of lifting a fallen 
vial from the track in an aseptic process could result in a different impact based on equipment design and/or 
air-flow design. 
Human interventions in an aseptic process can be a key source of microbiological contamination of sterile 
products, irrespective of the type of manufacturing system used. Hence, as a part of a risk assessment, it is 
critical to thoroughly understand the risk contributors in each intervention while determining the level of 
risks and planning mitigation actions. This can help not only eliminate or reduce the risks of high-risk 
interventions (which may include the decision that some interventions are not allowed), it can also help in 
planning the APS studies. When the possibility of contamination is higher based on process design (e.g., 
manually intensive filling lines), a larger number of units, generally at or approaching the full production 
batch size, should be used. In contrast, a process conducted in an isolator can have a low risk of 
contamination because of the lack of direct human intervention and can be simulated with a lower number 
of units as a proportion of the overall operation (4). The inclusion and frequency of interventions in the APS 
should be considered based on assessed risks posed to product sterility (1), and the frequency with which the 
interventions occur during routine manufacturing. A documented approach to risk assessment of 
interventions can help define the size of the run, duration of the run, and frequency of the simulated 
interventions in an APS. (See Section 14.1, Examples 1, 2, 4).  
Note: For very complex changes, even if the risk assessment indicates no new risks, it may be necessary to 
include the modified intervention (at least initially) to demonstrate there are no unexpected consequences. 
Risk-assessment outcomes can be used for:  
• 
Planning mitigation actions and setting the review process  
• 
Risk communication  
• 
Employee training  
• 
Future process design  
• 
APS design  
• 
Investigation of Out-Of-Trend (OOT) and Out-Of-Specification (OOS) results 
• 
Overall aseptic process improvement (e.g. Refinement of standard operating procedures for aseptic 
assembly of equipment and aseptic interventions) 
Examples are presented in Section 13.4.  
3.5 Ongoing Evaluation  
Assessment of ongoing controls and changes to the aseptic process, personnel, equipment, computerized 
systems, facility, and critical utilities should be performed as part of the change-control system to determine 
the risk of such changes to the assurance of sterility. This assessment should be used to justify the type of 
response or simulation of the process change needed to ensure that the change willnot adversely affected the 
aseptic process. A risk assessment may be beneficial in presenting a rationale for the need and extent of an 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
13 
APS as a result of change control. The risk-assessment and risk-management decisions should be recorded, 
approved, and incorporated into the change-control documentation. The assessment should include periodic 
evaluation of the type and frequency of interventions that must be executed or simulated in the APS to 
ensure it remains representative of routine operations. When assessing potential improvements, the 
assessment of risk should include consideration for effectiveness of the change and any unintended 
consequences that may occur. (See Section 4.1.3).  
 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
14 
4.0 Overview of Aseptic Process Simulation for Aseptically 
Produced Products 
This section summarizes general APS design requirements as well as considerations related to APS design 
with regard to products and aseptic processing technologies. 
4.1 General Requirements 
This section provides an overview of the various products manufactured aseptically in the pharmaceutical 
industry and how to perform adequate APS studies in respect to these products. 
4.1.1 Scope of Aseptic Process Simulation 
The APS should imitate the routine aseptic manufacturing process as closely as possible and include all 
critical manufacturing steps. The APS for aseptically produced sterile dosage forms and products starts at 
the point of sterilization of the product, for example, the sterile filtration of product solutions and the 
sterilization of product contact surfaces, including containers and closures, through sealing of the filled 
containers (e.g., vials, syringes) or other packaging units. Any aseptic activities performed during dosage-
form compounding (e.g., the aseptic addition of ingredients for the preparation of a suspension), are a 
necessary part of the APS. 
4.1.2 Design of Aseptic Process Simulation 
The aseptic process is simulated through the use of production operations in which a sterile growth medium 
and/or placebo is handled in a manner that resembles the methods used in routine production as closely as 
possible. The application of this principle to a specific aseptic process or procedure may require adaptation 
of the methods described in this technical report to that process or procedure. However, any such 
adaptations should not reduce the risk (i.e., APS should not be a “best case” in comparison to routine 
manufacturing), or increase risk beyond normal operating parameters. 
Where growth media and/or placebo is added or utilized in the APS, its sterilization need not be performed 
in a manner identical to that used for the product being simulated. For example, an APS does not support the 
validation of the sterilizing filter used in the product or process being simulated; this will be accomplished 
by other studies. So, differences in the filter area and filter media, for example, are acceptable providing 
these changes do not enhance the aseptic process or eliminate a process step that could adversely affect the 
sterility assurance of the product.  
A company must determine the appropriate rationale and approaches applicable to their unique operations 
and APS design based on a sound risk assessment. Process-flow diagrams showing the routine 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
15 
manufacturing process and steps in parallel with the APS steps are very useful for an APS illustration and 
design assessment and to explicitly highlight the potential differences between both processes.  
4.1.3 Interventions 
 Personnel are a significant source of microbial contamination during aseptic processes. Consequently, 
activities performed by personnel within the critical area, also called interventions, must be carefully 
designed, qualified, and controlled to ensure they do not compromise the sterility of the materials being 
produced. (See Section 4.1.3.2). Each company should have a list of “qualified interventions” for each 
aseptic process type. 
The execution of interventions during the APS is critical to the process-capability demonstration. To 
demonstrate that capability, APSs should include representative interventions that occur during an aseptic 
filling process. While there are no truly risk-free interventions, when absolutely necessary, interventions can 
be considered acceptable if demonstrated to carry acceptable residual risk as evidenced by the application of 
appropriate aseptic technique, air-flow studies and successful APS.  
It is essential to include the interventions that are known to occur during normal production runs in an APS. 
Interventions that are permitted in a production operation should be specifically documented and included in 
APSs at a similar frequency and of a similar duration based on their potential risk to product sterility. 
Nonqualified interventions that must be performed should be handled with the quality management system, 
and new interventions to be added to the intervention program should be managed through the change 
management system, as defined by the company. The details of the intervention conducted should be subject 
to risk assessment, recorded, and fully investigated under the manufacturer's pharmaceutical quality system, 
including a real-time assessment of the acceptance of the intervention from a risk to product/patient 
perspective. They should also be thoroughly assessed by the Quality Unit and considered for inclusion in the 
next APS based on the needs of the process or for investigational purposes. While interventions and/or 
stoppages are normally recorded in the batch record, the manner of documenting these occurrences varies. 
Line stoppages and corrective interventions should be sufficiently documented in batch records with the 
associated time, duration, and repetition of the event.  
A thorough risk assessment of the aseptic manufacturing process is necessary to evaluate the process risk 
associated with each intervention. Factors such as the proximity of the intervention to critical surfaces or 
open containers, the duration of the intervention, the complexity of the intervention, and other parameters 
determined by each company may be used to evaluate the risk of each intervention. Rating the intervention 
risks based on objective criteria will help determine if additional actions or controls are needed to mitigate 
each risk and will also help determine the frequency with which each intervention should be performed 
during the APS. (See Section 13.4).  
4.1.3.1 Identifying Interventions Associated with an Aseptic Process 
Companies should develop and maintain an approved list of allowed and qualified interventions that may 
occur during production and in the APS. Companies should also establish clear instructions for the 
performance of each aseptic intervention with inputs from operators, line mechanics, supervisory staff, 
microbiology, engineering, and quality assurance. These instructions can be in the form of written 
procedures, visual aids, videos, other media such as virtual reality, or any combination thereof. The 
instructions must be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect the current processes and interventions. 
This ensures consistency for operators and the interventions they are required to perform.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
16 
Companies should identify interventions and determine their frequency and duration of inclusion in the APS 
based on process design and historical performance documentation, such as completed batch records, batch-
related documentation, SOPs, and discussions with operating personnel. The goal of this activity is to list all 
interventions for each product, process, container, closure, or filling line configuration. For firms with 
multiple aseptic operations, interventions may vary from one fill line to another, even if both are filling 
similar products and containers. Variations in product type may add activities that are specific to individual 
situations. The basis and number of the required simulated interventions must be documented.  
Operators must demonstrate their ability to perform the aseptic interventions on the filling line prior to 
taking part in an APS or participating in a product fill (see Section 8.0). If multiple filling lines of 
comparable design are utilized for the manufacture of a product, application of a matrix approach to 
operator qualification might be considered. In the case of multiple primary-packaging configurations, it is 
technically not feasible to run every possible configuration on every filling line. Qualification of the 
operator on a different filling line can be done using a matrix approach only when equivalency of the 
intervention conducted on the other line has been established and well documented. This enables operators 
to simulate interventions on one filling line as part of the matrix approach in an APS, which is suitable for 
participation on other filling lines in routine production. The definition of worst-case configurations and 
matrixing therefore is a suitable alternative. For more information on qualification, please see Section 8.0. 
Similar logic can be applied to interventions of very similar type, or interventions that could be seen as a 
subset of more complex operations. It is not necessary to perform every intervention individually during an 
APS. Depending on a risk assessment of the individual interventions and solid rationale for why a certain 
operation can be seen as a subset of, or sufficiently similar to, another intervention, a matrixing approach 
might be applicable. For example, during the removal of varying numbers of vials from a turntable due to 
overturned vials or glass-breakage events, the performance of the highest-risk vial-removal activity may be 
sufficient to demonstrate proficiency in performing lower-risk vial-removal activities.  
4.1.3.1.1 Inherent Interventions  
Inherent interventions are an integral part of the aseptic process and are required for setup or routine 
operation and/or monitoring (e.g., equipment installation/assembly, weight adjustments, closure resupply, 
container resupply, EM sampling). Inherent interventions are not corrections to events that occur on the 
filling line; rather, they are a planned and necessary part of the overall process and are performed during the 
APS at a defined frequency or point of the filling operation. Inherent interventions are required by batch 
record, procedure, or work instructions and should be executed in full during APS in accordance with the 
normal production process or, in part, just simulated (e.g., loading of packaging components).  
Depending on the process design, the inherent interventions may pose different risks to the product. 
Therefore, the risk of the inherent interventions should be assessed and ranked for criticality (e.g., major, 
moderate, or minor). The criticality of an inherent intervention can be used to determine the frequency of its 
inclusion in the APS. That being said, higher-risk inherent interventions expected to take place at a 
relatively high frequency during production should be avoided to the extent possible, or the criticality of 
these interventions should be reduced by improved process, facility, or equipment design. Examples of 
inherent interventions are:  
• 
Setup of direct and indirect product-contact parts vs. nonproduct-contact parts  
• 
Change of EM plates preferably via manipulation through a glove port  
• 
Addition of components  
• 
Closure resupply requiring manual handling when opening the container/bag and during loading  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
17 
• 
For isolators and restricted access barrier systems (RABS):  
̶ 
Proximity of gloves to critical surfaces or open product during placement of hands in 
gloves  
̶ 
Docking and movement of materials in areas of the line with critical surfaces and/or open 
product  
4.1.3.1.2 Corrective Interventions 
Corrective interventions are performed to correct or adjust an aseptic process during its execution. There 
should be a list of permitted corrective interventions, each of which is fully characterized, that is, supported 
with a step-by-step written description, a contamination-focused risk assessment, comprehensive operator 
training, and detailed airflow visualization studies to confirm their suitability “by design.” (See Section 
4.1.3.2)  
Corrective interventions should be challenged during the APS at a frequency (rate) similar to that in which 
they occur during routine manufacturing. To achieve this, the approximate rate that each permitted 
intervention occurs during product manufacture should be evaluated and used to inform the APS process 
design. For the APS to remain representative of the routine aseptic process, the cumulative rate that all 
corrective interventions occur during product manufacturing should also be known; the total number of 
corrective interventions challenged in each APS should align with this cumulative rate. The frequency with 
which interventions are performed during the APS should be representative of that used for production and 
may be adjusted periodically based on recent manufacturing data.  
In practice, there are likely to be multiple permitted corrective interventions that may not occur during each 
production run and challenging each of them in every APS will lead to the APS becoming an un-
representative challenge. Because some interventions will occur infrequently (e.g., in less than 50% of 
batches), the use of frequency to determine how often these interventions are challenged during APS will 
lead to them being overchallenged (e.g., once during each APS) and push the overall intervention rate for 
the APS beyond what is representative. The suggested approach is to deal with infrequent interventions in 
order of the risk they pose and the frequency they occur, while ensuring that each permitted intervention is 
included at least annually. This will mean that lower-risk infrequent interventions may be challenged 
annually rather than every six months.  
Replicate interventions should not be performed at the same time but should be distributed throughout the 
APS to simulate production activities. Repeating the intervention multiple times during an APS may not 
represent an improved sterility assurance challenge to the process. Therefore, it should not be necessary to 
perform the same intervention multiple times during an APS to determine the maximum number of times an 
intervention may be performed in production. For example, if an intervention occurs ten times during 
production, it may not be necessary to replicate that number during the APS. The frequency should be 
representative, but does not need to equal the maximum number, especially for lower-risk interventions. The 
decision on the number of replicate interventions to include in the APS should be based on relative risk 
criteria. The inclusion of an unrealistically higher number and frequency of interventions during the APS 
than during the aseptic process may no longer be a true representation and simulation of the aseptic process.  
Where a lower-risk intervention has an established rate, leading to it potentially being challenged multiple 
times during an APS, one or more replicates could be dropped to allow additional higher-risk interventions 
to be included more frequently (although care should be taken to ensure that the APS design does not 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
18 
become artificially such a worst-case that it is no longer representative of the process). The selection of 
interventions and frequency that each intervention is performed during APS should be fully justified.  
Where the need to perform a new corrective intervention arises during product manufacture, a proactive 
assessment of risk should be performed to determine whether the intervention should be permitted and, if 
permitted, the risk-mitigating steps to be taken before and after it. Until that point and inclusion in a 
successful APS, any new intervention should be treated as a deviation from the established process with the 
potential for the batch to be stopped in the worst-case scenario.  
4.1.3.2 Intervention Procedures and Qualification  
In aseptic processing, the qualification of interventions is a critical aspect that ensures the maintenance of 
product sterility and overall process integrity. This section delves into the essential procedures and 
considerations for qualifying interventions, as well as the protocols for handling unqualified, unapproved, 
and disallowed interventions. 
4.1.3.2.1 Intervention Qualification  
Interventions should be properly qualified before they are performed in aseptic processes. The APS alone 
does not qualify the intervention, and it should not be considered the sole means to, or a substitute for, more-
focused and effective methods to qualify an intervention. However, all interventions (inherent or corrective), 
after meeting other qualification criteria, should be included in the APS to evaluate whether any weakness 
or under-addressed variable in the process adversely affects product sterility.  
The qualification of an intervention should include the following considerations:  
• 
Risk assessment to determine the risks posed by the intervention and if those risks are adequately 
controlled 
• 
Sound process design of the intervention, as well as qualification of any control measures designed 
to address risks posed by the intervention 
• 
Approved procedures (as noted in formal SOPs, batch records, or other documents) describing the 
performance of the intervention 
• 
Personnel training in the performance of the intervention  
• 
Evidence that adequately trained and qualified personnel can properly perform the intervention 
within a consistent duration 
• 
Evidence, inclusive of air-visualization studies, that personnel performing interventions in the 
critical area and in proximity to sterile product or contact surfaces can do so following good aseptic 
working techniques, without disrupting first air or compromising adjacent critical surfaces, e.g., by 
causing external “dirtier” air to enter the critical area by generating significant turbulences  
• 
Use of ergonomics, rest periods (e.g., breaks), and other means to minimize the effects of human 
fatigue on aseptic process performance and risks posed to product quality (see Section 7.9.2). 
• 
Oversight of intervention performance to evaluate proper execution of the intervention  
A clear decision as to whether the intervention is acceptable risk, if further actions such as engineering is 
required or if the intervention poses an unacceptable risk 
4.1.3.2.2 Unqualified or Unapproved Interventions 
Interventions that are required in a production run to continue manufacturing and have not been previously 
qualified should be considered unqualified and unapproved. Procedures should be in place to address 
unqualified and unapproved interventions, including personnel and departments responsible for input and 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
19 
approval and actions required to perform the intervention if it is possible to do it with an acceptable risk. If 
such interventions are required or are contemplated, the company should do one or more of the following:  
• 
Immediately contact the Quality Unit (before the intervention, if possible)  
• 
Disallow the intervention and immediately stop production, pending corrective actions that are not 
normally performed during the aseptic process (through a deviation or temporary change control) 
• 
Assess the intervention to determine the risk to product sterility posed by the intervention and 
control steps needed to mitigate such risk. If the assessment supports the execution of the 
intervention, consider whether the intervention should become part of the established process.  
• 
Incorporate special precautions, risk mitigation, controls, and monitoring to limit the risk of product 
contamination, including removal of potential compromised units and disinfection or 
decontamination of affected areas  
• 
Segregate and contain the affected units and define disposition criteria for the product filled after 
the performance of the intervention 
• 
Evaluate the similarity of the interventions to qualified and approved interventions and activities. If 
the intervention has occurred before or is reasonably likely to occur again, consideration should be 
given to adding it to the established process as a permitted intervention once it is fully qualified 
(i.e., assessed and successfully challenged during the APS).  
• 
If it is determined that the unqualified intervention will be necessary, operators should be coached 
on how to perform the intervention. Additionally, show the intervention be added to the qualified 
interventions, formal training of operators should be undertaken Document the intervention and 
decision criteria, including steps required to qualify the new intervention and its inclusion in future 
APS runs, if applicable  
• 
Arrange for the Quality Unit to oversee the proper execution of the intervention  
• 
Additional samples (e.g., sterility and EM taken after critical interventions) should be considered 
based on risk 
4.1.3.2.3 Disallowed Interventions  
Disallowed interventions are those that pose an unacceptable level of risk of contamination to sterile 
product, those that are no longer relevant or performed in production (not simulated in APS, "just in case" 
interventions), or those that for some other reason are no longer allowed in the production process. 
Disallowed interventions should be removed from the list of approved interventions, and procedures should 
be modified to remove these interventions from APS and normal production.  
4.1.3.3 Aseptic Processing Simulation Study Design  
The number, type, and complexity of inherent interventions that occur with each filling process, as well as 
corrective interventions and events (e.g., maintenance, stoppages, equipment adjustments) should be 
incorporated into the APS study design (12). When the APS procedures are consistent with those used for 
routine production, the simulation will be a more authentic representation of the routine process.  
The purpose of the APS is to evaluate the capability of executing a process, interventions included, under 
specific conditions to produce units devoid of microbial contamination. During the design of the APS, it's 
crucial to take into account the quantity, variety, and intricacy of both inherent and corrective interventions, 
backed by robust scientific reasoning. Filling lines with comparable equipment setups might adopt a "worst-
case" strategy for equipment arrangement and intervention to mimic the risks associated with each filling-
line configuration. For example, two sets of filling parts of similar design sourced from different vendors 
may present a similar overall processing risk and may not require a separate APS to demonstrate the 
acceptability of the interventions associated with the use of each filling set.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
20 
Interventions to be included in the APS protocol should be considered in terms of the expected frequency 
and duration with which they are performed during production based on process design, production logs, 
batch records, observations of the aseptic filling process, and the microbiological risk to the product and 
process as determined by a thorough risk assessment. In general, interventions that commonly occur should 
be routinely simulated, while those occurring rarely can be simulated periodically (e.g., annually, depending 
on their risk, complexity, and the frequency with which they are performed during production fills). It 
should be noted that rarely performed interventions may have an additional risk factor due to lower 
familiarity of the operator with the intervention (if it is sufficiently different from other more routine 
interventions). The APS should consider the anticipated number of interventions required to run and 
accurately simulate the aseptic process.  
Proper intervention performance is dependent upon the operator training and qualification program and 
predicated on sound intervention design, airflow-visualization studies, procedures, and evidence supporting 
operator training and execution of interventions (see Section 9.0). Qualification studies on higher-risk 
complex interventions may be used to demonstrate adequate aseptic training proficiency and the ability to 
execute less-complex interventions during production without the operator having to perform the less-
complex intervention during the APS. The execution of interventions during the APS, although important, 
should not be the sole indicator of an intervention's suitability or proper performance. Likewise, the ability 
to perform a particular intervention should not be based on the number of times it is performed during the 
APS, but rather the qualification and training of operators to perform these interventions. On-the-job 
training of higher-risk interventions using placebo (production environment) or growth promoting media 
(training environment), airflow visualization studies of intervention execution, virtual-reality training, and 
enhanced supervision of inexperienced operators may be used to ensure that operators are proficient at 
performing their assigned interventions.  
The performance of interventions should be accomplished by qualified personnel, including those involved 
in maintenance activities, EM, and support personnel according to defined procedures. The ability of the 
operator or mechanic to intervene in the process to address mechanical failures or other infrequent 
interventions that may pose a significant risk to the process should be reflected in the APS. Certain 
corrective interventions that occur infrequently during product manufacture should be performed 
periodically to simulate their performance during routine operations. These include events such as 
equipment breakdown, part replacement, or other infrequent nonroutine corrective interventions.  
Defined intervention procedures ensure controlled process activities and help avoid unintended, personnel-
dependent activities that may not conform to appropriate aseptic behavior. A matrix approach (grouping 
interventions by similarity of execution and risk) for certain types of aseptic processing interventions may 
be considered for the simulation of similar interventions of comparable complexity and risk, where risk-
related variables have been assessed and found to be captured in this approach. It should be noted that 
although some interventions may be considered within a matrix equivalent to each other, and in any one 
APS only a single intervention is executed the interventions should be rotated, so that over time all are 
included. Interventions that are demonstrated to be acceptable can normally be performed by other trained 
and qualified individuals.  
Note: This may not be the case for highly complex specialized activities where only individuals who have 
performed that activity successfully (as supported by acceptable APS results) are considered qualified (see 
Section 8.0).  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
21 
4.1.3.4 Handling of Intervention-Related Units  
It is common for a predefined number of units to be discarded during production runs as a risk reduction or 
mitigation activity following interventions, particularly after initial aseptic line setup. If the intervention 
procedure and batch documentation call for a minimum number of units (from specified location(s)) to be 
removed during or after an intervention, then those units are considered rejects associated with the 
intervention. Procedures should be in place to ensure that these rejected units are properly removed and 
discarded during production without compromising the adjacent aseptic environment and that the same 
procedure can be followed during the APS without incubation of rejected units.  
Units rejected in response to an APS intervention, however, may provide valuable information to help the 
manufacturer better understand the risk that each intervention poses and may drive further risk reduction or 
mitigation. For this reason, manufacturers should consider incubating any integral filled and closed units 
(e.g., a vial with a fully inserted stopper) for informational purposes. The incubation of these units during an 
APS should be considered (1) if there is scientific value that can be obtained from the evaluation of these 
incubated units, and (2) where the operation and automation of the filling line permits collection of these 
units. Otherwise, the intervention rejects may be removed and noted in the APS. Rejects from higher-risk 
operations, for example, first-filled units following setup operations or units filled following significant 
interventions should be incubated if their inclusion does not introduce an artificially greater challenge to 
aseptic control than commercial operation (e.g., units removed and sealed by a manual vs. an automated 
process). In no case should more units be removed, or a larger zone be cleared during an APS intervention 
than would be cleared during a production run.  
Where such units are incubated, they should be incubated separately. They are not to be considered part of 
the acceptance criteria for the APS; however, any contaminated unit should trigger an investigation for 
potential root cause, its impact on the overall process evaluation, and any associated corrective action. The 
exclusion of any units from incubation requires justification and documentation. Procedurally defined 
nonintegral units (e.g., cracked or unsealed containers) that are detected and discarded as part of the routine 
operation should not be incubated. The incubation of nonintegral units will not provide any meaningful 
measure of the aseptic process, since these units do not represent either acceptable production practices or 
acceptable container–closure integrity. Any integral units found to be contaminated should be considered in 
the context of potential improvement. 
4.1.4 Sterile Bulk Aseptic Process Simulation  
Technical Report 22 does not address APS for sterile bulk products (i.e., liquids, solids, suspensions) or for 
drug product, however they are described in PDA Technical Report No. 28 (Revised 2006): Process 
Simulation Testing for Sterile Bulk Pharmaceutical Chemicals (TR 28). Special considerations for the 
inclusion in the APS of sterile-material additions during the preparation of suspension drug products, 
however, is covered in Section 4.2.3. 
4.2 Aseptic Process Simulation Design with Regard to Products  
The following are aspects to consider in the design of the APS which are specific to the simulated product 
dosage form. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
