 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
36 
are focused to ATMPs, these may also be applied to other product types that utilize manual aseptic 
processing. In addition, recommended practices for manual aseptic processes are detailed in TR 62.  
Many ATMPs cannot be terminally sterilized (e.g., autologous cellular-based therapies) thus requiring 
aseptic processing at many steps (unit operations) of the overall manufacturing process. Additionally, these 
products may be produced in low batch volumes to meet specific patient needs with limitations in the 
application of closed, automated manufacturing systems, and thus these manufacturing processes are 
designed with multiple manual aseptic operations.  
ATMPs are new, state-of-the-art therapies that encompass gene therapy, somatic-cell therapy, and tissue-
engineered products from animals and human origin. These products are mostly produced in low batch sizes 
to meet specific patient needs, and the majority cannot be terminally sterilized, hence they are produced 
aseptically. In many cases, ATMPs are compounded and filled in constrained spaces in a hospital or 
laboratory setup which not only demands the careful and meticulous handling of the products but also limits 
the use of highly automated handling of these products from manufacturing to fill-finish.  
Production of ATMPs is at a minimum done in a BSC (Grade A environment surrounded by a Grade B 
environment), although preferentially in a barrier system (RABS or Isolator). A risk-based design of the 
facility, manufacturing process, and their qualification is crucial for ensuring the final quality of the products 
and the safety of the operators while handling these products.   
APS is an essential element of validation of the aseptic processes in this case. The design of simulation 
criteria should be based on the risk assessment done on the entire process. The following are key 
considerations for designing simulation studies:   
• 
The APS shall be designed to resemble, as closely as possible, the routine manufacturing process 
associated with open-processing steps. Extended closed-processing activities, such as incubation, do 
not need to be simulated for the duration of the activities, provided there is no manipulation of the 
closed containers. All transfer steps must be included in the APS design.  
• 
Where open product-handling is involved, the APS should simulate the entire process and should 
include all the interventions performed by the operators. 
• 
Where closed systems are used, the APS must focus on the aseptic connections and system 
integrity.    
• 
If there are requirements for addition and/or withdrawal of materials from the system, such 
processes shall be covered as a part of APS. Regulatory agencies expect used/spent processing 
solutions (e.g., media or wash solution) to be incubated. In the case of a facility (e.g., a hospital or 
laboratory setup) where multiple operations are carried out together in a single room, the APS 
should consider the worst-case scenario in terms of the area occupancy and its constraints during the 
APS. However, different stations might require separate APS based on the type of activities and risk 
assessment. 
• 
A risk-based approach should be used to determine the need for operator participation in certain 
aseptic interventions during the APS. Appropriate aseptic-intervention training may qualify 
operators for multiple aseptic interventions during production, if they have been bracketed as 
similar interventions, without having to participate in each of those interventions during an APS and 
qualification such as broth filling. For example, operators can be considered qualified for a process 
by demonstrating that they can perform the most complex aseptic-processing steps or manipulations 
without contaminating the microbiological medium. Aseptic technique is necessary to assure 
sterility of product in a manual aseptic process and not just a passed APS run alone. 
• 
Simulation with anaerobic conditions is not systematically required, as most cell and gene therapies 
are manufactured entirely in the presence of atmospheric oxygen.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
37 
• 
In the case of a multiproduct facility, if a bracketing approach is used for APS, strategies like risk-
based worst-case challenge combining the common processing steps or intervention types, could be 
adopted. However, it should be well defined through a structured risk-management plan.   
• 
Placebo/growth promoting media should contact all sterile surfaces of materials and equipment used 
during the manufacturing process. The incubation of intermediate containers (e.g., bioreactor bags) 
may be necessary if the APS is divided into sections to simulate the entire process.     
• 
Where there are different manufacturing steps involved for different products, a risk-based approach 
should be applied in the design of the matrix for APS to ensure coverage of all relevant practices.   
• 
The number, size, and type of containers to be used in the APS need to be considered during the 
APS design process, and adequate incubation space needs to be planned to meet these needs. Some 
of the used media or wash solution that needs to be incubated in the APS runs could be large 
volumes and consume a large area of incubation space. Containers used for incubation in the APS 
runs should simulate the containers used in the actual manufacturing process when possible. Use of 
alternative containers should be justified.  
Compounding Operations: Where the final product has no sterilization step for the compounded bulk 
before filling, the simulation study should include the compounding operations involving aseptic addition of 
the sterile input materials using sterile media and/or placebo (e.g., cell culture media demonstrated to 
support microbial growth).    
Filling Operations: The risk involved in the filling operation is directly proportionate to the number of 
operator interventions involved in the process and design (open or closed line). Hence, in the case of manual 
filling operations, the APS should be more thorough to cover all the operations of an actual product and 
should be performed for a duration similar to the actual production process. Specifically, it is not unusual for 
ATMPs to be manually filled or pipetted into the final product unit (vial) by the manufacturing operator. In 
such cases where the operator serves as the “filling machine,” the operator must be initially qualified to 
perform this activity following the requirements for qualification (at least three times for initial 
qualification) and requalification of manual filling (two times per year). These requirements should be 
isolated from the filling process and should not require that all upstream inoculation or expansion activities 
have the same requirements applied.  
For very small batches, it may be necessary to fill more APS units than is normally done for manufacturing 
in order to ensure there are sufficient units for growth promotion post-incubation.  
During execution of the APS, each operator working at a BSC must perform simulated aseptic 
manipulations; however, the APS may be performed in one or more representative BSCs as determined by a 
risk assessment. 
A case study for the design of an APS for an ATMP (autologous gene-modified cellular therapy such as a 
CAR-T product) is provided in Example 8.  
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
38 
5.0 Aseptic Process Simulation Documentation 
Documentation is an important element of an APS program, since it serves as a record of the simulation’s 
rationale and performance. Subsequently, this record can be of assistance in sterility-failure investigations as 
well as for review of the adequacy of the simulation by regulatory bodies (17).  
Documentation provides instructions for performance of the study, criteria for acceptance of the study, 
historical references, study results, and proof that the studies were conducted. The documentation should be 
reviewed and approved by the Quality Unit and include such items as procedures, batch instructions, risk 
assessments, EM results, unit acceptance and rejection criteria, incubation conditions, protocol deviation 
investigations, final report, acceptance criteria, and positive unit investigations that are reviewed and 
approved by the Quality Unit.  
An overall APS policy or procedure presents the requirements for scheduling, conducting, and documenting 
APS studies. This will include the rationale for worst-case container and line configuration (as applicable), 
intervention and process-step inclusion, and reevaluation frequency. A master plan may also be developed 
to present the requirements and rationale for conducting APS studies for a specific product, facility, or 
manufacturing line.  
5.1 Process Definition  
The processes, steps, activities, and conditions of the production process to be evaluated during the APS 
should be defined and documented. These are defined as any and all manufacturing steps that occur after 
product, equipment, and container-closure sterilization and which can adversely affect the sterility assurance 
of the product. In some cases, this may include process or handling steps subsequent to the sealing of the 
container (e.g., leak detection, automated inspection) where damage from handling can adversely affect 
product container integrity. Processes may include (but are not limited to) the post-sterilization handling of 
drug product, transfer and holding of sterile drug product, transfer and handling of sterilized container and 
closure, loading and removal of product from a lyophilizer, filling of product to the point the drug product is 
sealed and capped, and any subsequent inspection or handling steps that may affect sterility assurance of the 
product.  
5.2 Protocol and Procedure Preparation  
A formal written protocol, procedure(s), and/or batch instruction(s) describing the activities and conditions 
for the APS must be prepared, approved, and issued prior to the start of the study. The document must be 
identified for traceability and approved prior to execution by Quality Unit representatives. Other 
stakeholders may review and approve the document at the discretion of the company. The document should 
include, but not be limited to, the following information:  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
39 
• 
Groups responsible for execution, microbial testing, and approval of the study  
• 
Rationale for the worst-case parameters chosen as appropriate simulation of routine operations  
• 
Identification of the process to be simulated  
• 
Identification of the room or rooms to be used  
• 
Identification of the filling line and equipment to be used, including fluid-path configuration details 
if multiple configurations are available  
• 
Type of container–closure to be used  
• 
Line speed(s)  
• 
Minimum number of units to be filled  
• 
Number and type of interventions and stoppages  
• 
Identification of units to be excluded from incubation and rationale  
• 
Number, identity, and specific roles of people participating  
• 
Media to be used  
• 
Volume of medium to be filled into the containers  
• 
Incubation time, temperature, and duration for the filled units  
• 
EM to be performed  
• 
Copy of the batch record to be used  
• 
Accountability requirements  
• 
Acceptance criteria for all activities  
• 
Description of the documentation required for the final report  
• 
Duration of the APS  
• 
Directions on when an APS can be aborted or deemed invalid 
• 
Duration of routine production fills being simulated  
• 
Definition of conditions that may cause the simulations to be invalidated and decision-making 
authority  
• 
Any differences between the production process and the process performed during the simulation, 
which may include any changes or modification to the production process or equipment required to 
perform the APS and the reason for the change (e.g., the replacement of an inert gas with air)  
• 
Parameters (in the case of lyophilized products) that will be used for the simulation, including 
vacuum, process temperature, and dwell time  
Other factors may need to be considered due to the nature of the process to be simulated. The protocol 
should require that, prior to execution of the APS study, critical support-system qualifications and process 
validations have been verified to be successfully completed and approved. The protocol should include or 
reference risk assessments used to support the design, performance, and evaluation of the APS.  
5.3 Aseptic Process Simulation Execution Record  
Execution of the protocol may be performed through the instructions noted in a batch record. The batch 
record gives detailed instructions on how to perform the APS. It should be written in the same format as a 
normal production batch record and contain all the routine data and sign-off requirements. All information 
applicable to the APS that would normally be attached to a batch record should also be attached to the 
simulation batch record, for example, cleaning and sterilization records for pieces of equipment used and 
release stickers for the containers and closures. All interventions, whether inherent (an integral component 
of the process) or corrective (required to maintain operation), and stoppages should be documented in the 
batch record as to the type of intervention, time the intervention occurred, aseptic operators involved, 
duration of the intervention or stoppage, and the number of the box or tray being filled. The batch record 
should include information relevant to the performance and completion of the study. The protocol and report 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
40 
should be properly filled out following appropriate good manufacturing practice (GMP) documentation 
practices. This record should include, but is not limited to:  
• 
Names of individuals participating in the simulation  
• 
Number of units filled  
• 
Number of units incubated  
• 
Filled-unit incubation time, temperature, and duration  
• 
Number of positive units and box or tray number of any positive unit(s)  
• 
Number of units rejected for cause during pre-incubation inspection (e.g., damaged container, 
defective seal)  
• 
Growth promotion of medium (after incubation), see Section 7.17  
• 
Filled-unit accountability  
• 
Media sterilization method  
• 
Filter identification and membrane integrity-test results  
• 
Environmental and personnel monitoring results  
• 
Record or log of all inherent and corrective interventions/ occurrences which may influence the 
outcome of the study with the time, duration and other details as available (including personnel in 
the filling room) 
• 
Observation logs, records, and video recordings (if applicable)  
• 
Description and resolution of any discrepancies or deviations to the protocol  
• 
Executed batch record reviewed, signed, and dated per GMP requirements for batch production 
records  
5.4 Final Report  
The final report is an evaluation of the data from the batch record and environmental-control records. Based 
on this information, a conclusion is formulated regarding the acceptability of the APS as an adequate 
simulation of the manufacturing process.  
The final report should note the results of the study, whether the study met the acceptance criteria, the 
resolution of discrepancies or deviations to the protocol, the conclusion of the study (e.g., success of study), 
and any follow-up actions (see Section 9.0). 
Any APS run presenting one or more contaminated units should be investigated as positive and all efforts 
should be made to determine the root cause. This investigation and cause should be documented (see 
Section 11.0). Any aborted or discontinued APSs conducted for that line or conducted during the overall 
APS study should be clearly justified (see Section 9.3).  
Note: Contaminated units that are not integral should be carefully investigated and appropriately 
documented to justify the determination of the root cause of the integrity failure. If the root cause is 
determined not to be related to the routine process, it may not necessarily indicate a failure. 
The final report and completed documents should be approved by representatives of the Quality Unit. The 
protocol, batch record, final report, investigations, and all relevant support documentation should be retained 
in accordance with the firm’s policies and regulatory requirements.  
5.5 Aseptic Process Simulation Observation  
The APS should be observed to ensure that all planned activities are properly executed and represent an 
appropriate challenge to process capability. Observations may also be used to augment training for aseptic 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
41 
practices and can be a valuable tool during the investigation of an APS failure. Observation should 
commence upon initiation of the APS, including equipment setup (and loading for isolators), and continue 
until the entire aseptic process has been completed (see Section 4.1.1). Observation of the simulation should 
be performed by individuals who have the knowledge and competence to assess whether participants have 
used proper aseptic practices, executed activities according to procedures (e.g., SOPs, batch records and 
protocols), and assured that aseptic interventions have been executed properly. These assessments should be 
documented to provide confirmation that all activities were carried out as they would be during routine 
production. Any observed deviation should be routed through the deviation management system.  
There are several ways in which observations can take place during an APS:  
• 
Observations may take place inside the cleanroom area as long as the person observing does not 
interfere with the process or the operator performing any activities, interventions, or documentation 
and does not provide guidance to the operator.  
• 
Observations may take place from a window that provides unobstructed views of the filling line and 
aseptic process, thus reducing the number of personnel in the cleanroom area.  
• 
Observations may be performed using a live video feed from cleanroom-compatible cameras that 
are strategically placed inside the cleanroom, as long as they provide clear, continuous, and 
unobstructed view of the aseptic activities.  
• 
Any combination of these methods can be used for observation at different times throughout the 
simulation provided that the entire process is observed. Regardless of the method used to make the 
observations, all APS observations should be well documented. Note that this observation should 
not interfere with the APS procedure itself or add unnecessary risk of contamination to the process.  
5.5.1 Video Recording of Aseptic Process Simulations  
Video recording of the APS is recommended, although it is not currently an U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) or European Medicines Agency (EMA) regulatory requirement. The decision to 
record an APS should align with a manufacturer’s internal procedures, policies, and privacy restrictions and 
must include a description of the method, intended use, and retention parameters for the recording. The 
quality of the viewing angles, fidelity of the recording, and accuracy of date and time stamps must be 
evaluated to ensure they provide the best opportunity for effective evaluation. Internal policies may differ 
from company to company or from country to country, so it is important to comply with all local laws when 
recording personnel operations.  
The use of video recording during an APS has several advantages:  
• 
The process-simulation activity can be reviewed in detail after the simulation is complete to 
determine if lapses in technique or practice occurred. The recording should be reviewed to ensure 
compliance with procedures and aseptic techniques, regardless of the outcome of the APS.  
• 
During an investigation of a process simulation failure, information from the recording can help 
determine or eliminate potential causes of contamination.  
• 
The recording can be used to determine the potential for process improvements and incorporation of 
new or improved interventions and to assist with aseptic training programs.  
• 
The use of cameras can be beneficial as it allows for less-restricted viewing. The implementation of 
cameras to avoid risk of contamination.  
If used, video recording should be combined with people performing real-time observations. If used as part 
of an investigation, the applicable sections of the video recording should be retained just as any other GMP 
documentation. The video recording may then be referenced in any deviation raised. Each manufacturer 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
42 
should have a procedure that defines the purpose of the video recording, how it is to be used, and its 
retention period. Artificial intelligence (machine learning/deep learning) may also be used to analyze, detect, 
and classify interventions, and then to indicate whether or not the intervention was performed correctly. 
 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
43 
6.0 Environmental Monitoring  
Determining and understanding the environmental conditions present during the APS study is very 
important. A properly defined, controlled, and executed EM program provides increased assurance of 
sterility by demonstrating that environmental conditions conducive to the production of sterile product are 
being met over the duration of the aseptic process and that appropriate systems and utilities are functioning 
as intended. The environmental monitoring program includes appropriately set alert levels and action limits 
and requires an investigation and a corrective action plan in cases where action limits are exceeded. 
The elements and processes that define and detail the establishment and maintenance of an effective EM 
program, including sample-site selection, sampling frequency, alert and action levels, methodology and 
interpretation of data, can be found in PDA Technical Report No. 13: Fundamentals of an Environmental 
Monitoring Program.  
APS should be carried out using the routine EM operating procedures and sampling requirements. This 
should include the setup period, setup interventions, setup personnel, transfer of EM materials and samples, 
and performance of EM sampling. Any changes to the routine EM requirements during APS, including 
additional sampling or change in sampling location, should be justified. The routine monitoring program 
should be sufficiently robust to support commercial manufacturing and, thus, the APS. If an excursion 
results from a nonroutine sampling location during an APS, it should be assessed for inclusion as part of the 
routine EM during production. Performing less sampling than what is routine should be avoided as sampling 
is a routine intervention, and an APS is expected to be representative of routine manufacturing regarding 
interventions.  
The results of the environmental and personnel monitoring are used to assess whether aseptic processing 
conditions were maintained and suitably simulated during an APS. Additionally, environmental and 
personnel monitoring results obtained during APS can aid in the identification of root cause if the APS 
yields any positives (see Section 11.0).  
EM excursion investigations should be completed and approved before approving the APS report. Failure to 
meet established routine monitoring levels should be addressed according to routine monitoring 
investigation procedures, and actions should be taken according to those procedures. EM excursions are not 
an automatic cause to reject the results of an APS; rather, any decision should be based on the investigation 
results.  
“Passing” an APS with EM results that exceed action limits does not mean that the aseptic process may be 
routinely performed in such an environment and should not be used as justification for doing so. Similarly, 
passing an APS simulation with EM results significantly below production limits does not establish those 
lower levels as the new production limits.  
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
44 
7.0 Elements of Aseptic Process Simulations  
This section contains general information to consider when conducting any type of APS. Issues such as 
operator intervention, fill volumes, line speeds, container sizes, and run duration play a key role in 
effectively simulating the production process.  
Careful consideration should be given to each of the parameters discussed in Section 7.1-7.18 for inclusion 
in the APS study design. Parameter selection and justification should be well documented and approved by 
the organization’s Quality Unit. 
7.1 Facility and Filling Machine Considerations  
APS programs should ensure that each aseptic process that takes place on aseptic-processing equipment, in 
filling lines or rooms, or any combination thereof are evaluated every six months. Multiple APSs may be 
needed to address the aseptic processing that takes place on those lines and in those rooms. Where multiple 
container closure configurations are run on a given filling line, a bracketing or a matrix approach may be 
considered (see Section 7.5.1.1). The key consideration is that the aseptic filling or manufacturing process is 
being evaluated, not a specific product. 
7.2 Equipment Setup  
The setup for an aseptic process usually entails some manual assembly of the sterilized equipment, 
including items that directly or indirectly contact product, such as filler parts, closure placement and 
insertion systems, filter housings, stopper hopper-/bowl, and other assemblies. Because equipment setup 
activities may require more manipulation of critical surfaces than subsequent processing operations, the 
steps involved are considered inherent interventions and must be included in the APS.* The allowable 
adjustment or replacement of these parts during a production run should be considered as a corrective 
intervention and should also be included in APS runs. Personnel performing setup operations during routine 
manufacturing operations should perform these inherent and corrective interventions during APS studies.  
*Note: In many aseptic processing facilities, this is the most operator intensive part of the aseptic process. 
Greater emphasis and observation should be placed on its execution including details of transfer, handling, 
connection, placement, connection of parts and addition of components. 
Equipment setups, including filler parts that are similar (e.g., filling needles, nozzles, pumps, valves, other 
spare parts) and involve the same activities or interventions, should not require inclusion in separate APS 
studies. However, where there are potential differences in the use or condition of these parts, for example, 
parts from different supplier sources or evidence of differences from process performance records, a risk 
assessment should be used to help determine if additional or separate APS studies are required. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
45 
Consideration should be given to parts that are used in routine production rather than for APS studies alone, 
if risk related characteristics such as wear or condition vary. 
Where there are differences in variables, such as the size of filler parts and closure placement and insertion 
systems, a risk assessment should be used to determine if an APS bracketing approach or matrix is 
applicable. This approach should not be based solely on the physical dimensions of the parts or lines. It 
should consider process variables that may or may not be included because of the bracketing approach (see 
Section 7.5.1.1). Where it is determined that not all relevant variables are captured by a bracketing 
approach, it will be necessary to capture such sizes and variables in multiple APS runs.  
7.3 Media Selection and Preparation  
The most common medium for APS is SCDM, also referred to as TSB. SCDM is a general-purpose growth 
medium well-suited for the recovery of aerobic microorganisms of the types commonly associated with 
human-borne and environmental contamination. It is identical to SCDM agar (although without the agar), 
which is widely used for microbial recovery in aseptic areas for the same reason. Replacement of the 
products, diluents, and buffer solutions with SCDM is customary when performing APS studies.  
Where there is evidence that the process or environment may have anaerobic microorganism contamination 
that provides a risk of product contamination, the APS studies should include filling of an alternate media, 
such as fluid thioglycolate medium (FTM) or another suitable medium in addition to conducting an aerobic 
evaluation. This evidence may include aseptic processing conducted in a strict anaerobic environment, for 
an aerobic process if anaerobic microorganisms are consistently recovered during periodic EM (for 
anaerobes), or if facultative anaerobes are detected exclusively in a FTM sterility-test medium. If oxygen is 
excluded from processing, then such parameters as container fill-volume and inert gassing may require 
modification to provide a true anaerobic environment for the APS study. In the case of a purely anaerobic 
environment, the use of SCDM is not recommended and a purely anaerobic APS can be conducted. 
Media containing animal-derived components should be sourced from non-bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy/-transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (BSE/TSE) origin. Alternatively, vegetable 
options (e.g., vegetable peptone broth) are a viable alternative. Manufacturing processes with a risk of 
mycoplasma or prion transmission should always utilize a vegetable-based growth medium. These media 
are often very similar in composition to SCDM, but with the casein component being replaced with a plant 
peptone (see Section 13.2).  
7.4 Inert Gassing  
Nitrogen or other inert gases are used to provide a low-oxygen environment for oxygen-sensitive products. 
They are also used to provide positive pressure for solution transfer. Nitrogen (or other gases) for these uses 
does not provide a true anaerobic environment (less than 0.1% residual oxygen is needed for anaerobic 
conditions). However, the use of an inert gas with SCDM, may still inhibit growth. In these instances, filter-
sterilized air should be used in lieu of an inert gas for APS studies. Air should replace the inert gas and be 
delivered by the same delivery system, thus assuring that the purge/transfer setup-and-delivery 
considerations are fully considered in the simulation. If it is necessary to use an inert gas for simulation of 
an oxygen-free process, testing should confirm the ability of the medium selected (e.g., an anaerobic media) 
to support microbial growth when the inert gas is utilized. Any replacement of gases should not result in 
additional risk to the equipment, process, or personnel. It is important to note that the sterility of the inert 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
