 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
22 
4.2.1 Solutions  
The APS should include and mimic all process steps, activities, interventions, and conditions used or present 
during commercial production, unless those process steps, activities, interventions, and conditions inhibit or 
alter the microbiological growth properties of the media. After sterilization by sterile filtration, heat 
sterilization, gamma irradiation, or any other validated sterilization method, the growth media should be 
passed through the process and equipment train as if it were an actual production batch. All routine aseptic 
procedures, aseptic connections, filling-system setup, sampling, sterile product and material holding periods 
and conditions, sterile-material handling and transfer procedures used in the manufacture of a batch 
performed should be simulated.  
For the filling operation, the containers and closures (if necessary), product-contact equipment, and filling 
parts should be prepared using approved procedure. The filling machine should be operated at the 
predetermined fill-rate for the container size being utilized. Where identified, worst-case conditions should 
be used for the simulation.  
The containers should be sealed, and the media-filled units collected in sequentially numbered trays or 
containers. If possible, the time of collection should be noted, which would allow contaminated units to be 
linked directly with the approximate time and activity being performed or simulated during the APS. The 
integral filled units (closed and sealed units) should be inverted and swirled to ensure all internal surfaces 
are exposed to the medium.  
All integral media-filled units (passing initial 100% visual or automated inspection) should be incubated; 
integral, in this context, means closed and sealed units (See Section 7.13). Procedurally defined nonintegral 
units, including cracked vials, unsealed containers, or units with a defect that exposes the contents to the 
environment, which have been detected and discarded as part of the routine operation, should not be 
incubated. Units that are rejected for other reasons, including cosmetic defects or low-fill volume, which 
otherwise would not impact container-closure integrity and therefore sterility assurance, should be incubated 
and included in the study (13). (For more information on the rejection of nonintegral units, see Section 
4.1.3.4) 
To prevent contamination risk product-contact parts must be cleaned by a validated cleaning procedure to 
remove any growth-media residues. Cleaning may require removing gaskets and valves after an APS to 
avoid media contamination of commercial product. Unless otherwise noted, the recommendations for the 
filling of solutions are applicable to the filling of other liquid products described in Sections 4.2.2-4.2.6.  
4.2.2 Lyophilized Products 
The lyophilization APS should include and mimic all process steps, activities, interventions, and conditions 
used or present during routine production, unless those process steps, activities, interventions, and 
conditions inhibit or alter the microbiological growth properties of the media. The lyophilization process 
includes several unique process steps that are different from liquid fill and should be simulated to the extent 
feasible. Some of the steps may be performed manually, some may be performed using automated or 
semiautomated systems, some are performed in or through open controlled environments, some are 
performed using closed-environment systems, and some cannot be fully performed due to media-growth 
inhibition.  
The conditions, interventions, and activities that pose a risk to product sterility, including shelf-loading, 
cycle-dwell activities and conditions, condenser operation, vacuum activation, pulsing, venting and 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
23 
introduction of gas overlay, and shelf movement should be considered for inclusion withing the APS. A risk 
assessment should be used to determine the worst-case conditions to be used in the simulation for each of 
the lyophilization process steps and to decide whether to include the step, the extent of inclusion, and the 
need to modify any of the following steps and conditions in the APS:  
• 
Filling Step: There are various container-closure systems used, including vials with fluted stoppers, 
vials with a combination stopper and crimp, multichambered vials, and prefilled multichambered 
syringes. The containers are filled with media and partially stoppered, where required, and 
transferred to sterilized lyophilization chambers after filling. The approach employed for 
lyophilization filling-process simulation is similar to those used for solution fills except for the 
partial stoppering and the addition of the transport, loading, simulation of freeze-drying, full seating 
of the stoppers, where appropriate, and unloading steps. Because the lyophilization filling process 
involves partially stoppering units, simulation separately from the simulation of product that is not 
lyophilized may be beneficial.  
• 
Sterilization Hold Time: The simulation should include the maximum holding time for all 
sterilized equipment and components. For the lyophilizer this is the time between the lyophilizer 
chamber sterilization and loading of the lyophilizer.  
• 
Transfer Step: The filled and partially stoppered units are transferred from the filling line to the 
lyophilizer. The units are only partially stoppered or open within a sealed box with the interior of 
the containers and media/product exposed to the environment. The transfer is performed manually 
by using barrier technologies and mobile unidirectional air flow (UDAF) carriers or using an 
automated loading and transfer system. The environment where the transfer occurs, whether open or 
closed, should be controlled to Grade A conditions.  
• 
Loading Step: The containers are loaded into the lyophilizer chamber at ambient temperature, 
either manually or using an automated loading system. Barrier systems are required or a mobile 
UDAF Grade A unit for manual transfer (1). The environment where the loading occurs should be 
controlled and should be Grade A anywhere the partially stoppered units are exposed. A risk 
assessment should be used to determine the number of trays, number of media units, and the 
positioning of the trays required to simulate the aseptic lyophilization loading and positioning 
process. The positioning of trays on the chamber shelves should simulate the normal loading of the 
unit and allow for the proper stopper-seating operation at the end of the cycle.  
• 
Cycle Vacuum Step: A partial vacuum is drawn on the chamber, and this level is held for a 
predetermined time. A full-cycle vacuum should not be used because it could result in media 
boilover. This can result in insufficient media for appropriate recovery and spillage within the 
lyophilizer chamber.  
• 
Freezing Step: The freezing step can be simulated through the activation of the condenser, the 
opening of valves, and other activities that occur during the freezing step. It is important not to 
freeze the media because that can inhibit microbiological growth.  
• 
Cycle Dwell Step: Activities that occur during the cycle dwell should be included in the simulation. 
The duration of the dwell simulated in the APS does not necessarily have to represent the full 
production dwell time. The APS dwell activities and time should be determined by risk assessment 
and should be sufficient to include simulation of the conditions and activities that occur during the 
dwell time. Simulating the full duration of the dwell time may not be necessary, because the risk of 
contamination is the result of activities or events that occur during the cycle, including the 
introduction of gases (e.g., air substituted for nitrogen or other inert gases), and not necessarily the 
time that the units are exposed in the chamber in the absence of activity (14). 
• 
Full Stopper Insertion: After the dwell period, the filled vial units are stoppered by chamber shelf 
compression.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
24 
• 
Unit Unloading: The units are removed from the lyophilizer and transported to the capping station 
or area. The unloading and transfer can be performed manually using tools to manipulate the boxes, 
or barriers or mobile UDAF units. The environment through which the units are transferred should 
be closed or in the case of stoppered vials controlled (Grade A air supply as minimum requirement). 
The units are not considered to be fully sealed until they are capped.  
4.2.2.1 Special Considerations Unique to the Production of Lyophilized Products  
• 
Freezing of Media: In order to maximize microbial recovery, freezing or cooling of media that 
inhibits microbiological growth should be avoided. 
• 
Vacuum Levels and Duration for Traditional Lyophilization: In the simulation of a 
lyophilization process, the depth of vacuum drawn on the chamber and the period of time for which 
this vacuum is held are important considerations. The vacuum level must not be so low as to permit 
the medium in the container to boil out, thereby invalidating the simulation. To avoid boiling the 
media, the chamber pressure during APS must not drop below the equilibrium vapor-pressure of the 
media (e.g., water, 32 mbar at 25 °C) at the loading temperature. The best practice is to maintain the 
chamber pressure between approximately 100 mbar and 200 mbar during sublimation and 
secondary drying simulation. Factors to consider in determining APS design, where applicable, 
include:  
̶ 
Using air to break the vacuum instead of nitrogen or other process gases  
̶ 
Replicating the maximum interval between sterilization of the lyophilizer and its use 
̶ 
Replicating the maximum period of time between filtration and lyophilization 
̶ 
Considering quantitative aspects of worst-case situations, for example, loading the largest 
number of trays or replicating the longest duration of loading where the chamber is open to 
the environment 
• 
Inert Gas Simulations: In the production of lyophilized products, it is common practice to use 
sterile inert gases to break the vacuum on the chamber. These gases can remain in the product 
containers after sealing. The use of inert gases, such as nitrogen, in the lyophilization process does 
not necessarily constitute an anerobic condition that warrants the use of anerobic media. The use of 
an inert gas and anaerobic medium (e.g., alternate fluid thioglycollate medium) would be 
appropriate where the persistent presence of strict anaerobic microorganisms has been confirmed 
either through EM or, more likely, during product sterility testing or when the entire process is 
conducted under anaerobic conditions. Where strict anaerobes have not been detected in EM or 
sterility testing and where the entire process is not conducted under anaerobic conditions, 
lyophilizer APSs should be conducted under fully aerobic conditions (i.e., utilizing soybean casein 
digest medium (SCDM) and air in place of an inert gas to break the vacuum).  
4.2.3 Suspensions  
Sterile suspensions are used for the administration of insoluble sterile materials such as some antibiotics, 
vaccines, and corticosteroids. Because suspensions contain insoluble materials, sterilization through 
filtration may not be possible. Additionally, suspensions may contain heat-sensitive materials and 
ingredients, therefore heat sterilization may not be possible. For those reasons, sterile suspensions may 
involve the aseptic addition of sterilized components and ingredients as part of the compounding procedure. 
The APS for the filling of suspensions requires the simulation of these aseptic additions and other aseptic 
procedures in addition to the simulation of the aseptic filling process.  
In aseptic compounding operations, the APS procedures should include the aspects of suspension 
manufacturing including sterilization of the vehicle, addition of the sterile component, and homogenization 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
25 
of the suspension. The most basic adaptation of the standard liquid APS is the addition of a sterile placebo 
powder or sterile media (instead of sterile product powder) to a tank of medium. If a sterile liquid 
component is added to the suspension, adding media is recommended so as not to alter the final media 
composition and its growth-promoting capabilities. While replacing the sterile product powder with sterile 
nutrient media, care should be taken to avoid excess powder in the area. A granular media helps in reducing 
dust formation and improving the flow. This simulates the critical difference in the production of 
suspensions: addition of a sterile component under aseptic conditions.  
Filling operations should be carried out in a manner similar to that described for solution fills, with the 
introduction of any routine changes in the filling setup to accommodate suspension filling. Where 
recirculation lines, surge tanks, agitators, and other modifications are employed to fill suspensions, they 
should be employed in the simulated fill.  
To effectively simulate the manufacturing process, it is crucial to follow it completely from the preparation 
of the sterile suspension to the end of the filling. Avoid breaking down or separating individual process 
operations, such as the compounding process or the aseptic addition of the suspension material. This is 
important because segmenting the process might lead to the omission of key process variables in the 
simulation. Be cautious when not formulating and filling the APS end-to-end in one continuous process, as 
additional steps not part of the simulated process may be required.  
The one exception may be a suspension APS, where having separate simulations for the aseptic 
compounding procedure and the aseptic filling procedure can be beneficial. This approach can help evaluate 
specific aseptic process steps involved in the preparation of suspensions, identify sources of process 
weaknesses, and investigate process-simulation failures. While a segmented APS may be beneficial initially 
or during a failure investigation, there should be no need for routine separate APS for suspension products. 
As mentioned above, when segmenting the APS, great care needs to be applied to covering all process 
variable in the simulation.  
The need for or benefit of segmenting the suspension APS into individual process simulations should be 
supported by documented justification, stating why the end-to-end process cannot occur, including a risk-
based assessment that ensures all aseptic processing steps and conditions are included in the simulations, 
and that the combined APS runs cover the entire aseptic manufacturing process. The segmented approach 
should be described in a protocol that includes any steps required to ensure the adequacy of the simulation, 
including the overlap of process steps and handling from one segmented run to the next segmented run. The 
segmented runs should not create conditions that are more favorable than normal manufacturing operations.  
4.2.4 Semisolids—Ointments, Creams, and Gels  
For the purpose of this technial report, sterile ointments, creams, gels, and other semisolids will be referred 
to collectively as ointments. Producing sterile ointments involves unique manufacturing conditions and steps 
that may require special consideration in the APS design. The aseptic manufacturing processes can resemble 
either solution or suspension product processes, depending on the solubility of the active and inactive 
materials in the bases. The simulation should mimic the actual procedures used by the firm in their 
operations. This may involve the use of surrogate materials, including agents to increase the viscosity of the 
media needed to simulate the filling properties of the product. Where drug product processing steps and 
conditions may adversely affect the growth of microbiological contamination, modification of the steps or 
use of alternative steps may need to be incorporated in place of those steps in the APS.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
26 
4.2.4.1 Compounding 
Where the manufacturing process includes aseptic compounding (also known as formulation) operations, 
the procedures previously described for either solution or suspension compounding should be followed 
using whichever method more closely simulates the actual compounding procedure used for the product 
being simulated.  
The product manufacturing process may also include heating steps that could reduce the growth of 
microbiological contamination. These heating steps should not be included in the APS if they will 
significantly reduce the ability to detect contamination. If heating will impact that ability, it may be 
necessary to modify the viscosity of the media to accommodate filling. If heating is required for the routine 
process, whether it will impact the growth promotion properties of the media must be evaluated and 
determined. It is important to ensure that the media maintains appropriate growth-promoting capabilities 
through all processing and handling steps, supported by the growth-promotion test after incubation.  
4.2.4.2 Filling 
Filling of sterile ointments generally is performed on a filling machine quite different from one employed 
for vials, syringes, or ampoules. The differences in equipment design and operation aside, the basic 
approach to conducting the fill is similar to that employed for other dosage forms. Increasing the viscosity of 
the media (e.g., adding agar to media) in the APS to simulate a process is not required, if the fill time of the 
media is the same as for the viscous product and the filler can properly operate at lower viscosities.  
Depending on the capabilities of the filling equipment, increasing the viscosity may be required to enable 
the media to be processed without difficulty and allow an aseptic filling of media. However, the use of 
thickening agents should not impact the viability of the media.  
4.2.4.3 Inspection 
Ointments are often filled into opaque containers, tubes, and applicators. The post-incubation inspection of 
filled process-simulation tubes may require additional steps to view evidence of contamination. If possible, 
opaque containers can be replaced with similarly sized and shaped clear containers, with similar sealing 
systems. Where clear substitute containers are used, those containers should not run, fill, or be handled in a 
manner that is better than the opaque containers nor should they have properties that reduce the ability for 
growth of microbiological contamination.  
If it is not possible to substitute clear containers, then the media-filled opaque containers should be 
incubated in their containers. After incubation, the media should be transferred from the opaque container to 
an individual glass or other suitably clear and sterile container for inspection. Care should be taken to avoid 
contamination from this transfer of media. It is important to culture any suspected contaminated unit as soon 
as practical to determine if the source of that contamination is microbiological, chemical, or from another 
source.  
4.2.5 Powders  
Aseptically produced sterile dry drug products, such as powders, microspheres, liposomes, or other solid 
materials, are dry nonliquid materials that are typically filled into vials, syringe cartridges, or other types of 
sterilized containers. These products will be collectively referred to here as “sterile powders.”  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
27 
Section 4.2.5 covers simulation of the handling, transfer, filling, and sealing of sterile powders. Some 
options and approaches for performing the APS will be presented, along with their respective advantages 
and disadvantages. Unless otherwise noted, the steps and precautions noted in the APS of solution products 
will be relevant to the APS of sterile-powder handling, filling, and sealing. (See Section 4.2.1 for solution 
products.)  
The production of sterile powders requires aseptic processes and equipment that may be quite different from 
those used to produce other aseptically produced liquid or lyophilized sterile dosage forms. While the filling 
of dry powders and materials utilizes equipment different from that used for filling liquids the APS of sterile 
powder-filling still involves the evaluation of sterile growth media filled in place of the powder product or 
in addition to a powder placebo.  
The APS for sterile powders may require special processing steps for the replacement of the product and the 
evaluation of the media. Similarly, during the performance of the APS for a powder-filling procedure, 
adaptations to the filling practices may need to be employed.  
Aseptic handling, filling, and sealing processes can be simulated using an appropriate placebo powder or 
other suitable surrogate powder material, such as sterilized Tryptic Soy Agar (TSA), mannitol, lactose, or 
polyethylene glycol, that mimics the sterile-powder drug product. The following bullet points need to be 
considered: 
• 
Any placebo or surrogate material used should be filled and sealed in the same containers as those 
used in the aseptic process under evaluation.  
• 
The placebo or surrogate material should exhibit or imitate physical characteristics similar to those 
of the sterile drug powder that pose a risk to product sterility.  
• 
The placebo or surrogate material and the necessary modified process steps should not inhibit 
microbiological growth, impact growth-promoting properties of the media, or interfere with the 
ability to visualize turbidity.  
• 
The impact of the placebo or surrogate material to inhibit the growth of microbiological 
contamination in the nutrient media should be assessed in microbiological growth and recovery 
studies.  
• 
The placebo or surrogate material should not adversely affect the ability of the media to exhibit or 
show microbiological contamination.  
• 
Where the processing steps and conditions may adversely affect the growth of microbiological 
contamination, steps may need to be modified or alternative steps may need to be used.Modified 
processing steps should not exclude processing steps that have been determined to pose a risk to 
product sterility.  
• 
The APS will require two individual filling operations - one for filling of the liquid nutrient medium 
and one for the filling of the placebo powder or surrogate material.  
• 
The individual contamination contribution from each of these individual filling steps may increase 
the overall risks of process-simulation contamination, and the process controls during the APS must 
take these risks into account.  
• 
The placebo or surrogate material should be compatible with the production handling and filling 
systems.  
• 
Separate simulations of individual unit operations should be avoided but, if used, they should be 
documented and supported by scientific or technical justification as to why these are needed. This 
also requires a risk-based assessment to ensure that all processing steps that pose a risk to product 
sterility are covered in the simulations.  
• 
Inspectors should be trained to inspect filled media-containing placebo or surrogate material, since 
the material could create the appearance of turbidity that resembles microbial growth. Ideally, the 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
 Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
28 
material used should not create the appearance of turbidity; however, if that is not possible, it should 
be clearly distinguished from microbial turbidity, and inspectors should be specifically trained to 
recognize the difference between product precipitation (from the placebo) and microbial 
turbidity. Any questions regarding if growth is present or not requires further evaluation including 
isolation and testing / further incubation if required. 
Sections 4.2.5.1-4.2.5.5 present some approaches for performing sterile-powder APSs. Other approaches, 
including the use of newer technologies that are not listed, may also be used with proper controls and 
consideration. 
4.2.5.1 Liquid Media Filled by Powder Filling Equipment 
Some sterile-powder filling machines can fill liquid with little or no modification; the main advantages and 
disadvantages of this are listed in Table 4.2.5.1-1. While these units may not fill liquids to the same degree 
of consistency with which they fill powders, their flexibility greatly simplifies the APS. In this procedure, 
the liquid medium is introduced as a direct substitute for the sterile powder in the fill hopper. The methods 
used to introduce the medium are different from those used when powder-filling, but that is a minor 
adaptation to the process when contrasted with the modifications necessary for other fillers. The conduct of 
the APS is essentially the same as that described in Section 4.2, which notes the importance of integrating 
all the fill-line activities during the simulation.  
Table 4.2.5.1-1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Liquid Medium Filled by Powder Filling 
Equipment 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
 
• 
Only a single filling machine is required.  
• 
Simplifies the execution of the APS.  
• 
Avoids the risk of contamination from a 
new system.  
• 
Additional media controls for a separate 
liquid-fill machine are not required. 
• 
Setup may differ from that used for powder fill. 
• 
Any variables or risks posed by the handling and 
filling of dry material may not be captured.  
• 
The powder-filler may be capable, but it may not 
be well-suited for filling liquid.  
• 
Liquid media leakage may occur.  
• 
Cleaning liquid media may be difficult. 
4.2.5.2 Liquid Media Filled on Dry-Powder Filler with Supplementary Liquid-Fill 
Capability  
Some dry powder fillers may be adapted to add a supplementary liquid-filling capability; the main 
advantages and disadvantages of this are listed in Table 4.2.5.2-1. The liquid-filling capability of these 
machines is not equivalent to conventional liquid fillers and is used only in APSs. In this manner, the same 
filling machine could be used for both the liquid- and solid-filling operation during APS.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 22 (Revised 2025) 
© 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 
29 
Table 4.2.5.2-1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Liquid Media Filled on Dry-Powder Filler 
with Supplementary Liquid-Fill Capability 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
• 
A single filler is used, and no 
additional line modifications 
are required. 
• 
The filler may need to be operated at lower speeds due to its 
design.  
• 
Some designs may not fill liquid into every vial that receives 
powder.  
• 
Requires additional processing or handling steps that are not 
part of regular process which may add risk to the simulation 
that is not present in the production process.  
• 
The setup may differ from that used for powder fill.  
• 
Any variables or risks posed by the handling and filling of dry 
material may not be captured.  
• 
The powder filler may be capable but not well-suited for 
filling liquid.  
• 
Liquid media leakage may occur. 
• 
Cleaning liquid media may be difficult. 
4.2.5.3 On-Line Liquid Media Fill followed by On-Line Placebo Powder Fill  
In this scenario, a liquid-filling machine is added to the filling line prior to the powder filler; the main 
advantages and disadvantages of this are listed in Table 4.2.5.3-1. Use of this method depends in part on the 
space available on the filling line. For the APS, a volume of medium in the range appropriate for a liquid fill 
is added to the container, followed by a fill of sterile placebo material to the same container. When a powder 
and a liquid are combined, then the dispersion and dissolution of powder through the media should be 
confirmed. This can be achieved manually by inverting the container several times during the pre-inspection 
of containers prior to incubation.  
Table 4.2.5.3-1 Advantages and Disadvantages of On-Line Liquid Media Fill Followed by On-
Line Placebo Powder Fill 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
• 
All processes on-line, with 
no additional handling of 
containers. 
• 
A second filler will need to be set up and qualified. 
• 
The process subjects the open units to additional exposure time.  
• 
Additional processing or handling steps that are not part of regular 
process are added due to liquid filling which may add risks to the 
simulation that are not present in the production process.  
• 
Limited space in the container may result in powder collecting on 
the rim of the container and affecting the seal. 
4.2.5.4 On-line Placebo Powder Fill Followed by On-Line Liquid Media Fill 
This method is used when the physical addition of a liquid media before the powder filler is not possible; the 
main advantages and disadvantages of this are listed in Table 4.2.5.4-1 As with the process above, when a 
powder and a liquid are combined, then the dispersion and dissolution of powder through the media should 
be confirmed. This can be achieved manually by inverting the container several times during the pre-
inspection of containers prior to incubation.  
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
