
ISO 11608-1:2014(E)
Foreword
ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) is a worldwide federation of national standards 
bodies (ISO member bodies). The work of preparing International Standards is normally carried out 
through ISO technical committees. Each member body interested in a subject for which a technical 
committee has been established has the right to be represented on that committee. International 
organizations, governmental and non-governmental, in liaison with ISO, also take part in the work. 
ISO collaborates closely with the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) on all matters of 
electrotechnical standardization.
The procedures used to develop this document and those intended for its further maintenance are 
described in the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1.  In particular the different approval criteria needed for the 
different types of ISO documents should be noted.  This document was drafted in accordance with the 
editorial rules of the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2 (see www.iso.org/directives).  
Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be the subject of 
patent rights. ISO shall not be held responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights.  Details of 
any patent rights identified during the development of the document will be in the Introduction and/or 
on the ISO list of patent declarations received (see www.iso.org/patents). 
Any trade name used in this document is information given for the convenience of users and does not 
constitute an endorsement.
For an explanation on the meaning of ISO specific terms and expressions related to conformity 
assessment, as well as information about ISO’s adherence to the WTO principles in the Technical Barriers 
to Trade (TBT) see the following URL:  Foreword - Supplementary information.
The committee responsible for this document is ISO/TC  84, Devices for administration of medicinal 
products and intravascular catheters.
This third edition cancels and replaces the second edition (ISO  11608-1:2012), which has been 
technically revised.
ISO  11608 consists of the following parts, under the general title Needle-based injection systems for 
medical use — Requirements and test methods:
—	 Part 1: Needle-based injection systems
—	 Part 2: Needles
—	 Part 3: Finished containers
—	 Part 4: Requirements and test methods for electronic and electromechanical pen-injectors
—	 Part 5: Automated functions
This third edition of ISO 11608-1:2014 incorporates the following corrections:
a)	 in 4 Y: the term ‘pens’ is changed to ‘NISs’;
b)	 in 5.5 n): reference to ISO 11608-4 is deleted since 5.5. o) already addresses this;
c)	
in Table 3: the word “or” is changed to “and” so that it reads “Condition at 70 °C and −40 °C, then 
standard DA”;
d)	 in 10.1, NOTE 1: Explanation is inserted;
e)	 in 10.5 a) designation B is deleted;
f)	
in 10.5 b) designation D is deleted;
g)	 in 10.5 b) 3) iv) the term ‘replacements’ is changed to ‘obvious container failures’;
﻿
© ISO 2014 – All rights reserved
v

﻿
ISO 11608-1:2014(E)
h)	 in 10.5 d) 2) iv) the term ‘replacements’ is changed to ‘obvious container failures’;
i)	
in 10.8 the temperature range is changed from (25 ± 3) °C to (5 ± 3) °C;
j)	
in 10.10.4 and 10.10.5 “five NISs” is changed to “20 NISs” according to Table 3;
k)	 in Table 3 – references to 10.10.4 and 10.10.5 are added under column A;
l)	
in 13.2.3 “unit packaging” has been changed into “user packaging”.
﻿
vi
© ISO 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO 11608-1:2014(E)
Introduction
This part of ISO 11608 covers needle-based injection systems (referred to as NISs) primarily intended 
for human use. It provides performance requirements regarding essential aspects so that variations of 
design are not unnecessarily restricted.
This part of ISO 11608 should be used in conjunction with the other parts of ISO 11608.
The first edition of this part of ISO 11608 introduced the concept of interchangeability and the labelling 
designations “Type A” (i.e. interchangeable) and “non-Type A” for needles and container systems. Since 
its promulgation, experience has shown that the complexity of these systems makes it very difficult 
to ensure functional compatibility as defined in the different parts of this International Standard, 
particularly when products are made by different manufacturers. Based on this experience, it is believed 
that the Type A designation does not represent adequate guidance to the user in making decisions on 
the compatibility of needles and containers with specific needle-based injector systems. As such, the 
labelling designation “Type A” has been removed. The design requirements related to system function 
have been maintained as a guide to assist manufacturers during the design phase, supporting the 
achievement of cross-platform compatibility. However, these design requirements are an insufficient 
replacement for system testing of the components and, where possible, direct communication and/or 
quality agreements between system component manufacturers. Therefore, given the patient convenience 
benefits associated with cross-platform compatibility, manufacturers of needles, containers and needle-
based injectors shall label their products with the specific system components that have been tested 
and demonstrated to be functionally compatible.
The sampling plans for inspection selected for this part of ISO 11608 are intended to verify the design at 
a high confidence level. The sampling plans for inspection do not replace the more general manufacturing 
quality systems that appear in standards on quality systems, for example the ISO 9000 series and ISO 13485.
Materials to be used for construction are not specified, as their selection will depend on the design, the 
intended use and the process of manufacture used by individual manufacturers.
There are other international and national standards and guidance publications and, in some countries, 
national regulations that are applicable to medical devices and pharmaceuticals. Their requirements 
might supersede or complement this part of ISO  11608. Developers and manufacturers of NISs are 
encouraged to investigate and determine whether there are any other requirements relevant to the 
safety or marketability of their products.
Manufacturers are expected to follow a risk-based approach during the design, development and 
manufacture of the product. Given the specific medicinal product and intended use, this might result in 
product-specific requirements and test methods that differ from what is outlined in this part of ISO 11608.
﻿
© ISO 2014 – All rights reserved
vii

﻿
Needle-based injection systems for medical use — 
Requirements and test methods —
Part 1: 
Needle-based injection systems
1	 Scope
This part of ISO 11608 specifies requirements and test methods for needle-based injection systems 
(NISs) intended to be used with needles and with replaceable or non-replaceable containers. Containers 
covered in this part of ISO 11608 include single- and multi-dose syringe-based and cartridge-based 
systems, filled either by the manufacturer or by the end-user.
Additional guidance for NISs equipped with electronic or electromechanical components and NISs 
equipped with automated functions is given in ISO 11608-4 and ISO 11608-5 respectively.
Needle-free injectors, and requirements relating to methods or equipment associated with end-user 
filling of containers, are outside the scope of this part of ISO 11608.
2	 Normative references
The following documents, in whole or in part, are normatively referenced in this document and are 
indispensable for its application. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated 
references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies.
ISO  10993-1, Biological evaluation of medical devices  — Part  1: Evaluation and testing within a risk 
management process
ISO 11608 (all parts), Needle-based injection systems for medical use — Requirements and test methods
ISO 13485:2003, Medical devices — Quality management systems — Requirements for regulatory purposes
ISO 14253-1, Geometrical product specifications (GPS) — Inspection by measurement of workpieces and 
measuring equipment — Part 1: Decision rules for proving conformity or nonconformity with specifications
ISO 14971, Medical devices — Application of risk management to medical devices
ISO/IEC  Guide  98-3, Uncertainty of measurement  — Part  3: Guide to the expression of uncertainty in 
measurement (GUM:1995)
IEC 60068-2-6:2007, Environmental testing — Part 2-6: Tests — Test Fc: Vibration (sinusoidal)
IEC 60068-2-30:2005, Environmental testing — Part 2-30: Tests — Test Db: Damp heat, cyclic (12 + 12 h cycle)
IEC 60601-1-2:2007, Medical electrical equipment — Part 1-2: General requirements for basic safety and 
essential performance — Collateral standard: Electromagnetic compatibility — Requirements and tests
IEC 62366, Medical devices — Application of usability engineering to medical devices
3 Terms and definitions
For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply.
INTERNATIONAL STANDARD
ISO 11608-1:2014(E)
© ISO 2014 – All rights reserved
1

﻿
ISO 11608-1:2014(E)
3.1
cap
part of the NIS intended to protect the injector and its contents
3.2
container
primary packaging that contains the medicinal product for injection (either single-compartment or 
multi-compartment)
3.3
dose delivery efficiency
ratio of expelled dose to fill volume
Note 1 to entry: Dose delivery efficiency is expressed as a percentage.
Note 2 to entry: Delivery efficiency can be used to evaluate dose accuracy for NISs designed to fully empty single-
dose containers filled by the user.
3.4
dialling resolution
smallest possible increment to be selected between dose amounts
3.5
dose accuracy
accuracy with which the NIS delivers a pre-set dose of medicinal product
3.6
“dose delivered” indication
dose number shown in the dose window indicating the amount of medicinal product delivered
Note  1  to entry:  This applies to variable multi-dose NISs that allow the setting of a dose greater than the 
remaining volume.
Note 2 to entry: If the dose window indicates the amount of medicinal product yet to be delivered, then the “dose 
delivered” indication can be determined as the intended dose minus the indication of medicinal product yet to 
be delivered.
3.7
manufacturer-filled
container supplied to the user pre-filled by the manufacturer of medicinal products
Note 1 to entry: This medicinal product can be in liquid form or lyophilized with diluent in the same container.
3.8
minimum deliverable dose
minimum dose that is ensured by the manufacturer to be delivered in a single-dose manufacturer-filled 
NIS designed to fully empty the container
3.9
NIS
needle-based injection system
injection system intended for parenteral administration by injection of medicinal products using a 
needle and a multi-dose or single-dose container
Note 1 to entry: This term may also be referred to as “system” or “injector” in this part of ISO 11608.
3.10
pre-setting
procedure by which individual amounts of medicinal product can be selected for injection by the user
Note 1 to entry: The doses may be pre-set by the manufacturer or the user.
﻿
2
© ISO 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO 11608-1:2014(E)
3.11
residual scale
graduated scale which indicates the remainder of medicinal product in the container
3.12
user packaging
what is provided to the user with one or a collection of devices of the same item and from the same 
manufacturing batch, including the directions for use
3.13
user-filled
container that is filled or reconstituted (if in lyophilized form) by the user from a separate medicinal 
product or diluent container
4	 Symbols and abbreviated terms
NIS
Needle-based injection system.
Vset
One of the three pre-set doses (expressed as a volume, in millilitres) used in determining the 
dose accuracy for a given NIS. Vset is defined as one of the following:
a) minimum dose (Vset = Vmin) (specified in the instructions for use);
b) maximum dose (Vset = Vmax) (specified in the instructions for use);
c) midpoint dose (Vset = Vmid), where Vmid is defined as the injector setting closest to 
(Vmin +Vmax)/2.
NOTE 1	
Recommended doses as specified in the instructions for use may differ from 
the pre-set doses used for determining the dose accuracy.
NOTE 2	
System designations B1 and D1 define Vset to be equal to the manufactur-
er-filled or user-filled volumes. System designations B2 and D2 define Vset to be equal to a 
single pre-set dose representing a portion of the manufacturer-filled or user-filled volumes. 
In the case of last-dose accuracy assessments for system designations A and C, Vset is equal to 
Vmid, the TP, or dose error (evaluated over a range of doses within a specified percentage of 
the TP).
Vmeas
The volumetric measurement value for a given Vset, expressed in millilitres.
Gmeas
The gravimetric measurement value for a given Vset, expressed in grams.
ρ
Density, expressed in grams per millilitre.
p
Probability content.
Y
Number of NISs required for a given test.
R
Number of replicates required for a given test. A replicate is a random sequence of Vmin, Vmid, 
and Vmax. There are six possible replicates.
N
Number of measurements, Vmeas, to be made for each Vset.
x
The sample mean; when based on a random sample, an estimate of the true mean:
x
V
n
meas
= ∑
/
.
﻿
© ISO 2014 – All rights reserved
3