package integrity over its life cycle. 
During the package design/process development phase, a thorough knowledge and understanding 
of the package seal is critical for designing an appropriate package system. Subsection 3.1 
describes the nature of these requirements, including a knowledge of the seal location, the sealing 
mechanism, and the critical factors of design, assembly, and processing that may impact seal 
quality. The importance of testing the package and processing parameters at extremes is stressed 
to ensure that the package will be able to withstand the rigors of processing, distribution, and 
usage. 
Once a product reaches commercial manufacturing, in-process control of critical production and 
processing steps are necessary. Subsection 3.2 describes these vital checks in greater detail. 
Product leak testing is discussed in subsection 3.3. The types of methods available for product 
testing are included, along with their limitations. 
3.1 
Package Design, Process Development, and Durability 
Assessment 
Package integrity quality assurance involves the selection of appropriate packaging materials, the 
design of the [seal or] closure system, and the verification that the incoming components meet 
specifications. 
Establishing leakage rate specifications may be desirable early during product 
development based on the particular product and package performance characteristics to ensure 
that the product will reflect these limits. Integrity tests used during package design may include 
gross leak tests that simply check for leak presence or location, but should also consist of those 
that test at or near the established leakage/permeation rate specification. 
Packages may be closed via either seals or closures. By definition, a seal is the result of the 
bonding of two similar or dissimilar surfaces. Examples of seals include: 1) contiguous 
containers formed from a single material (for example, glass or plastic ampoules); 2) the direct 
fusion of two material surfaces, usually by heat (for example, heat sealed plastic bags or unit- 
Vol. 52, No. 4 I July-August 
1998, Supplement 
2 
dose blister packaging for solid oral dosage forms); and 3) the bonding of two material surfaces 
with an intermediate adhesive agent. A closure, on the other hand, is the physical mating of two 
surfaces. In the strictest sense, all closures are tortuous path barriers. The degree to which a 
closure can limit leakage is a function of the closure design, the viscoelastic nature of the 
package components, and the extent of package component fit. 
For instance, an elastomeric 
rubber stoppered sterile vial is capable of achieving a very low gaseous leakage rate due to the 
viscoelastic nature of the rubber and its ability to conform to the vial surface upon compression. 
Other closure systems, such as metal on metal or plastic on metal, rely on the frictional mating of 
relatively incompressible materials. Still other closures do not depend on component fit as much 
as the existence of a tortuous path. In this guideline, the term “package seal” will be used 
generically to mean all seal and closure system types. 
There are critical factors that impact the quality of each package seal. Such factors typically 
include package component variables of composition, dimension, and critical defects; and 
sealing operation variables of time, temperature, pressure, and torque. The impact of processing 
on package integrity 
must also be characterized. 
Package component washing, drying, 
siliconization and sterilization, and product processing such as terminal sterilization may all 
impact the ability of the package seal to maintain its effectiveness. 
During the package design and process development phases, the acceptable ranges for each 
critical variable should be established based on package performance criteria that incorporate 
integrity 
testing. 
Wherever feasible, the variables of design and processing should be 
exaggerated and their impact on package integrity evaluated to help define the margin of safety 
for that variable. 
Such factors may include, for example, time, temperature, and pressure 
variables for heat seal operations and for steam sterilization cycles. Stability studies extending 
through shelf-life must also include integrity tests of the packaged product produced under 
typical manufacturing conditions. In some cases it may also be prudent, although not mandatory, 
to place product on stability that has been manufactured at critical processing or package design 
extremes. When greater time and effort are spent on package integrity verification during the 
design and process development phases, fewer problems will 
likely be encountered after 
commercialization. 
The assurance of product quality depends on the ability of the product to maintain integrity 
throughout the stresses anticipated during storage, distribution, 
and use. 
During product 
development, the effects of various environmental and handling stresses may need to be 
considered in addressing package integrity. 
Relevant types of stress may include temperature, 
pressure, and relative humidity 
extremes, shock and vibrational 
stress, and exposure to 
microorganisms. 
The evaluation of package integrity may include exposure of the product to 
simulated conditions of storage, distribution, and use coupled with appropriate leakage detection 
methodology. 
The integrity tests chosen are generally those that detect sporadic damage to the 
product, which may result in gross leakage or product loss, and in the case of sterile products, 
microbial ingress. 
3.2 
In-Process Control 
The processes that have been determined during product development to most critically impact 
package integrity should be those that are targeted for in-process control. Performance criteria 
3 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
for in-process controls are typically based on the performance of a specific unit operation rather 
than the performance of the final product. 
For example, in-process controls and tests may be 
used to statistically verify that the time, temperature, and pressure variables of a sealing 
operation are “in control” as opposed to final product testing used to demonstrate that microbial 
barrier or rarefied internal atmosphere criteria have been met. During validation studies it must 
be demonstrated that a process “in control” yields only products that meet the established leakage 
rate specifications. 
For a limited number of products, instrumentation exists that permits high-speed 100% on-line 
,verification of package integrity at the established leakage rate specifications. 
But for many 
sterile products in-process leak test instruments have limitations that preclude high speed, on-line 
integrity verification at the required product leakage rate specifications. 
In-process leak test 
instruments are designed to check for intermittent defective packages leaking at a gross rate that 
circumvented the various in-process controls. Certainly no instrumentation currently available 
for in-process use is intended to measure permeation rates of gases through the package itself. 
In-process testing is strictly limited to leakage through package imperfections. 
There are a variety of logical, validatable in-process integrity tests that can help verify 
product/package integrity. However, no amount of in-process or final product testing can replace 
the need for the control and monitoring of various critical package and sealing parameters. For 
example, vision systems can be used to cull out defective components, gas flow rate meters can 
be installed on ample sealing lines, time/temperature/pressure controls can be used on thermal 
sealing equipment, and torque monitors can be placed on screw-capping equipment. These on- 
line in-process controls, in combination with well-designed product/process validation studies, 
are an essential part of the total package integrity quality assurance. 
3.3 
Product Testing 
A product that has been properly and carefully designed with critical production processes well 
characterized and controlled should have little need for final product release testing for package 
integrity. Certainly the quality of a pharmaceutical product cannot merely be based on the results 
of a product integrity test, especially when such tests are usually performed on a fraction of the 
production lot. Sterility tests have historically been considered an indicator of package integrity; 
however, due to the insensitive nature of sterility tests, the small number of samples tested, and 
the possibility of false positives, these results are no longer considered reliable as a final 
indicator of package integrity. 
Generally, integrity test methods selected for final product testing are designed to verify the 
absence of gross leaks well above permeation rate levels. For those package systems that can be 
tested 100% on-line with instruments shown to measure near or below the leakage rate 
specification there is no need for additional product integrity testing. 
For other products a 
statistically established percentage of the batch may be integrity tested for in-house process 
control purposes. 
Indirect tests of package integrity may also be employed on production lot samples. 
For 
example, indirect measures of integrity may include visual inspection, residual seal force of a 
serum vial with elastomeric closure, or seal strength of an adhesive or thermal seal. 
The 
Vol. 52, No. 4 I July-August 
1998, Supplement 
4 
acceptance criteria for such tests should be based on the critical variable acceptance ranges 
established during the development phases of package design and process development. 
4. 
Package Integrity and Leak Rate Specifications 
This section provides a definition of leaks and leakage, and presents examples of leakage rate 
units of measure. The concept that all packages leak to some extent is introduced, although such 
leakage may not have a negative impact on product quality. 
Therefore, when designing a 
product/package system, a leak rate specification must be established. Examples of leak rate 
specifications are provided. 
A leak is an unintended crack, hole, or porosity in a package capable of passing a liquid or gas 
through the package. Leakage is the movement of the liquid or gas through the leak. Leakage is 
defined in units of mass or volume flow of a gas or liquid over time under defined conditions of 
temperature and pressure. Leakage is often described in units of standard cubic centimeters of 
gas (air) that can move through an orifice per second (std cc/set or sees’) under defined 
conditions of temperature and differential pressure. 
Similarly, leakage units of atm cc/s are also 
used to define leakage measured at local atmospheric pressure and temperature. While the two 
are not identical, units of sees and atm ccs are often used interchangeably. Another common unit 
of measure is the SI unit of Pa m3/s, or Pascal cubic meters per second. One Pa m3/s is equal to 
9.87 sees or roughly 10 sees. Various general references on the subjects of leakage, leak test 
methods, and units of measure are referenced at the end of this document. 
Leakage rates from a pharmaceutical package may vary over a wide range. For instance, leakage 
through an orifice large enough to create an audible sound may be approximately 1 sees. The 
human eye can detect visible flow of liquid occurring through holes that leak at gaseous rates of 
0.1 sees. No visible water will leak when dry air, at the same pressure, leaks at a rate as great as 
10“’ sees. Leak detection by helium spectroscopy is the most sensitive leak testing method 
currently available and, under certain conditions, can detect leakage as small as lo-” sees (Ref. 
ASNT, 1982, and Varian, 1995). 
Leakage need not always be described in units of gas mass or volume flow over time. It may 
also be described in other terms believed to be more meaningful to the specific product or leak 
test method. For instance, leakage rate may be described in units of product weight loss or gain, 
or rise of percent oxygen in an inert gas-flushed headspace, or as the volume of dye that has 
migrated through a package seal. Regardless of the leakage units used, it is important to clearly 
indicate the relevant leak test parameter conditions. For instance, weight loss might be described 
as grams of product loss measured over 2 years when the product is stored at 35°C. 
Such 
descriptions of leakage that clearly and meaningfully define mass or volume flow over time are 
as acceptable as gas leak rate units. 
’ 1 std cc = 1 standard unit volume of gas (air) at sea level atmospheric pressure (I 01.3 kPa, 760 
mm Hg or 760 torr), and 20°C (293°K) temperature. 
5 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
6 
Strictly speaking, all packages demonstrate leakage to some extent, although such leakage may 
not affect product quality. Therefore it is important to establish an allowable leakage rate for a 
given product/package system early during product development. 
The product’s needs for 
protection will dictate the performance criteria of a package and therefore the allowable leakage 
rate. 
All pharmaceutical packages must contain their intended product, and thus must prevent 
gross leakage. For a nonporous package this may equate to a maximum gaseous leakage rate of 
approximately 1 O‘3 sees (Ref. ASNT, page 699). Packages designed to only prevent aerosolized 
microbial challenge may be able to tolerate a higher leakage rate specification. 
Sterile liquid products require containers that prevent minute liquid product leakage and 
microbial ingress. Other products, such as sterile powders, ointments, and lyophilized products, 
may also require containers that prevent liquid-borne 
microbial 
ingress. 
For all of these 
products, the leakage rate specification limit should be the same as the cut-off for liquid passage, 
as microorganisms are believed incapable of penetrating a leak smaller in size than can be 
penetrated by liquids (Ref. Kirsch and Morton). 
Water is generally thought to be incapable of 
penetrating pores that allow less than approximately 10-j sees of airflow at a differential pressure 
across the seal of approximately 1 atmosphere. The relationship between gaseous flow, liquid 
leakage, and liquid-borne microbial ingress was demonstrated by L. Kirsch, et al and Morton, 
1989. For other products, much smaller rates of leakage or even permeation through the package 
may cause an unacceptable loss of a critical gas headspace or vacuum, or an excessive migration 
of water vapor or solvents. 
Once the level of acceptable leakage/permeation has been established, a leakage/permeation 
specification incorporating a reasonable margin of safety may be set. 
5. 
Test Method Selection 
This section is devoted to leak test method selection criteria. In subsection 5.1 the need to select 
tests of adequate sensitivity is discussed. Because test methods have an optimum sensitivity 
range, it may be necessary to select more than one type of leak method for a single 
product/package system. Subsection 5.2 discusses other test method selection considerations. 
5.1 
Test Method Sensitivity 
In selecting a leak test method it is important to choose a test which is capable of detecting the 
leakage rates of concern. The leakage rate of concern will depend on the product/package system 
as well as the phase of the product life cycle in which the test will be utilized. 
During certain 
times in the product life cycle, a leak test method is needed merely for gross leakage detection or 
for leakage location. But at some point in the development of a product-package system, the leak 
test method selected must be capable of detecting leakage at the product’s established leakage 
rate specification. 
Most physical leak test methods have an optimum sensitivity range, meaning that a method 
capable of detecting leaks between 10V6 sees and lo-’ sees may not be appropriate for gross leaks 
of IO0 sees. Some physical test methods have a “gross” and a “fine” leak test mode in order to 
expand this sensitivity window. 
However, it is inappropriate and can be quite costly to select a test method that is too sensitive. 
For instance, a helium leak test capable of detecting leaks as low as lo-” sees would be an 
inappropriate test for a high density polyethylene screw-capped bottle merely intended to retain 
tablets and capsules. But the converse is also true; an airborne microbial challenge test would be 
meaningless for a product with a gaseous leakage rate specification of 1 O-’ sees. 
Because leak test methods have a range of sensitivity, and because the leakage rate of concern 
may differ depending on the stage of the product’s life cycle, it may be necessary to test a given 
product using more than one leak test method, each designed to detect leaks of varying 
magnitude. A package containing a lyophilized powder undergoing shipping simulation studies 
may need to be tested for larger leaks that have resulted from shock or vibration damage. While 
long term stability samples of the same product may need to be checked for leaks indicative of 
gaseous leakage and permeation. 
Once in production, a gross leak test detection system may be 
most appropriate for a high speed filling line where package breakage is a concern. 
A test method’s sensitivity can be expressed in various units of measure. Optimum sensitivity of 
a method can only be realized through careful selection of the test parameter conditions. If, for 
example, an oxygen analyzer is used to monitor the headspace of a package, the instrument’s 
sensitivity is expressed as the smallest change in headspace oxygen content detectable by the gas 
analyzer. 
But the ability of this method to detect very small leakage/permeation rates will 
depend on the time that has elapsed since the package was first sealed, and on the extent of 
package exposure to an oxygen partial pressure differential. 
As another example, the sensitivity 
of a dye test is described as the smallest volume of dye that can be detected in the given product- 
package under the stated test conditions of time, temperature, and pressure. Dye tests can be 
optimized by maximizing the test conditions, as well as by manipulating the dye formulation and 
detection technique. Lastly, the sensitivity of a helium mass spectrometry leak detection method 
is described as the smallest measurable leak rate in units of standard cc of gas (helium) per 
second. Helium leak detection capabilities can be improved by maximizing the concentration of 
helium in the package headspace, and by choosing the most optimum detection mode. 
5.2 
Other Test Method Selection Considerations 
A wide variety of leak test methods are available for the evaluation of pharmaceutical packages. 
In Section 8, “Leak Test Methods,” summaries of several of the most commonly used physical 
methods are provided. The usefulness of a physical method must be determined on a product-by- 
product basis by evaluating the ability of a method to test the seal of interest, the sensitivity of 
the instrument or method, and any relevant sources of measurement variation. 
In some cases 
factors such as data storage, analysis and display functions, statistical manipulation of data, 
practicality, speed, safety, on-line integration feasibility, and expense may play important roles in 
the selection of the most appropriate leak test method. 
Sterile package integrity has traditionally 
been verified by airborne or liquid immersion 
microbial challenge tests. Microbial challenge tests have a long history of use and may be an 
indicator of microbial package integrity. 
Also in Section 8, a brief description of microbial 
challenge tests is provided. 
Section 6, “Methods of Establishing Microbial Package Integrity,” 
7 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
reviews both the microbial challenge approach and the alternate physical testing approach for 
verifying a package’s microbial barrier properties. 
6. 
