Preface 
This report reviews issues of pharmaceutical product package integrity and provides guidance for 
evaluating the barrier qualities of a pharmaceutical package. It supersedes the previously issued 
“PDA Technical Information Bulletin No. 4, Aspects of Container/Closure Integrity.” 
In this 
updated guideline, the term “product package” is used, rather than the term “container/closure 
system,” as it encompasses any nonporous barrier system that protects a pharmaceutical product 
from the environment. Similarly, the term “package seal” is used generically to mean all types of 
seals or closure systems. Although it is written to reflect the complexity of all pharmaceutical 
products and packages, the emphasis throughout the document is clearly on packaging intended 
for sterile products. 
This report was written by the following members of the PDA Task Force on Container/Closure 
Integrity: 
Michael C. Carroll, The Liposome Company, Inc. 
Vivian F. Denny, Peak to Peak Pharmaceutical Associates 
Dana M. Guazzo, Ph.D., The R. W. Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute 
Mark W. Kaiser, Lancaster Laboratories 
Lee E. Kirsch, Ph.D., The University of Iowa 
John D. Ludwig, Ph.D., G. D. Searle and Company 
Gerald K. Masover, Genentech, Inc. 
Jeri L. May, DuPont Merck Pharmaceutical Co. 
Jeanne E. Moldenhauer, Ph.D., Fujisawa USA, Inc. 
Jean I. Olsen, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals 
Terri M. Polson, Glaxo Wellcome Inc. 
Glenn E. Wright, Eli Lilly & Co. 
In addition, the Task Force acknowledges the immense help and support of Michael S. 
Korczynski, Ph.D. and Russell E. Madsen of PDA. Their editorial assistance and their insight 
into many of the key issues of package integrity were invaluable contributions to this effort. 
This document 
should be considered as a guide; it is not intended 
to establish any 
mandatory or implied standard. 
2. 
Introduction 
Product quality can be defined in terms of the ability of a product to perform its desired functions 
despite the stresses to which it has been exposed before and during its intended use. 
Pharmaceutical container systems may have a variety of functions including facilitation 
of 
product use, prevention of improper use, light protection, 
containment of the product, 
maintenance of a microbial barrier, and maintenance of a rarefied product environment. 
Assurance of package integrity is primarily 
concerned with product containment and the 
maintenance of an effective barrier against ingress of microorganisms or potentially reactive 
gases such as oxygen or water vapor, and sometimes, the maintenance of a vacuum. 
The 
information 
provided in this guideline is intended to assist users in developing integrity 
assessment strategies for use during the phases of product life. 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
3. 
Integrity 
Assurance Through Product Development And Product Life 
Product package integrity 
assessment begins during a product’s development phase and 
continues throughout its life cycle, encompassing routine manufacturing and shelf-life stability 
assessments. 
The phases of a product’s life cycle include: 
3.1 
Package design, process development, and durability assessment 
3.2 
In-process control 
3.3 
Product testing 
Further reconfirmation of product package integrity should occur when there are major changes 
in the package system that may affect its integrity, including package design, package materials, 
and/or when changes occur in the manufacturing processing conditions, including sterilization. 
The following subsections contain information on the critical factors for assessing a product’s 
