Methods of Establishing Microbial 
Package Integrity 
All sterile pharmaceutical packages must prevent the ingress of microorganisms. 
This section 
focuses on liquid immersion and airborne microbial challenge test methods and alternate physical 
test methods useful for establishing a package’s microbial barrier properties. In subsection 6.1 
the rationale for selecting a microbial challenge test versus a physical test method is discussed. 
Subsections 6.2 and 6.3 describe how one may directly verify a package’s microbial integrity 
through either liquid immersion or airborne microbial challenge tests. 
In subsection 6.4 an outline is presented describing how physical leak tests may be validated as 
an alternative indicator of package microbial integrity. 
A direct correlation of physical integrity 
test results to microbial barrier properties can be done by exposing a given population of 
packages to both physical and microbial challenge tests (subsection 6.4.1). An indirect approach 
is to compare the physical method’s sensitivity to leakage rates previously demonstrated as 
preventing microbial ingress (subsection 6.4.2). 
6.1 
Microbial 
Challenge vs. Physical Test Methods 
For most sterile pharmaceutical packages, the leakage rate specification is that which will 
prevent the ingress of microorganisms. 
Such packages must therefore be validated as providing 
an effective barrier against either airborne and/or liquid-borne microbial ingress. The microbial 
barrier properties of a package may be demonstrated using either microbial challenge tests or 
physical tests that have been correlated to microbial ingress. 
There are several reasons for choosing to use a microbial challenge test. First, there may be no 
reasonable alternative to microbial challenge tests. For instance, certain closures or packages 
that rely solely upon a tortuous path to prevent airborne microbial ingress may not be reliably 
tested by a physical method. A second reason may be that the package design does not lend 
itself to sufficiently sensitive physical test methods. For example, a package may not tolerate the 
relatively high differential 
pressures required for testing by vacuum decay or tracer gas 
techniques. A third reason may be that the manufacturer does not have the resources or expertise 
required for developing and validating an alternate physical test method. It is also possible that 
the product is only intended for limited distribution so that an extensive physical test method 
validation program cannot be justified. 
Conversely, a physical test may be the preferred approach for microbial barrier package 
validation. 
If a sufficiently sensitive physical test method is available that is compatible with the 
product-package system, it is often more economical in the long run to invest in developing and 
validating such .a physical test. 
Physical tests can be selected that yield qualitative or 
quantitative results or that can pinpoint the location of leaks. 
Microbial challenge tests are 
relatively insensitive, yield inconsistent results, are labor intensive, necessitate extensive storage 
space for sample incubation, and require long test times. Another disadvantage is that microbial 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
8 
challenge tests must often be done using media-filled packages rather than packages containing 
the intended product. 
Physical tests are the more logical 
choice when the leakage rate specification 
for a 
product/package system is significantly lower than the limit for microbial ingress. For example, 
a given sterile glass vial closed with an elastomeric stopper may require a leakage rate 
specification of lo-’ std cc/s to maintain an inert gas headspace. The gaseous leakage rate that 
correlates to the ingress of liquid-borne microorganisms for this package system has been shown 
to be approximately lo-’ sees when tested by helium mass spectrometry (Ref. Kirsch, et al). 
Given this scenario, it is unnecessary to further establish the package’s microbial integrity by 
microbial challenge tests. In fact, gaseous leakage below the rates that allow microbial ingress 
can be assured for some packages by verifying the maintenance of an inert gas headspace when 
the packages are tested .over an extended period of time, and when they are sufficiently 
challenged with a differential pressure leakage driving force. 
6.2 
Liquid Immersion Microbial 
Challenge Tests 
There is no standard liquid immersion microbial challenge test, but the following guidelines are 
suggested for the establishment of a meaningful and useful method. First, it is important to 
select a small bacterium that is demonstrated to yield a high population of viable organisms at 
the end of the study. 
Whenever possible, positive controls that demonstrate growth must be 
included. 
These may consist of defective packages or packages prepared outside the package 
assembly process control limits. 
As with 
any package integrity 
study, a statistically 
representative number of samples should be tested. When packages vary in size, but not in 
design or package component materials of construction, worst case container sizes are to be 
evaluated, or, preferably, sizes should be bracketed. If more than one seal is relied upon for 
package integrity, each seal should be challenged. 
The position of the container during the 
integrity test should ensure that the seal is exposed to the challenge microorganisms. The media, 
incubation, and challenge conditions of time and pressure must be logically chosen keeping in 
mind critical integrity variables such as package component materials, assembly, processing 
parameters, and challenge organism viability 
and morphology. 
Whenever reasonable, the 
product itself should be challenged, as it is possible the product may influence seal integrity. 
However, this may not be feasible based on the product’s inability to support microbial growth. 
6.3 
Airborne Microbial 
Challenge Tests 
There are many references describing airborne microbial challenge test procedures published by 
the food and medical device industries. Several of these are listed in the references at the end of 
the Microbial Challenge Aerosolization Test Method summary. It is recommended that such 
references be utilized in, establishing an airborne microbial challenge test for pharmaceutical 
packages. 
Very briefly, some critical factors in the design of such tests include location and 
position of the microbial challenge source versus the test articles, methodology used to aerosolize 
the microbial challenge, size and morphology of the challenge organisms, and the size, shape, 
and configuration of the test chamber. 
There are many variables that affect the outcome of airborne microbial challenge tests. The key 
to performing consistent airborne challenges is design of the aerosolization apparatus with 
9 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
sufficient fine adjustments and system monitors (for example, pressure gauges, flow meters) so 
that variation between runs and/or operators is minimized. 
6.4 
Physical Leak Test Detection Methods 
Unlike microbial challenge tests, physical leak test methods do not directly measure microbial 
ingress, but rather, they measure some physical property of the leak that may be related to 
microbial failure. The relationship between the sensitivity of a physical leak test method to the 
probability of microbial failure can be either directly or indirectly determined. 
6.4.1 
Direct Correlation 
to Microbial 
Ingress 
Typically the development of a direct correlation between a physical integrity test and microbial 
ingress first requires the creation of representative acceptable and defective packages that can be 
tested by both leak test methods. Then it must be experimentally demonstrated that the measured 
leak rate by the physical method can be quantitatively correlated to the probability of microbial 
failure. 
To illustrate, the following results would need to be demonstrated by direct correlation of a 
liquid chemical tracer test to a microbial immersion test: 
1. the presence of tracer in all test units that show microbial ingress, 
2. the presence of tracer in some test units that fail to show microbial ingress, 
3. the absence of tracer in some test units that fail to show microbial ingress. 
4. the absence of microbial ingress in all of the test units that do not show tracer. 
A direct correlation of tracer to microbial ingress would need to take into consideration the 
potential ,interference of the tracer with microbial growth, and the potential interference of 
microbial growth on tracer detection. 
Liquid chemical tracer tests provide simple pass-fail results; either the tracer is present or it is 
not. If a physical test method is used that provides a range of leakage rate results, correlation to 
microbial ingress is based on the rate of leakage determined by the physical method versus the 
probability of microbial failure. 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
10 
6.4.2 
Indirect Correlation 
to Microbial 
Ingress 
A physical test method can be indirectly correlated to microbial ingress based on documented 
evidence of microbial ingress within the physical method
’
s 
leakage rate detection range. Again, 
for a sterile glass vial with elastomeric stopper, it has been demonstrated that the helium leak rate 
(under specific testing conditions) that corresponds to microbial ingress as determined by 
rigorous immersion challenge testing is 10M5 sees (Ref. Kirsch, et al). This information can be 
used to verify the microbial ingress leak detection capability of another physical method by 
demonstrating that the second method can reliably detect leakage at or below the documented 
leakage rate of about 10S5 sees. It is important to keep in mind that the leak test gas and the test 
conditions of temperature and differential pressure used for the referee test (in this case the 
helium test) may differ significantly from those employed by the alternative physical method. 
Therefore it may be necessary to calculate an equivalent leakage rate (either > or < lo-
’ 
std cc/s) 
against which the alternative physical leak test method must be compared. 
Indirect correlation of a physical test method to liquid-borne microbial challenge tests can also be 
made by demonstrating that the physical method is capable of detecting microscopic liquid 
passageways near the limit of microbial ingress. This relies on the assumption that without a 
passageway large enough to permit liquid flow, microbial ingress cannot occur. For example, a 
dye or liquid chemical tracer can be used as an indirect indication of microbial package integrity. 
In order to rely on such results, the sensitivity of the dye or liquid chemical tracer test must be 
optimized in order to approach the leakage limit for liquid ingress. 
7. 
Decision Tree 
A decision tree is presented in this section to assist in selecting appropriate leak tests and process 
control methods. When using the tree, it must first be decided whether leakage/permeation is to 
be measured, or whether the leak location is to be pinpointed. Within the category of “Total 
Leakage and Permeation” measurement, there is a further classification according to seal type. 
These include compression & friction 
fit closures, thermal & adhesive seals, contiguous 
containers, or tortuous path closures. (These seal types are defined more fully at the end of this 
Section.) 
Each seal type can be intended to effect any one of a variety of package integrity 
performance criteria. The seal or closure may be intended as a microbial barrier, or it may be 
designed to restrict product leakage, or to maintain a rarefied gas or vacuum headspace. Another 
subheading “In-process Control” is also included under “Performance Criteria” to help identify 
some of the process monitors and controls used to ensure package quality and minimize package 
integrity problems. 
Below each performance criteria in the decision tree, a listing of potentially useful leak test 
methods is presented. 
Leak test methods are categorized according to their most common 
application. 
Microbial barrier tests are either described as direct (microbial challenge methods) 
or indirect (physical tests). Product leakage tests are subdivided into either gross methods (for 
larger leaks) or fine (for relatively smaller leaks). Rarefied gas headspace retention tests and 
vacuum retention tests are listed. Leak tests useful as in-process control checks are also provided. 
All leak tests included in the decision tree are described more fully in Section 8, Leak Test 
Methods. 
Certainly this decision tree is merely intended as a guide, and is not meant to be 
restrictive when choosing among these or other viable leak test methods or process controls. 
11 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Decision Tree Table of Terms 
Leakage 
characterization 
Package Seal 
Type 
Performance 
criteria 
- 
Total leakage and 
permeation 
Leak location 
This refers to the need to detect, qualitatively or quantitatively, 
the total leakage and permeation 
In this case, the source of leak in the container system is 
sought. 
Compression or 
friction fit closure 
A closure mechanism effected by the physical contact of two 
materials forced against each other, such as a rubber stopper 
on a glass vial. 
Thermal/adhesive 
bond 
A bond formed by thermal fusion of two materials (e.g., a 
plastic laminate heat seal) or by the use of an intermediate 
adhesive. 
Contiguous 
A package formed from a single material (e.g., a glass or 
container 
plastic ampoule) 
Tortuous path 
A barrier to airborne microorganisms 
accomplished 
primarily 
dependent closures 
via a convoluted pathway to the product (e.g., a crimp-sealed 
aluminum tube, or a screw-thread closure) 
Microbial barrier 
The selected method is used to demonstrate that the package 
system is an effective barrier against microbial ingress. 
In the 
case of physical 
detection 
methods, 
correlation 
between 
microbial ingress and the physical method is needed. 
Product leakage 
The method is used to demonstrate that product is contained 
by the package. 
Rarefied gas 
atmosphere 
Vacuum retention 
The 
method 
is used 
to 
demonstrate 
that 
a controlled 
environment is maintained in the package headspace. 
The method demonstrates the maintenance of a vacuum in the 
package headspace. 
In-process control 
The selected leak test or process control method is used to 
demonstrate that a manufacturing 
unit operation or series 01 
operations is “in control.” 
A correlation 
must exist between 
process control and product quality. 
In-process 
parameter controls 
These are manufacturing 
parameters which can be controlled 
to increase the probability of satisfactory package integrity 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
12 
13 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical 
Science & Technology 
I 
, 
, 
,- 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
8. 
