PDA Task Force on Container/Closure 
Integrity 
‘Michael C. Carroll, The Liposome Company, Inc. 
Vivian F. Denny, Peak to Peak Pharmaceutical Associates 
Dana M. Guazzo, Ph.D., The R. W. Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute 
Mark W. Kaiser, Lancaster Laboratories 
Lee E. Kirsch, Ph.D., The University of Iowa 
John D. Ludwig, Ph.D., G. D. Searle and Company 
Gerald K. Masover, Genentech, Inc. 
Jeri L. May, DuPont Merck Pharmaceutical Co. 
Jeanne E. Moldenhauer, Ph.D., Fujisawa USA, Inc. 
Jean I. Olsen, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals 
Terri M. Polson, Glaxo Wellcome Inc. 
Glenn E. Wright, Eli Lilly & Co. 
Pharmaceutical Package Integrity 
Technical Report No. 27 
PDA 
April 1998 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Preface.. ................................................................................................................................ 
1 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 
1 
Integrity Assurance Through Product Development And Product Life ............................. .2 
3.1 
Package Design, Process Development, and Durability Assessment.. ................... .2 
3.2 
In-Process Control ...................................................................... ..1.. ....................... .3 
3.3 
Product Testing.. ..................................................................................................... 
.4 
Package Integrity and Leak Rate Specifications.. ............................................................... .5 
Test Method Selection ........................................................................................................ 
.6 
5.1 
Test Method Sensitivity.. ........................................................................................ .6 
5.2 
Other Test Method Selection Considerations ......................................................... .7 
Methods of Establishing Microbial Package Integrity.. ...................................................... .8 
6.1 
Microbial Challenge vs. Physical Test Methods.. ................................................... .8 
6.2 
Liquid Immersion Microbial Challenge Tests ........................................................ .9 
6.3 
Airborne Microbial Challenge Tests ........................................................................ . 
6.4 
Physical Leak Test Detection Methods.. ............................................................... .lO 
6.4.1 
Direct Correlation to Microbial Ingress.. .................................................. .10 
6.4.2 
Indirect Correlation to Microbial Ingress.. ................................................. 
10 
Decision Tree .................................................................................................................... 
.ll 
Leak Test Methods.. .......................................................................................................... 
.15 
8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
8.7 
8.8 
8.9 
8.10 
8.11 
8.12 
8.13 
8.14 
8.15 
8.16 
8.17 
8.18 
Bubble Test.. ......................................................................................................... 
.I6 
Helium Mass Spectrometry.. ................................................................................. .17 
High Voltage Leak Detection (HVLD). ................................................................ .20 
Lid Deflection ....................................................................................................... 
.2 1 
Liquid Tracer ........................................................................................................ 
.22 
Microbial Challenge, Aerosolization 
.................................................................... .25 
Microbial Challenge, Liquid Immersion.. ............................................................. .26 
Package Headspace Analysis.. .............................................................................. .28 
Particulate Transmission.. ..................................................................................... .29 
Residual Gas Ionization ........................................................................................ 
.30 
Tracer Gas Leak Detection ................................................................................... .3 1 
Ultrasonic Detection of Gas Flow.. ....................................................................... .33 
Ultrasonic Imaging.. ............................................................................................. 
..3 4 
Vacuum/Pressure Decay ...................................................................................... ..3 5 
Vacuum/Pressure Retention.. ................................................................................ .37 
Visual Inspection .................................................................................................. 
.3 8 
Volumetric Gas Flow ............................................................................................ 
.39 
Weight Loss/Gain ................................................................................................. 
.40 
9. 
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 
TECHNICAL 
REPORT NO. 27 
PHARMACEUTICAL 
PACKAGE INTEGRITY 
Table of Contents 
Vol. 52, No. 4 I July-August 
1998, Supplement 
i 
1. 
Preface 
This report reviews issues of pharmaceutical product package integrity and provides guidance for 
evaluating the barrier qualities of a pharmaceutical package. It supersedes the previously issued 
“PDA Technical Information Bulletin No. 4, Aspects of Container/Closure Integrity.” 
In this 
updated guideline, the term “product package” is used, rather than the term “container/closure 
system,” as it encompasses any nonporous barrier system that protects a pharmaceutical product 
from the environment. Similarly, the term “package seal” is used generically to mean all types of 
seals or closure systems. Although it is written to reflect the complexity of all pharmaceutical 
products and packages, the emphasis throughout the document is clearly on packaging intended 
for sterile products. 
This report was written by the following members of the PDA Task Force on Container/Closure 
Integrity: 
Michael C. Carroll, The Liposome Company, Inc. 
Vivian F. Denny, Peak to Peak Pharmaceutical Associates 
Dana M. Guazzo, Ph.D., The R. W. Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute 
Mark W. Kaiser, Lancaster Laboratories 
Lee E. Kirsch, Ph.D., The University of Iowa 
John D. Ludwig, Ph.D., G. D. Searle and Company 
Gerald K. Masover, Genentech, Inc. 
Jeri L. May, DuPont Merck Pharmaceutical Co. 
Jeanne E. Moldenhauer, Ph.D., Fujisawa USA, Inc. 
Jean I. Olsen, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals 
Terri M. Polson, Glaxo Wellcome Inc. 
Glenn E. Wright, Eli Lilly & Co. 
In addition, the Task Force acknowledges the immense help and support of Michael S. 
Korczynski, Ph.D. and Russell E. Madsen of PDA. Their editorial assistance and their insight 
into many of the key issues of package integrity were invaluable contributions to this effort. 
This document 
should be considered as a guide; it is not intended 
to establish any 
mandatory or implied standard. 
2. 
Introduction 
Product quality can be defined in terms of the ability of a product to perform its desired functions 
despite the stresses to which it has been exposed before and during its intended use. 
Pharmaceutical container systems may have a variety of functions including facilitation 
of 
product use, prevention of improper use, light protection, 
containment of the product, 
maintenance of a microbial barrier, and maintenance of a rarefied product environment. 
Assurance of package integrity is primarily 
concerned with product containment and the 
maintenance of an effective barrier against ingress of microorganisms or potentially reactive 
gases such as oxygen or water vapor, and sometimes, the maintenance of a vacuum. 
The 
information 
provided in this guideline is intended to assist users in developing integrity 
assessment strategies for use during the phases of product life. 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
3. 
Integrity 
Assurance Through Product Development And Product Life 
Product package integrity 
assessment begins during a product’s development phase and 
continues throughout its life cycle, encompassing routine manufacturing and shelf-life stability 
assessments. 
The phases of a product’s life cycle include: 
3.1 
Package design, process development, and durability assessment 
3.2 
In-process control 
3.3 
Product testing 
Further reconfirmation of product package integrity should occur when there are major changes 
in the package system that may affect its integrity, including package design, package materials, 
and/or when changes occur in the manufacturing processing conditions, including sterilization. 
The following subsections contain information on the critical factors for assessing a product’s 
package integrity over its life cycle. 
During the package design/process development phase, a thorough knowledge and understanding 
of the package seal is critical for designing an appropriate package system. Subsection 3.1 
describes the nature of these requirements, including a knowledge of the seal location, the sealing 
mechanism, and the critical factors of design, assembly, and processing that may impact seal 
quality. The importance of testing the package and processing parameters at extremes is stressed 
to ensure that the package will be able to withstand the rigors of processing, distribution, and 
usage. 
Once a product reaches commercial manufacturing, in-process control of critical production and 
processing steps are necessary. Subsection 3.2 describes these vital checks in greater detail. 
Product leak testing is discussed in subsection 3.3. The types of methods available for product 
testing are included, along with their limitations. 
3.1 
Package Design, Process Development, and Durability 
Assessment 
Package integrity quality assurance involves the selection of appropriate packaging materials, the 
design of the [seal or] closure system, and the verification that the incoming components meet 
specifications. 
Establishing leakage rate specifications may be desirable early during product 
development based on the particular product and package performance characteristics to ensure 
that the product will reflect these limits. Integrity tests used during package design may include 
gross leak tests that simply check for leak presence or location, but should also consist of those 
that test at or near the established leakage/permeation rate specification. 
Packages may be closed via either seals or closures. By definition, a seal is the result of the 
bonding of two similar or dissimilar surfaces. Examples of seals include: 1) contiguous 
containers formed from a single material (for example, glass or plastic ampoules); 2) the direct 
fusion of two material surfaces, usually by heat (for example, heat sealed plastic bags or unit- 
Vol. 52, No. 4 I July-August 
1998, Supplement 
2 
dose blister packaging for solid oral dosage forms); and 3) the bonding of two material surfaces 
with an intermediate adhesive agent. A closure, on the other hand, is the physical mating of two 
surfaces. In the strictest sense, all closures are tortuous path barriers. The degree to which a 
closure can limit leakage is a function of the closure design, the viscoelastic nature of the 
package components, and the extent of package component fit. 
For instance, an elastomeric 
rubber stoppered sterile vial is capable of achieving a very low gaseous leakage rate due to the 
viscoelastic nature of the rubber and its ability to conform to the vial surface upon compression. 
Other closure systems, such as metal on metal or plastic on metal, rely on the frictional mating of 
relatively incompressible materials. Still other closures do not depend on component fit as much 
as the existence of a tortuous path. In this guideline, the term “package seal” will be used 
generically to mean all seal and closure system types. 
There are critical factors that impact the quality of each package seal. Such factors typically 
include package component variables of composition, dimension, and critical defects; and 
sealing operation variables of time, temperature, pressure, and torque. The impact of processing 
on package integrity 
must also be characterized. 
Package component washing, drying, 
siliconization and sterilization, and product processing such as terminal sterilization may all 
impact the ability of the package seal to maintain its effectiveness. 
During the package design and process development phases, the acceptable ranges for each 
critical variable should be established based on package performance criteria that incorporate 
integrity 
testing. 
Wherever feasible, the variables of design and processing should be 
exaggerated and their impact on package integrity evaluated to help define the margin of safety 
for that variable. 
Such factors may include, for example, time, temperature, and pressure 
variables for heat seal operations and for steam sterilization cycles. Stability studies extending 
through shelf-life must also include integrity tests of the packaged product produced under 
typical manufacturing conditions. In some cases it may also be prudent, although not mandatory, 
to place product on stability that has been manufactured at critical processing or package design 
extremes. When greater time and effort are spent on package integrity verification during the 
design and process development phases, fewer problems will 
likely be encountered after 
commercialization. 
The assurance of product quality depends on the ability of the product to maintain integrity 
throughout the stresses anticipated during storage, distribution, 
and use. 
During product 
development, the effects of various environmental and handling stresses may need to be 
considered in addressing package integrity. 
Relevant types of stress may include temperature, 
pressure, and relative humidity 
extremes, shock and vibrational 
stress, and exposure to 
microorganisms. 
The evaluation of package integrity may include exposure of the product to 
simulated conditions of storage, distribution, and use coupled with appropriate leakage detection 
methodology. 
The integrity tests chosen are generally those that detect sporadic damage to the 
product, which may result in gross leakage or product loss, and in the case of sterile products, 
microbial ingress. 
3.2 
In-Process Control 
The processes that have been determined during product development to most critically impact 
package integrity should be those that are targeted for in-process control. Performance criteria 
3 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
for in-process controls are typically based on the performance of a specific unit operation rather 
than the performance of the final product. 
For example, in-process controls and tests may be 
used to statistically verify that the time, temperature, and pressure variables of a sealing 
operation are “in control” as opposed to final product testing used to demonstrate that microbial 
barrier or rarefied internal atmosphere criteria have been met. During validation studies it must 
be demonstrated that a process “in control” yields only products that meet the established leakage 
rate specifications. 
For a limited number of products, instrumentation exists that permits high-speed 100% on-line 
,verification of package integrity at the established leakage rate specifications. 
But for many 
sterile products in-process leak test instruments have limitations that preclude high speed, on-line 
integrity verification at the required product leakage rate specifications. 
In-process leak test 
instruments are designed to check for intermittent defective packages leaking at a gross rate that 
circumvented the various in-process controls. Certainly no instrumentation currently available 
for in-process use is intended to measure permeation rates of gases through the package itself. 
In-process testing is strictly limited to leakage through package imperfections. 
There are a variety of logical, validatable in-process integrity tests that can help verify 
product/package integrity. However, no amount of in-process or final product testing can replace 
the need for the control and monitoring of various critical package and sealing parameters. For 
example, vision systems can be used to cull out defective components, gas flow rate meters can 
be installed on ample sealing lines, time/temperature/pressure controls can be used on thermal 
sealing equipment, and torque monitors can be placed on screw-capping equipment. These on- 
line in-process controls, in combination with well-designed product/process validation studies, 
are an essential part of the total package integrity quality assurance. 
3.3 
Product Testing 
A product that has been properly and carefully designed with critical production processes well 
characterized and controlled should have little need for final product release testing for package 
integrity. Certainly the quality of a pharmaceutical product cannot merely be based on the results 
of a product integrity test, especially when such tests are usually performed on a fraction of the 
production lot. Sterility tests have historically been considered an indicator of package integrity; 
however, due to the insensitive nature of sterility tests, the small number of samples tested, and 
the possibility of false positives, these results are no longer considered reliable as a final 
indicator of package integrity. 
Generally, integrity test methods selected for final product testing are designed to verify the 
absence of gross leaks well above permeation rate levels. For those package systems that can be 
tested 100% on-line with instruments shown to measure near or below the leakage rate 
specification there is no need for additional product integrity testing. 
For other products a 
statistically established percentage of the batch may be integrity tested for in-house process 
control purposes. 
Indirect tests of package integrity may also be employed on production lot samples. 
For 
example, indirect measures of integrity may include visual inspection, residual seal force of a 
serum vial with elastomeric closure, or seal strength of an adhesive or thermal seal. 
The 
Vol. 52, No. 4 I July-August 
1998, Supplement 
4 
acceptance criteria for such tests should be based on the critical variable acceptance ranges 
established during the development phases of package design and process development. 
4. 
Package Integrity and Leak Rate Specifications 
This section provides a definition of leaks and leakage, and presents examples of leakage rate 
units of measure. The concept that all packages leak to some extent is introduced, although such 
leakage may not have a negative impact on product quality. 
Therefore, when designing a 
product/package system, a leak rate specification must be established. Examples of leak rate 
specifications are provided. 
A leak is an unintended crack, hole, or porosity in a package capable of passing a liquid or gas 
through the package. Leakage is the movement of the liquid or gas through the leak. Leakage is 
defined in units of mass or volume flow of a gas or liquid over time under defined conditions of 
temperature and pressure. Leakage is often described in units of standard cubic centimeters of 
gas (air) that can move through an orifice per second (std cc/set or sees’) under defined 
conditions of temperature and differential pressure. 
Similarly, leakage units of atm cc/s are also 
used to define leakage measured at local atmospheric pressure and temperature. While the two 
are not identical, units of sees and atm ccs are often used interchangeably. Another common unit 
of measure is the SI unit of Pa m3/s, or Pascal cubic meters per second. One Pa m3/s is equal to 
9.87 sees or roughly 10 sees. Various general references on the subjects of leakage, leak test 
methods, and units of measure are referenced at the end of this document. 
Leakage rates from a pharmaceutical package may vary over a wide range. For instance, leakage 
through an orifice large enough to create an audible sound may be approximately 1 sees. The 
human eye can detect visible flow of liquid occurring through holes that leak at gaseous rates of 
0.1 sees. No visible water will leak when dry air, at the same pressure, leaks at a rate as great as 
10“’ sees. Leak detection by helium spectroscopy is the most sensitive leak testing method 
currently available and, under certain conditions, can detect leakage as small as lo-” sees (Ref. 
ASNT, 1982, and Varian, 1995). 
Leakage need not always be described in units of gas mass or volume flow over time. It may 
also be described in other terms believed to be more meaningful to the specific product or leak 
test method. For instance, leakage rate may be described in units of product weight loss or gain, 
or rise of percent oxygen in an inert gas-flushed headspace, or as the volume of dye that has 
migrated through a package seal. Regardless of the leakage units used, it is important to clearly 
indicate the relevant leak test parameter conditions. For instance, weight loss might be described 
as grams of product loss measured over 2 years when the product is stored at 35°C. 
Such 
descriptions of leakage that clearly and meaningfully define mass or volume flow over time are 
as acceptable as gas leak rate units. 
’ 1 std cc = 1 standard unit volume of gas (air) at sea level atmospheric pressure (I 01.3 kPa, 760 
mm Hg or 760 torr), and 20°C (293°K) temperature. 
5 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
6 
Strictly speaking, all packages demonstrate leakage to some extent, although such leakage may 
not affect product quality. Therefore it is important to establish an allowable leakage rate for a 
given product/package system early during product development. 
The product’s needs for 
protection will dictate the performance criteria of a package and therefore the allowable leakage 
rate. 
All pharmaceutical packages must contain their intended product, and thus must prevent 
gross leakage. For a nonporous package this may equate to a maximum gaseous leakage rate of 
approximately 1 O‘3 sees (Ref. ASNT, page 699). Packages designed to only prevent aerosolized 
microbial challenge may be able to tolerate a higher leakage rate specification. 
Sterile liquid products require containers that prevent minute liquid product leakage and 
microbial ingress. Other products, such as sterile powders, ointments, and lyophilized products, 
may also require containers that prevent liquid-borne 
microbial 
ingress. 
For all of these 
products, the leakage rate specification limit should be the same as the cut-off for liquid passage, 
as microorganisms are believed incapable of penetrating a leak smaller in size than can be 
penetrated by liquids (Ref. Kirsch and Morton). 
Water is generally thought to be incapable of 
penetrating pores that allow less than approximately 10-j sees of airflow at a differential pressure 
across the seal of approximately 1 atmosphere. The relationship between gaseous flow, liquid 
leakage, and liquid-borne microbial ingress was demonstrated by L. Kirsch, et al and Morton, 
1989. For other products, much smaller rates of leakage or even permeation through the package 
may cause an unacceptable loss of a critical gas headspace or vacuum, or an excessive migration 
of water vapor or solvents. 
Once the level of acceptable leakage/permeation has been established, a leakage/permeation 
specification incorporating a reasonable margin of safety may be set. 
5. 
Test Method Selection 
This section is devoted to leak test method selection criteria. In subsection 5.1 the need to select 
tests of adequate sensitivity is discussed. Because test methods have an optimum sensitivity 
range, it may be necessary to select more than one type of leak method for a single 
product/package system. Subsection 5.2 discusses other test method selection considerations. 
5.1 
Test Method Sensitivity 
In selecting a leak test method it is important to choose a test which is capable of detecting the 
leakage rates of concern. The leakage rate of concern will depend on the product/package system 
as well as the phase of the product life cycle in which the test will be utilized. 
During certain 
times in the product life cycle, a leak test method is needed merely for gross leakage detection or 
for leakage location. But at some point in the development of a product-package system, the leak 
test method selected must be capable of detecting leakage at the product’s established leakage 
rate specification. 
Most physical leak test methods have an optimum sensitivity range, meaning that a method 
capable of detecting leaks between 10V6 sees and lo-’ sees may not be appropriate for gross leaks 
of IO0 sees. Some physical test methods have a “gross” and a “fine” leak test mode in order to 
expand this sensitivity window. 
However, it is inappropriate and can be quite costly to select a test method that is too sensitive. 
For instance, a helium leak test capable of detecting leaks as low as lo-” sees would be an 
inappropriate test for a high density polyethylene screw-capped bottle merely intended to retain 
tablets and capsules. But the converse is also true; an airborne microbial challenge test would be 
meaningless for a product with a gaseous leakage rate specification of 1 O-’ sees. 
Because leak test methods have a range of sensitivity, and because the leakage rate of concern 
may differ depending on the stage of the product’s life cycle, it may be necessary to test a given 
product using more than one leak test method, each designed to detect leaks of varying 
magnitude. A package containing a lyophilized powder undergoing shipping simulation studies 
may need to be tested for larger leaks that have resulted from shock or vibration damage. While 
long term stability samples of the same product may need to be checked for leaks indicative of 
gaseous leakage and permeation. 
Once in production, a gross leak test detection system may be 
most appropriate for a high speed filling line where package breakage is a concern. 
A test method’s sensitivity can be expressed in various units of measure. Optimum sensitivity of 
a method can only be realized through careful selection of the test parameter conditions. If, for 
example, an oxygen analyzer is used to monitor the headspace of a package, the instrument’s 
sensitivity is expressed as the smallest change in headspace oxygen content detectable by the gas 
analyzer. 
But the ability of this method to detect very small leakage/permeation rates will 
depend on the time that has elapsed since the package was first sealed, and on the extent of 
package exposure to an oxygen partial pressure differential. 
As another example, the sensitivity 
of a dye test is described as the smallest volume of dye that can be detected in the given product- 
package under the stated test conditions of time, temperature, and pressure. Dye tests can be 
optimized by maximizing the test conditions, as well as by manipulating the dye formulation and 
detection technique. Lastly, the sensitivity of a helium mass spectrometry leak detection method 
is described as the smallest measurable leak rate in units of standard cc of gas (helium) per 
second. Helium leak detection capabilities can be improved by maximizing the concentration of 
helium in the package headspace, and by choosing the most optimum detection mode. 
5.2 
Other Test Method Selection Considerations 
A wide variety of leak test methods are available for the evaluation of pharmaceutical packages. 
In Section 8, “Leak Test Methods,” summaries of several of the most commonly used physical 
methods are provided. The usefulness of a physical method must be determined on a product-by- 
product basis by evaluating the ability of a method to test the seal of interest, the sensitivity of 
the instrument or method, and any relevant sources of measurement variation. 
In some cases 
factors such as data storage, analysis and display functions, statistical manipulation of data, 
practicality, speed, safety, on-line integration feasibility, and expense may play important roles in 
the selection of the most appropriate leak test method. 
Sterile package integrity has traditionally 
been verified by airborne or liquid immersion 
microbial challenge tests. Microbial challenge tests have a long history of use and may be an 
indicator of microbial package integrity. 
Also in Section 8, a brief description of microbial 
challenge tests is provided. 
Section 6, “Methods of Establishing Microbial Package Integrity,” 
7 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
reviews both the microbial challenge approach and the alternate physical testing approach for 
verifying a package’s microbial barrier properties. 
6. 
Methods of Establishing Microbial 
Package Integrity 
All sterile pharmaceutical packages must prevent the ingress of microorganisms. 
This section 
focuses on liquid immersion and airborne microbial challenge test methods and alternate physical 
test methods useful for establishing a package’s microbial barrier properties. In subsection 6.1 
the rationale for selecting a microbial challenge test versus a physical test method is discussed. 
Subsections 6.2 and 6.3 describe how one may directly verify a package’s microbial integrity 
through either liquid immersion or airborne microbial challenge tests. 
In subsection 6.4 an outline is presented describing how physical leak tests may be validated as 
an alternative indicator of package microbial integrity. 
A direct correlation of physical integrity 
test results to microbial barrier properties can be done by exposing a given population of 
packages to both physical and microbial challenge tests (subsection 6.4.1). An indirect approach 
is to compare the physical method’s sensitivity to leakage rates previously demonstrated as 
preventing microbial ingress (subsection 6.4.2). 
6.1 
Microbial 
Challenge vs. Physical Test Methods 
For most sterile pharmaceutical packages, the leakage rate specification is that which will 
prevent the ingress of microorganisms. 
Such packages must therefore be validated as providing 
an effective barrier against either airborne and/or liquid-borne microbial ingress. The microbial 
barrier properties of a package may be demonstrated using either microbial challenge tests or 
physical tests that have been correlated to microbial ingress. 
There are several reasons for choosing to use a microbial challenge test. First, there may be no 
reasonable alternative to microbial challenge tests. For instance, certain closures or packages 
that rely solely upon a tortuous path to prevent airborne microbial ingress may not be reliably 
tested by a physical method. A second reason may be that the package design does not lend 
itself to sufficiently sensitive physical test methods. For example, a package may not tolerate the 
relatively high differential 
pressures required for testing by vacuum decay or tracer gas 
techniques. A third reason may be that the manufacturer does not have the resources or expertise 
required for developing and validating an alternate physical test method. It is also possible that 
the product is only intended for limited distribution so that an extensive physical test method 
validation program cannot be justified. 
Conversely, a physical test may be the preferred approach for microbial barrier package 
validation. 
If a sufficiently sensitive physical test method is available that is compatible with the 
product-package system, it is often more economical in the long run to invest in developing and 
validating such .a physical test. 
Physical tests can be selected that yield qualitative or 
quantitative results or that can pinpoint the location of leaks. 
Microbial challenge tests are 
relatively insensitive, yield inconsistent results, are labor intensive, necessitate extensive storage 
space for sample incubation, and require long test times. Another disadvantage is that microbial 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
8 
challenge tests must often be done using media-filled packages rather than packages containing 
the intended product. 
Physical tests are the more logical 
choice when the leakage rate specification 
for a 
product/package system is significantly lower than the limit for microbial ingress. For example, 
a given sterile glass vial closed with an elastomeric stopper may require a leakage rate 
specification of lo-’ std cc/s to maintain an inert gas headspace. The gaseous leakage rate that 
correlates to the ingress of liquid-borne microorganisms for this package system has been shown 
to be approximately lo-’ sees when tested by helium mass spectrometry (Ref. Kirsch, et al). 
Given this scenario, it is unnecessary to further establish the package’s microbial integrity by 
microbial challenge tests. In fact, gaseous leakage below the rates that allow microbial ingress 
can be assured for some packages by verifying the maintenance of an inert gas headspace when 
the packages are tested .over an extended period of time, and when they are sufficiently 
challenged with a differential pressure leakage driving force. 
6.2 
Liquid Immersion Microbial 
Challenge Tests 
There is no standard liquid immersion microbial challenge test, but the following guidelines are 
suggested for the establishment of a meaningful and useful method. First, it is important to 
select a small bacterium that is demonstrated to yield a high population of viable organisms at 
the end of the study. 
Whenever possible, positive controls that demonstrate growth must be 
included. 
These may consist of defective packages or packages prepared outside the package 
assembly process control limits. 
As with 
any package integrity 
study, a statistically 
representative number of samples should be tested. When packages vary in size, but not in 
design or package component materials of construction, worst case container sizes are to be 
evaluated, or, preferably, sizes should be bracketed. If more than one seal is relied upon for 
package integrity, each seal should be challenged. 
The position of the container during the 
integrity test should ensure that the seal is exposed to the challenge microorganisms. The media, 
incubation, and challenge conditions of time and pressure must be logically chosen keeping in 
mind critical integrity variables such as package component materials, assembly, processing 
parameters, and challenge organism viability 
and morphology. 
Whenever reasonable, the 
product itself should be challenged, as it is possible the product may influence seal integrity. 
However, this may not be feasible based on the product’s inability to support microbial growth. 
6.3 
Airborne Microbial 
Challenge Tests 
There are many references describing airborne microbial challenge test procedures published by 
the food and medical device industries. Several of these are listed in the references at the end of 
the Microbial Challenge Aerosolization Test Method summary. It is recommended that such 
references be utilized in, establishing an airborne microbial challenge test for pharmaceutical 
packages. 
Very briefly, some critical factors in the design of such tests include location and 
position of the microbial challenge source versus the test articles, methodology used to aerosolize 
the microbial challenge, size and morphology of the challenge organisms, and the size, shape, 
and configuration of the test chamber. 
There are many variables that affect the outcome of airborne microbial challenge tests. The key 
to performing consistent airborne challenges is design of the aerosolization apparatus with 
9 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
sufficient fine adjustments and system monitors (for example, pressure gauges, flow meters) so 
that variation between runs and/or operators is minimized. 
6.4 
Physical Leak Test Detection Methods 
Unlike microbial challenge tests, physical leak test methods do not directly measure microbial 
ingress, but rather, they measure some physical property of the leak that may be related to 
microbial failure. The relationship between the sensitivity of a physical leak test method to the 
probability of microbial failure can be either directly or indirectly determined. 
6.4.1 
Direct Correlation 
to Microbial 
Ingress 
Typically the development of a direct correlation between a physical integrity test and microbial 
ingress first requires the creation of representative acceptable and defective packages that can be 
tested by both leak test methods. Then it must be experimentally demonstrated that the measured 
leak rate by the physical method can be quantitatively correlated to the probability of microbial 
failure. 
To illustrate, the following results would need to be demonstrated by direct correlation of a 
liquid chemical tracer test to a microbial immersion test: 
1. the presence of tracer in all test units that show microbial ingress, 
2. the presence of tracer in some test units that fail to show microbial ingress, 
3. the absence of tracer in some test units that fail to show microbial ingress. 
4. the absence of microbial ingress in all of the test units that do not show tracer. 
A direct correlation of tracer to microbial ingress would need to take into consideration the 
potential ,interference of the tracer with microbial growth, and the potential interference of 
microbial growth on tracer detection. 
Liquid chemical tracer tests provide simple pass-fail results; either the tracer is present or it is 
not. If a physical test method is used that provides a range of leakage rate results, correlation to 
microbial ingress is based on the rate of leakage determined by the physical method versus the 
probability of microbial failure. 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
10 
6.4.2 
Indirect Correlation 
to Microbial 
Ingress 
A physical test method can be indirectly correlated to microbial ingress based on documented 
evidence of microbial ingress within the physical method
’
s 
leakage rate detection range. Again, 
for a sterile glass vial with elastomeric stopper, it has been demonstrated that the helium leak rate 
(under specific testing conditions) that corresponds to microbial ingress as determined by 
rigorous immersion challenge testing is 10M5 sees (Ref. Kirsch, et al). This information can be 
used to verify the microbial ingress leak detection capability of another physical method by 
demonstrating that the second method can reliably detect leakage at or below the documented 
leakage rate of about 10S5 sees. It is important to keep in mind that the leak test gas and the test 
conditions of temperature and differential pressure used for the referee test (in this case the 
helium test) may differ significantly from those employed by the alternative physical method. 
Therefore it may be necessary to calculate an equivalent leakage rate (either > or < lo-
’ 
std cc/s) 
against which the alternative physical leak test method must be compared. 
Indirect correlation of a physical test method to liquid-borne microbial challenge tests can also be 
made by demonstrating that the physical method is capable of detecting microscopic liquid 
passageways near the limit of microbial ingress. This relies on the assumption that without a 
passageway large enough to permit liquid flow, microbial ingress cannot occur. For example, a 
dye or liquid chemical tracer can be used as an indirect indication of microbial package integrity. 
In order to rely on such results, the sensitivity of the dye or liquid chemical tracer test must be 
optimized in order to approach the leakage limit for liquid ingress. 
7. 
Decision Tree 
A decision tree is presented in this section to assist in selecting appropriate leak tests and process 
control methods. When using the tree, it must first be decided whether leakage/permeation is to 
be measured, or whether the leak location is to be pinpointed. Within the category of “Total 
Leakage and Permeation” measurement, there is a further classification according to seal type. 
These include compression & friction 
fit closures, thermal & adhesive seals, contiguous 
containers, or tortuous path closures. (These seal types are defined more fully at the end of this 
Section.) 
Each seal type can be intended to effect any one of a variety of package integrity 
performance criteria. The seal or closure may be intended as a microbial barrier, or it may be 
designed to restrict product leakage, or to maintain a rarefied gas or vacuum headspace. Another 
subheading “In-process Control” is also included under “Performance Criteria” to help identify 
some of the process monitors and controls used to ensure package quality and minimize package 
integrity problems. 
Below each performance criteria in the decision tree, a listing of potentially useful leak test 
methods is presented. 
Leak test methods are categorized according to their most common 
application. 
Microbial barrier tests are either described as direct (microbial challenge methods) 
or indirect (physical tests). Product leakage tests are subdivided into either gross methods (for 
larger leaks) or fine (for relatively smaller leaks). Rarefied gas headspace retention tests and 
vacuum retention tests are listed. Leak tests useful as in-process control checks are also provided. 
All leak tests included in the decision tree are described more fully in Section 8, Leak Test 
Methods. 
Certainly this decision tree is merely intended as a guide, and is not meant to be 
restrictive when choosing among these or other viable leak test methods or process controls. 
11 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Decision Tree Table of Terms 
Leakage 
characterization 
Package Seal 
Type 
Performance 
criteria 
- 
Total leakage and 
permeation 
Leak location 
This refers to the need to detect, qualitatively or quantitatively, 
the total leakage and permeation 
In this case, the source of leak in the container system is 
sought. 
Compression or 
friction fit closure 
A closure mechanism effected by the physical contact of two 
materials forced against each other, such as a rubber stopper 
on a glass vial. 
Thermal/adhesive 
bond 
A bond formed by thermal fusion of two materials (e.g., a 
plastic laminate heat seal) or by the use of an intermediate 
adhesive. 
Contiguous 
A package formed from a single material (e.g., a glass or 
container 
plastic ampoule) 
Tortuous path 
A barrier to airborne microorganisms 
accomplished 
primarily 
dependent closures 
via a convoluted pathway to the product (e.g., a crimp-sealed 
aluminum tube, or a screw-thread closure) 
Microbial barrier 
The selected method is used to demonstrate that the package 
system is an effective barrier against microbial ingress. 
In the 
case of physical 
detection 
methods, 
correlation 
between 
microbial ingress and the physical method is needed. 
Product leakage 
The method is used to demonstrate that product is contained 
by the package. 
Rarefied gas 
atmosphere 
Vacuum retention 
The 
method 
is used 
to 
demonstrate 
that 
a controlled 
environment is maintained in the package headspace. 
The method demonstrates the maintenance of a vacuum in the 
package headspace. 
In-process control 
The selected leak test or process control method is used to 
demonstrate that a manufacturing 
unit operation or series 01 
operations is “in control.” 
A correlation 
must exist between 
process control and product quality. 
In-process 
parameter controls 
These are manufacturing 
parameters which can be controlled 
to increase the probability of satisfactory package integrity 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
12 
13 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical 
Science & Technology 
I 
, 
, 
,- 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
8. 
Leak Test Methods 
The final section is a series of summaries that describe several commonly used microbial and 
physical integrity test methods. 
These methods are listed alphabetically. In each summary, 
information is included on the validatability 
of the method, the limitations that influence the 
method’s sensitivity, and whether it is useful for quantitative leakage measurement, for 
qualitative leakage detection, or for leak location. 
Critical test parameters are listed followed by 
the time required to complete the leak test, and special equipment required. The package stress 
created by the leak test is stated, along with specific product/package types that are most 
commonly tested by the given method. 
Finally, pertinent literature references from the 
document’s general reference list are given that relate to the method being summarized. 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
8.1 
Bubble Test 
Description: The package is submerged in water or other suitable clear, colorless solvent. 
A 
vacuum is exerted on the test system, and the package is examined visually for evidence of 
gaseous leakage. Alternatively, surfactant may be added to the seal in question, a differential 
pressure is applied across the seal, and evidence of gaseous leakage is detected by visible 
inspection. 
Validation 
This method determines the presence and location of leaks 
that allow sufficient gaseous flow to permit the formation of 
visually detectable bubbles in the submersion fluid or in the 
applied surfactant. This method can be validated for the 
detection or location of larger leaks or package 
imperfections. Validation will depend on the test method 
parameters and the reliability and sensitivity of visual 
detection. 
Sensitivity 
The sensitivity of the method is based on the ability of gas to 
move out of a leak to form visible bubbles in the submersion 
fluid or applied surfactant, and the ability to identify positive 
leak controls 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Qualitative 
Critical test parameters 
Differential pressure exposure 
Differential pressure rate of exposure 
Test time 
Submersion fluid or surfactant surface tension 
Cleanliness of package 
Visible inspection parameters include: 
l 
Light intensity, 
l 
Magnification, 
l 
Background, 
l 
Time for inspection 
l 
Visual inspector training and experience 
Time to complete 
Up to several minutes 
Equipment required 
Vacuum or pressure source 
Submersion fluid or surfactant 
Submersion vacuum vessel for submersion testing 
Pressure controls and monitors 
Visual inspection requires appropriate lighting, light meters, 
magnification, and color background. 
Vol. 52, No. 4 I July-August 
1998, Supplement 
16 
Stress on package 
Pressure differential 
Wetting of seal or entire package 
Product/Package Types 
Applicable to all pharmaceutical packages that do not rely on 
a tortuous path or barrier seal. And that can tolerate wetting 
and pressure differentials 
Literature References 
ASNT, 1982 
Elder, 1995 
ASTM D 3078 
Guazzo, 1996 
ASTM D 4991 
Morton, 1987 
ASTME515 
Morton et al, May-June 1989 
8.2 
Helium Mass Spectrometry 
Description: Helium is used as a tracer gas for detection and measurement of leakage across a 
package seal. Helium is detected by mass spectrometry. 
There are four ways of testing for 
helium leakage rate by mass spectrometry: Tracer Probe, Hood, Detector Probe, and Inside Out. 
Tracer Probe: The package itself is placed in-line with the mass spectrometry unit and helium 
is sprayed around the outside of the package. The mass spectrometer vacuum pump applies 
vacuum to the package and helium leakage into the package is measured by mass 
spectrometry. 
Hood Method: The package is placed in-line with the mass spectrometer and is enclosed in a 
“hood” or chamber into which helium can be introduced. The mass spectrometer vacuum 
pump applies vacuum to the package and helium leakage into the package is measured by 
mass spectrometry. 
Detector Probe: The package is flooded with helium and a detector probe connected to the 
mass spectrometer is used to sample the atmosphere around the package perimeter. 
The 
package is not under vacuum in this case. 
Inside-Out: The package is flooded with helium and subsequently placed into a test chamber 
directly connected to the mass spectrometer. Helium can be introduced into the package 
headspace by penetrating the package and flooding the headspace, by flooding the headspace 
prior to sealing the package, or by bombing, i.e. exposing the sealed package to an 
environment of pressurized helium. During the Inside-Out method the package is subjected 
to vacuum generated by the mass spectrometer. 
17 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Validation 
Sensitivity 
Helium mass spectrometry methods can be validated for the 
detection, location, and measurement of gaseous leaks and 
helium permeation. Instrument sensitivity can be demonstrated 
using calibrated helium leaks. Positive control package leaks 
can be used in some cases. Validation studies should examine 
the ability of the leak test method to accurately measure gas 
leakage in the package system. 
Helium leak detection methods are potentially the most 
sensitive indicators of package leakage and permeation. The 
sensitivity of helium mass spectrometry methods is based on 
the ability to accurately detect and measure helium 
leakage/permeation rate in the package system. The test 
method and the parameters selected for testing the package are 
critical for accurate leakage/permeation measurement. General 
mass spectrometry system parameters that can impact 
sensitivity include: 
Volume of vacuum system 
Pressure in the vacuum system 
Pressure in the sensing element of the mass spectrometer 
Response time of the mass spectrometer 
Effective pump speed of vacuum pump system 
Ratio of the total gas flow of the vacuum pump system to 
the total gas flow of the mass spectrophotometer leak 
detector. 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Quantitative: Hood method and Inside-Out method 
Qualitative or semi-Quantitative: Tracer Probe method and the 
Detector Probe method 
Critical test parameters 
Package testing mode 
(all methods) 
Test time duration 
Temperature of package 
Percentage of tracer gas surrounding the test boundary 
Location, length and size of connection between tester and 
vacuum system 
Helium background within the vacuum system 
Cleanliness, surface area, surface finish and material 
composition of test boundary exposed to the vacuum system 
Stability of electrical supply to the mass spectrometer 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
18 
Critical test parameters 
Concentration of the tracer gas in the package or hood 
(Hood and Inside-Out 
Bombing time 
methods) 
Bombing pressure 
Critical test parameters 
(Tracer and Detector 
Probe methods) 
Time to complete 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
Product/Package Types 
Degassing of the package surface (post bombing dwell time or 
air wash) 
Specialized Operator training, experience, technique 
Surface scanning speed 
Differential pressure across the package 
Helium gas concentration within the test boundary 
The distance the probe or sniffer is held from the surface 
The length and diameter of sniffer probe lines 
Pressure in the sensing element of the mass spectrometer 
Build-up of helium in the background atmosphere 
Method dependent. Several hours may be required for 
bombing. 
Once helium challenge conditions are established, the actual 
test time is a few seconds. 
Helium mass spectrometer with vacuum system 
Package test fixture or probe 
Helium source 
Vacuum (Tracer Probe, Hood and Inside-Out methods) 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages that do not rely on a 
tortuous path or barrier material and that are required to 
maintain a very low leak rate specification. 
Generally, the Inside-Out method is used for testing 
hermetically sealed containers having a defined internal 
volume that can withstand a vacuum applied to the package 
exterior. 
The Tracer Probe method is used for items that can withstand a 
vacuum of 0.1 Pascal (10” torr). 
The Detector Probe method is used for items that can tolerate a 
pressure differential and which the effluent side of the leak is 
accessible with the mass spectrometer probe. 
The Hood method can be used with packages that can be 
evacuated. 
19 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
Literature References 
ASNT 1982 
Gilchrist, et al, 1985 
ASTM E 493 
Gilchrist et al, 1989 
ASTM E 499 
Guazzo, 1994 
ASTM E 908 
Kirsch et al, 1997 
ASTM E 948 
Hoffmann, 1996 
ASTM E 1603 
Rhea, et al, 1984 
Elder, 1995 
Varian Vacuum Products, 1995 
8.3 
High Voltage Leak Detection (HVLD) 
Description: Containers are exposed to a high frequency, high-voltage current near the area of the 
package to be detected for leaks. The presence of a leak will result in a flow of current above 
base noise detected by the HVLD system as a reject. 
This test method is only feasible for 
containers constructed of relatively nonconductive materials and for product that is significantly 
more conductive. The product must be at or very near any potential leaks to allow conductance 
to occur. 
Validation 
Sensitivity 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Qualitative 
Critical test parameters 
High voltage setting 
Product conductivity 
Sensitivity setting (Gain) 
Test area cleanliness 
HVLD probe positioning 
Cleanliness of the package 
Package geometry 
Access of product to the leak 
Package conductivity 
Time to complete 
Test time is almost instantaneous. 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
HVLD methods can be validated for the detection of leaks in 
product/package systems meeting the conductivity 
requirements stated above. Validation studies should examine 
the ability of HVLD to detect control leaks as a function of 
voltage level and detection sensitivity settings, HVLD probe 
positioning, package wall thickness and geometry, and product 
formulation variations. 
HVLD can detect leaks large enough to permit liquid 
penetration or wetting. HVLD sensitivity must be 
demonstrated during validation studies for each 
product/package system to ensure the detection of all control 
leaks with a minimum number of false positives. 
20 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
High voltage leak detection instrumentation 
Package handling system to ensure package is positioned to 
wet the seal area and for feeding product into the HVLD 
equipment. 
Rapid, short exposure to a voltage. 
Other 
It is recommended that the impact of voltage on product 
stability be determined. 
Product/Package Types 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages that do not rely on a 
tortuous path or barrier seal, and that meet the conductivity 
requirements described above. 
Literature References 
Anonymous, 1996 
Arndt, et al, 1996 
Axelson, et al, 1990 
Ball, 1997 
’ 
The Parenteral Society, 1992 
Villiger 1987 
8.4 
Lid Deflection 
Description: To perform lid deflection tests a pressure differential is applied to a package and the 
resultant movement of the package’s flexible lidding material is monitored and used as an 
indication of the absence or presence of unacceptable levels of leakage. Lid deflection sensors 
can work by any of a variety of methods, including strain gauges for monitoring lidding 
movement, and sensors that work by contact, capacitance, inductance, electromagnetic wave 
motion, photoelectricity, and ultrasonic pulse echo. 
Validation 
Lid deflection methods can be validated for the detection of the 
absence of lidding material or for the detection of gaseous 
leaks large enough to result in minimal or no flexible lidding 
material displacement when a package is subjected to a 
reference differential pressure. Validation studies should 
examine the ability of the lid deflection instrument to detect 
control leaks as a function of instrument sensor capabilities, 
differential pressure testing conditions, package headspace, and 
package component geometry. 
21 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
Sensitivity 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Qualitative 
Critical test parameters 
Lidding movement sensor 
accuracy and sensitivity 
Differential pressure applied to 
package 
Time to complete 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
Product/Package Types 
Literature References 
8.5 
Liquid Tracer 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
22 
Description: A liquid tracer solution, such as dye, radionuclides, or metal ions, is exposed to the 
package seal to be tested. This may require submersion of the package in the liquid tracer, 
application of a small amount of liquid tracer to the seal, or tilling the package itself with liquid 
tracer followed by submersion of the package in water or other suitable solvent. Migration of the 
tracer across the seal is determined either visually, spectrophotometrically, or by other analytical 
The sensitivity of lid deflection methods is based on the ability 
to accurately detect flexible lidding material movement when 
the package is subjected to a standard differential pressure. 
Sensitivity will largely depend on the method for monitoring 
lidding movement and the capabilities of the particular sensor 
device selected. Instrument sensor capabilities must be 
verified using appropriate techniques specific for the sensor 
selected. Generally, lid deflection tests are used as an indicator 
of larger leaks. This method is sometimes coupled with 
pressure/vacuum decay leak tests in order to provide both a 
“gross” and a “fine” leak test detection range. 
Package headspace 
Package component 
geometry 
A few seconds 
Lidding deflection instrumentation 
Differential pressure source, monitors and controls 
Differential pressure 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages that do not rely on a 
tortuous path or barrier seal and that can tolerate a differential 
pressure applied to the seal area. 
This test is particularly useful for checking critical sizes of 
specialty packages or devices. The test can often be used 
instead of vacuum/pressure decay for packages that tend to 
deform under pressure. 
Gnanasekharan, et al, 1992 
Hoffmann, 1996 
Gnanasekharan, et al, 1994 
Rice, 1986 
Guazzo, 1996 
Yam, 1995 
means appropriate to the liquid tracer. Often a pressure differential is applied to the package to 
accelerate the migration of the tracer across the seal and to improve test method sensitivity. 
Validation 
Sensitivity 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Detection limit 
Critical test parameters 
Time to complete 
Several minutes to as long as a few hours 
Liquid tracer leak test methods can be validated for the detection or 
location of leaks large enough to permit liquid penetration and 
detection. For some methods, the extent of liquid leakage can be 
quantitatively measured. Validation will depend on the test method 
parameters and the reliability and sensitivity of the liquid tracer 
detection method. 
The sensitivity of the method is based on the extent of liquid tracer 
penetration and the ability to detect or measure such leakage. 
Generally qualitative, although it may be quantitative if liquid 
tracer penetration can be quantitatively measured. 
There must be sufficient liquid tracer leakage to permit detection by 
the selected detection method. 
General test parameters include: 
l 
Differential pressure exposure 
l 
Time of liquid tracer exposure 
l 
Tracer liquid surface tension, viscosity, 
hydrophilicity/lypophilicity, 
and temperature 
l 
Compatibility and stability of the liquid tracer with the product 
l 
Light stability of the tracer with product 
Visual inspection parameters include: 
l 
Type of lighting and light intensity 
l 
Magnification 
l 
Background 
l 
Angle of inspection 
l 
Time for inspection 
l 
Training and experience of inspectors 
Analytical inspection parameters will depend on the detection 
method of choice. 
23 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
Product/Package Types 
Literature References 
(general) 
Literature References 
(dye tests) 
Literature References 
(other) 
The equipment required varies with the liquid tracer and the 
detection method selected. Some equipment that may be required 
includes: 
Liquid tracer solution 
Vacuum or pressure source 
Submersion fluid 
Vacuum vessel for submersion testing 
Pressure controls and monitors 
Visual inspection requires appropriate lighting, light meters, 
magnification, and color background. 
Fluorescent dye inspection requires black light of appropriate 
wavelength and intensity 
Analytical detection method may require UVNis 
spectrophotometry, atomic absorption, HPLC, or other appropriate 
instrumentation 
Pressure differential 
Wetting of seal or entire package 
Applicable to all pharmaceutical packages that do not rely on a 
tortuous path or barrier seal and that can tolerate wetting or 
submersion 
ASNT Handbook, 1982 
ASTM E 165 
Elder, 1995 
Guazzo, 1994 
Guazzo, 1996 
Morton, 1987 
Akers, 1985 
Artz et al, 1961 
ASTM E 165 
British Standards Institute, 
B.S. 3263, current edition 
Chrai et al, Sep 1994 
Gilchrist et al, 1989 
EP VI 
Butler et al, 1978 
[radionuclides] 
McVean et al, 1972 
PDA Techn. Inform. Bull. 4, 1983 
Korczynski 1987 
Hansen et al, 1995 
IS0 8362-2 
Jones et al, 1995 
Lin, et al, 1982 
Marcy, 1995 
McVean et al, 1972 
Spitzley, 1993 
The Parenteral Society, 1992 
Morton et al, May-June 1989 
[copper ion] 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
24 
8.6 
Microbial 
Challenge, Aerosolization 
Description: 
Microbial 
challenge testing by aerosolized microorganisms 
involves placing 
product-filled or media-filled package units into a specially designed aerosolization chamber and 
’ 
charging 
the atmosphere within 
the chamber with 
a nebulized cloud or aerosol of 
microorganisms for a specified period of time. During the challenge test, the packages may be 
subjected to differential pressure challenges. The atmosphere within the chamber must be kept 
within defined humidity and temperature ranges and well circulated. 
After the challenge, the 
units are removed from the chamber. If media-filled product is used (or product which supports 
microbial growth), the units are then incubated and examined for microbial growth. Otherwise, 
the package contents are removed and exposed to media which is subsequently incubated and 
examined for growth. 
Validation 
Sensitivity 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Detection limit 
Critical test parameters 
Time to complete 
Microbial aerosolization challenge methods determine the 
presence of microorganisms that have penetrated a package 
exposed to aerosolized microorganisms. Critical validation 
parameters include the concentration and uniformity of 
aerosolized microorganisms, chamber temperature, pressure, 
and humidity settings and controls, and the ability of the media 
or product to support microbial growth. Positive controls 
should demonstrate growth. 
The sensitivity of the method is based on the incidence of 
ingress of aerosolized microorganisms into positive control 
package defects and the ability to detect such ingress. 
Qualitative 
There must be sufficient bacterial growth for media to visibly 
or analytically demonstrate growth. 
Media or product microbial growth promotion 
Stable microbial concentration in the aerosol (level and 
uniformity) 
Size of challenge organism 
Electrical charge on aerosolized particle 
Extent of microbial drying during test 
Time of exposure to the aerosol 
Chamber air flow patterns and speed 
Chamber temperature and humidity conditions 
Differential pressure exposure (optional) 
Exposure time is typically a few hours. 
Incubation time is several days, depending on the microbial 
challenge and incubation conditions 
25 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Equipment required 
Standard microbiological laboratory equipment 
Microbial growth support media or product 
Airtight test chamber 
Microbial spore nebulization unit with impinger, motor and fan 
Temperature, pressure, and humidity controls and monitors 
Chamber sterilization equipment 
Air samplers 
Standard microbiological laboratory equipment 
Stress on package 
Pressure differential (optional) 
Challenge Organism 
Typically, B. subtilis spores 
Product/Package Types 
Applicable to sterile pharmaceutical packages that cannot 
tolerate liquid immersion microbial challenge tests and that 
rely on tortuous path or barrier seals to ensure package 
integrity 
Literature References 
Akers, 1985 
ASTM F1585-95 
ASTM F 1608-95 
Blakistone, 1995 
Chen, et al, 1991 
Chrai, et al Sept. 1994 
Gnasasekharan, et al, 1995 
Hansen, et al, 1995 
Henke, et al, 1992 
Jones, et al, 1995 
Korczynski, 1987 
Morton, 1987 
Placencia, et al, 1988, 1989 
Reich, 1985 
Reich, 1986 
Spitz, 1994 
Spitzley, 1993 
Tallentire, et al, 1985 
8.7 
Microbial 
Challenge, Liquid Immersion 
Description: Microbial challenge testing by liquid immersion involves immersing filled package 
units into a liquid concentration of microorganisms for a specified period of time, removing the 
units, rinsing them, incubating the units and examining them for microbial growth. These units 
typically contain nutritive growth media, but may alternatively contain product, if not inhibitory 
to the growth of the challenge organism. During immersion, the packages may be exposed to 
extremes of pressure to simulate anticipated product processing or distribution conditions. 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1996, Supplement 
26 
Validation 
Sensitivity 
Microbial challenge by liquid immersion tests determine the 
ingress of microorganisms into a package that has been 
challenged with a liquid microbial challenge suspension. A 
method can be validated, provided the concentration of 
microorganisms .in the challenge suspension is sufficient, and 
the media or product within the container adequately supports 
microbial growth. Positive controls, if appropriate, should 
demonstrate growth. 
The sensitivity of the method is based on the incidence of 
ingress of liquid-borne microorganisms through positive 
control package defects and the ability to detect such ingress. 
Packaged media or product must support microbial growth. 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Qualitative 
Detection limit 
There must be sufficient bacterial growth for media to be 
visibly turbid or analytically detectable 
Critical test parameters 
Challenge media formulation and surface tension 
Size of challenge organism 
High viable count in challenge media at end of test (1 10 ‘/mL) 
Time of exposure to microorganism 
Differential pressure exposure 
Ability of sterile packaged media to support growth of 
challenge organism. 
Sensitivity of analytical method if used to detect growth 
Time to complete 
Exposure time can vary from a few minutes to several hours. 
Usual incubation time is 7-14 days 
Equipment required 
Standard microbiological laboratory equipment 
Microbial growth support media or product 
Challenge microorganism 
Immersion chamber capable of vacuum/pressure cycles and 
temperature control 
Incubation chamber 
For visual inspection, an inspection area with appropriate 
lighting and color background 
For analytical microbial growth determination, appropriate 
equipment and instrumentation 
Stress on package 
Pressure differential 
Wetting of seals from liquid media 
27 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
Challenge Organism 
Organisms reportedly used include: Escherichia coli, Serratia 
marcesans, Clostridium sporogenes, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Brevundimonas diminuta 
Product/Package Types 
Applicable to sterile pharmaceutical packages that can tolerate 
liquid immersion 
Literature References 
Akers, 1985 
Lin, et al, 1992 
Blakistone, 1995 
Marcy, 1995 
Chrai, et al, Sept. 1994 
McEldowney, et al, 1990 
Frieben, et al, 1982 
Morton, 1987 
Harper, 1995 
Morton, May/June 1989 
Kirsch, et al, 1997 
PDA, 1983 
Korczynski, 1987 
Rose, 1995 
Gnanasekharan, et al, 1995 
The Parenteral Society, 1992 
8.8 
Package Headspace Analysis 
Description: The headspace content of a package is analyzed and monitored for change over 
time. Package headspace analyses are useful for the measurement of leakage and permeation 
from packages that require a rarefied gas headspace to ensure long term product stability. 
The 
packages may be stored in a challenge environment of vacuum or concentrated rarefied gas to 
accelerate leakage/permeation. 
Validation 
This method can be validated for the measurement of gaseous 
leaks and permeation large enough to result in an unacceptable 
shift in headspace content over time. Validation studies should 
examine the ability of the analytical method to accurately 
sample and measure rarefied gas content in the package 
system. 
Sensitivity 
The sensitivity of headspace analyses is based on the ability to 
accurately sample and measure gas headspace content in the 
package system. Sensitivity can be verified using reference 
gas mixtures of known concentration. Gas headspace content 
tests can be very sensitive indicators of package leakage and 
permeation, especially after exposure of product to longer 
times or to a challenge environment designed to accelerate 
leakage and permeation. 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Quantitative 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
28 
Critical test parameters 
Time to complete 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
Product/Package Types 
Literature References 
Rarefied gas analytical instrument sensitivity and accuracy 
Headspace sampling technique 
Package headspace volume 
Efficiency of the establishment of initial gas headspace content 
Test times can be a few seconds to a few minutes 
Analytical gas content measurement instrumentation 
Headspace sampling device 
Puncture during headspace sampling 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages that require a rarefied 
gas headspace to ensure product stability. 
ASNT, 1982 
Wang, et al, 1997 
8.9 
Particulate Transmission 
Description: Package challenge testing by aerosolized dust involves placing the package units 
into a specially designed aerosolization chamber and charging the atmosphere within the 
chamber with aerosolized dust for a specified period of time. 
During the challenge test, the 
packages may be subjected to differential pressure challenges. 
The atmosphere within the 
chamber must be kept well circulated. 
After the challenge, the units are removed from the 
chamber and examined for evidence of dust ingress. 
Validation 
Particulate transmission tests determine the presence and 
location of leaks that can be penetrated by particulates. This 
method can be validated provided the particulate size is 
uniformly small, the dust concentration is sufficient and 
uniformly dispersed within the chamber, and the chamber 
circulation system settings and controls are adequate. Positive 
controls, where appropriate, should demonstrate dust ingress. 
Sensitivity 
The sensitivity of the method is based on the incidence of 
penetration of aerosolized dust into positive control package 
defects and the ability to detect such penetration. 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Qualitative 
Detection limit 
There must be sufficient dust for visible detection. 
29 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Critical test parameters 
Time to complete 
Exposure time is typically a few hours. 
Equipment required 
Particulate source 
Airtight test chamber 
Stress on package 
Challenge Tracer Dust 
Product/Package Types 
Size and uniformity of challenge dust particle 
Concentration of dust in aerosol 
Electrical charge on dust 
Time of exposure to dust 
Chamber air flow patterns and speed 
Chamber temperature and humidity conditions 
Differential pressure exposure (optional) 
Dust aerosolization unit with motor and fan 
Pressure controls and monitors 
Pressure differential (optional) 
Carbon black, talcum powder, powdered chalk, smoke 
Applicable to sterile pharmaceutical packages that rely on a 
tortuous path or barrier system. 
Literature References 
Jones, et al, 1995 
8.10 
Residual Gas Ionization 
Description: A high voltage, high frequency field is applied to packages sealed under vacuum. 
The field causes residual headspace gas to ionize. A conducting plate located near the package 
detects the level of ionization current. Ionization above an established limit triggers rejection of 
the package. 
Validation 
The residual gas ionization method can be validated for the 
detection of insufficient vacuum in packages designed to 
maintain a minimal vacuum level. Validation studies should 
examine the ability of the ionization sensors to differentiate 
between packages containing various known levels of vacuum 
as a function of voltage, frequency, or package headspace. 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
Sensitivity 
The sensitivity of a residual gas ionization method is based on 
the ability to accurately detect pressure exceeding a desired 
acceptance limit in evacuated packages. Instrument sensitivity 
can be determined using control packages containing known 
pressure levels. It is possible to detect smaller leaks and 
permeation rates with this method as the time interval from 
when the package was originally evacuated to the test time is 
lengthened. 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Qualitative 
Critical test parameters 
Voltage 
Frequency 
Conducting plate and voltage field positioning 
Package component ionization potential 
Package headspace volume 
Gaseous content of the residual headspace 
Package component geometry 
Time to complete 
Less than a second. 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
Gas ionization instruments 
Package handling systems 
High frequency high voltage spark 
Product/Package Types 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages designed to maintain a 
partial vacuum in the headspace. The package tested must be 
relatively non-ionizing. 
Impact of the voltage spark on product stability should be 
considered. 
Literature References 
Wu, 1989 
Crist, 1994 
8.11 
Tracer Gas Leak Detection 
Description: A tracer gas is placed on one side of the package seal. An inert carrier gas is passed 
across the opposite seal side. 
Tracer gas is detected by appropriate analytical methods. 
Examples of analytical methods include coulometric 
detectors for oxygen detection and 
photoelectric sensors for carbon dioxide and water vapor detection. This test is useful for the 
measurement of leakage and permeation from packages that require a specific gas headspace to 
ensure long term product stability, or for products that are susceptible to degradation upon 
exposure to environmental gases or vapors. While oxygen, carbon dioxide, and water vapor are 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
typically selected for testing pharmaceutical packages, a wide variety of other tracer gases can be 
used as well (see Ref. Elder, 1995; ASNT, 1982). 
Validation 
Sensitivity 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Quantitative 
Critical test parameters 
Gas analytical instrument sensitivity and accuracy 
Package test fixture design and dimensions 
Temperature and humidity of the testing environment 
Inert carrier gas temperature and humidity 
Concentration of the tracer gas in the package 
Concentration of tracer gas in the effluent atmosphere 
Time to complete 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
Product/Package Types 
Literature References 
This method can be validated for the detection, location, and 
measurement of gaseous leaks and permeation large enough to 
result in an unacceptable shift in headspace content over time 
or in product degradation. Validation studies should examine 
the ability of the analytical method to accurately measure gas 
leakage/permeation rate in the package system. 
The sensitivity of tracer gas detection methods is based on the 
ability to accurately measure tracer gas leakage/permeation rate 
in the package system. Instrument sensitivity can be 
established using reference gas mixtures of known tracer 
concentration. Test method sensitivity is largely dependent on 
the design of the test fixture. 
Several hours to a few days 
Analytical gas measurement instrumentation with package test 
fixture. 
Carrier gas source 
Tracer gas 
None 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages that are required to 
maintain a specified leakage/permeation rate of gas through the 
package to ensure product stability. 
Amini, 198 1 
ASNT, 1982 
ASTM E 427 
ASTM E 498 
ASTM E 1603 
Demorest, 1988 
Demorest, 1992 
Demorest, et al, 
1996 
Elder, 1995 
Gnasasekharan, 
1994 
Guazzo, 1996 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
32 
8.12 
Ultrasonic Detection of Gas Flow 
Description: Containers under pressure are placed near an ultrasonic sensor capable of detecting 
acoustic energy in the ultrasonic range of 20-100 kHz. Ultrasonic sensors will detect movement 
of air or gasses out of package leaks large enough to create turbulent gas flow. 
Smaller leaks 
may be detected by the application of a special surfactant to the seal. Bursting of surfactant 
bubbles is detected ultrasonically. There must be enough package headspace to permit detectable 
gas flow out of the package. 
Validation 
Sensitivity 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Critical test parameters 
Time to complete 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
Product/Package Types 
Ultrasonic gas flow detection methods can be validated for the 
detection and location of leaks in package systems sealed under 
pressure or in packages which can be “squeezed” or otherwise 
manipulated to create pressure inside the package. Validation 
studies should examine the ability of the ultrasonic sensor to 
detect control leaks as a function of instrument sensitivity 
settings, internal package pressure, package-sensor positioning, 
background noise, and line speeds. 
Sensitivity of the method is limited by the presence of 
turbulent flow gas leakage and the ability to detect such flow 
using positive control package leaks or standard gaseous 
reference leaks. 
Qualitative 
Sensitivity settings 
Background noise 
Internal package pressure 
Line speeds 
Package-sensor positioning 
Test time is almost instantaneous. 
Ultrasonic detection instrumentation 
Package handling system for squeezing package and/or 
positioning of the package near the sensor. 
Surfactant for ultrasonic detection of bubble breakage 
Possible squeezing of flexible packages 
Possible surfactant wetting of seal surface 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages that do not rely on a 
tortuous path or barrier seal, that contain a headspace volume, 
that are sealed under pressure or that are flexible enough to 
permit pressurization by squeezing. 
33 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
Literature References 
ASNT, 1982 
ASTM E 1002 
Bandes, 1988 
Elder, 1995 
Guazzo, 1997 
8.13 
Ultrasonic Imaging 
Description: Very short ultrasound pulses are generated at frequencies up to several hundred 
MHz. These ultrasound frequencies are focused on the container seal by acoustic lenses. Once 
inside the package the ultrasonic pulses may be absorbed, scattered or reflected depending on the 
change in the material. The reflected ultrasound echoes are used to create an image that can be 
analyzed for the presence of improper sealing, delamination, gaps, or product-contaminated 
seals. Alternate ultrasonic inspection methods work by contact transmission of ultrasonic energy 
through the package seal using an array of transmitters and receivers in direct contact with the 
seal region. 
Validation 
Sensitivity 
Ultrasonic imaging methods can be validated for the detection 
and location of seal imperfections in flat thermal or adhesive 
bonded seals, for instance a pouch. Validation studies should 
examine the ability of the ultrasonic sensor to detect control 
leaks as a function of ultrasound pulse generation and 
transmission variables, instrument sensor sensitivity settings, 
transmission and detection sensor positioning, package 
materials of construction, and package geometry. Validation 
studies should reflect the range of acceptable package sealing 
parameters. 
Sensitivity of an ultrasonic imaging method is based on the 
ability to detect positive control package defects such as gaps, 
seal contaminants, package material defects, and other seal 
inconsistencies. 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Qualitative 
Critical test parameters 
Sensor sensitivity settings 
Quantity of transmitters and sensors per seal surface area 
Package-sensor and transmission positionings 
Ultrasound frequency 
Ultrasound pulse amplitude 
Package materials of construction 
Package geometry 
Dry package testing vs. water immersion testing 
Vol. 52, No. 4 I July-August 
1998, Supplement 
34 
Time to complete 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
Product/Package Types 
Literature References 
Adams, 1995 
Test time is less than one second 
Ultrasonic detection and imaging instrumentation 
Package handling, system for positioning packages in the 
sensor. 
None 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages that do not rely on a 
tortuous path or barrier seal, that contain a headspace volume, 
that are sealed under pressure or that are flexible enough to 
permit pressurization by squeezing. 
8.14 
Vacuum/Pressure 
Decay 
Description: A pressure differential is applied to a package and the change in pressure or vacuum 
is measured either inside the package itself using a test fixture, or outside in a sealed package test 
chamber. 
The change in test chamber pressure or vacuum can be determined by absolute 
pressure measurement, or it can be determined using a differential pressure manometer in which 
the test chamber pressure change is compared to that of a control package. 
Validation 
Vacuum/pressure decay methods can be validated for the 
detection or measurement of gaseous leaks large enough to 
allow a measurable change in pressure in the package or the 
test chamber over the duration of the test. Validation studies 
should examine the ability of the vacuum/pressure decay 
instrument to detect control leaks as a function of test chamber 
geometry, instrument sensor capabilities, differential pressure 
testing conditions, test time, and environmental temperature 
conditions. 
Sensitivity 
Sensitivity of the vacuum/pressure decay method is based on 
the ability to detect and/or measure a change in pressure or 
vacuum resulting from gaseous leaks. Instrument sensitivity 
can be verified using positive control package defects or 
gaseous reference leaks. Test method sensitivity is greatly 
influenced by a number of factors. These include those 
mentioned under validation above as well as the critical 
parameters listed below. Generally, pressure decay is 
considered a more sensitive test that vacuum rise, and 
differential pressure is potentially more sensitive than absolute 
pressure sensors. 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Qualitative or quantitative, depending on the instruments and 
test conditions used. 
Critical test parameters 
Pressure/vacuum sensor mechanism of operation and 
capabilities 
Volume of space being tested (test chamber or package 
headspace) 
Test chamber geometry 
Time allowed for measured pressure change to occur 
Stabilization time 
Differential pressure applied to package 
Water vapor pressure inside package 
Atmospheric pressure 
Temperature of package and test system 
Package creep effects when exposed to differential pressure 
Time to complete 
Test time may range from less than a second to a few minutes. 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
Leak test instrumentation including vacuum or pressure 
sensors in absolute or differential pressure sensing mode 
Differential pressure source, monitors and controls 
Temperature and humidity controls and monitors 
Differential pressure 
Product/Package Types 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages that do not rely on a 
tortuous path or barrier seal and that can tolerate a differential 
pressure applied to the seal area. 
When selecting the appropriate testing configuration and 
parameters, consider the impact of package headspace volume 
(vacuum testing requires a defined headspace), and the 
presence of product which may plug the leaks (vacuum testing 
may pull liquids, semi-solids, or even moisture in the package 
into the seal area thus plugging leaks), and the ability of the 
package to tolerate differential pressure (vacuum rise tests are 
limited to a differential pressure of 1 atm whereas pressure 
decay differential pressure may be much greater). 
Vol. 52, No. 4 I July-August 
1998, Supplement 
36 
Literature References 
ASNT, 1982 
Blakistone, 1995 
Chrai, et al, 1994 
Elder, 1995 
Gnanasekharan, et al, 1992 
Gnanasekharan, et al, 1994 
Guazzo, 1994 
Guazzo, 1996 
Hoffmann, 1996 
Jones, et al, 1995 
Morton, 1987 
Morton, et al, Mar-Apr 1989 
Morton, et al, May-Jun 1989 
Snow, 1992 
Stauffer, 1988 
The Parenteral Society, 1985 
Yam, 1995 
8.15 
Vacuum/Pressure 
Retention 
Description: 
Vacuum/pressure retention tests consist of directly measuring the vacuum or 
pressure within a package headspace by typically using a package piercing device and an 
absolute pressure gauge. Vacuum/pressure retention tests are used for packages that are designed 
to maintain either a vacuum or positive pressure within the package as a function of product 
stability. 
Validation 
Vacuum/pressure retention methods can be validated for the 
detection or measurement of gaseous leaks large enough to 
allow a measurable change in pressure in the test chamber over 
the duration of the test. Validation studies should examine the 
ability to access the package headspace and accurately measure 
headspace pressure. 
Sensitivity 
Sensitivity of the vacuum/pressure retention method is based 
on the ability to detect and/or measure a change in pressure or 
vacuum resulting from gaseous leaks. Test method sensitivity 
is dependent on the ability to access the package headspace 
without creating a loss of pressure or vacuum. 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Qualitative or quantitative 
Critical test parameters 
Pressure/vacuum sensor mechanism of operation and 
capabilities 
Volume of space being tested (test chamber or package 
headspace) 
Time allowed for measured pressure change to occur 
Vacuum or pressure initially introduced to the package 
Water or other vapor pressure inside package 
Temperature of package and test system 
Technique for piercing or accessing package headspace 
Time to complete 
Test time is a few seconds. 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
Equipment required 
Stress on package 
Absolute pressure gauge 
Temperature controls and monitors 
Pressure or vacuum 
Product/Package Types 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages that are designed to 
maintain a positive pressure or a vacuum in the headspace over 
product shelf-life. 
Literature References 
ASNT, 1982 
Morton, 1987 
Chrai, et al, 1994 
PDA, 1981 
Crist, 1994 
Rhea, et al, 1984 
Gnanasekharan, et al, 1992 
Wang, et al, 1997 
8.16 
Visual Inspection 
Description: The package is examined visually by human or by electronic inspection devices for 
evidence of product leakage. The test may be accompanied by additional package challenges of 
temperature or pressure extremes to increase the sensitivity of the test. 
Validation 
Visual inspection for leakage determines the presence or 
location of leaks penetrated by the contained product. This 
method can be validated for the detection of larger leaks or 
package imperfections. Validation will depend on the 
reliability and sensitivity of the mode of leakage detection. 
Sensitivity 
The sensitivity of the method is based on the incidence of 
product migration through positive control package defects and 
the ability to detect such migration. 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Qualitative test 
Detection limit 
There must be sufficient product or contents leakage to permit 
visible or electronic detection. 
Critical test parameters 
Package cleanliness 
Differential pressure and temperature exposure (optional) 
Visible inspection parameters include light intensity, 
magnification, time, background, angle of inspection 
Visual inspector training and experience 
Electronic inspection parameters are dependent on the mode of 
inspection 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
38 
Time to complete 
From less than a second for electronic inspection to several 
minutes by visual inspection. 
Equipment required 
Temperature and/or pressure controls and monitors are 
’ 
required for optional package stress testing 
Visual inspection requires appropriate lighting, light meters, 
magnification, and color background. 
Electronic inspection requires appropriate product handling 
equipment and inspection instrumentation 
Stress on package 
Pressure or temperature differential (optional) 
Product/Package Types 
Applicable to all pharmaceutical packages and closure/seal 
types 
Literature References 
ASNT, 1982 
Hansen, et al, 1995 
ASTM E 165 
Jones, et al, 1995 
Chrai, et al, 1994 
Lin, et al, 1982 
Gnasasekharan, et al, 1992 
Shaw, 1995 
8.17 
Volumetric 
Gas Flow 
Description: A pressure differential is applied to a package and the outward flow rate of gas is 
measured. 
Validation 
Volumetric gas flow methods can be validated for the 
measurement of gaseous leaks large enough to allow a 
measurable flow of gas out of the package over the duration of 
the test. Validation studies should examine the ability of the 
volumetric flow rate instrument to measure control leaks as a 
function of instrument sensor capabilities, differential pressure 
testing conditions, and test time. 
Sensitivity 
The sensitivity of volumetric gas flow methods is based on the 
ability to accurately measure gaseous flow out of a package 
under positive pressure. Instrument sensitivity can be verified 
using gaseous reference leaks or positive control package 
defects. Test method sensitivity is influenced primarily by 
flow meter accuracy, test time, and the differential pressure 
applied to the package. Generally, volumetric gas flow is not 
as sensitive a test as vacuum / pressure decay methods. 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Quantitative 
39 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Critical test parameters 
Flow meter accuracy 
Time of test 
Differential pressure applied to package 
Time to complete 
A few seconds 
Equipment required 
Leak test instrumentation equipped with flow meters 
Differential pressure source, monitors and controls 
Stress on package 
Differential pressure 
Product/Package Types 
Applicable to pharmaceutical packages that do not rely on a 
tortuous path or barrier seal and that can tolerate a differential 
pressure applied to the seal area. 
Literature References 
This test is particularly useful for checking critical orifice sizes 
of specialty packages or devices. The test can often be used 
instead of vacuum/pressure decay for packages that tend to 
deform under pressure. 
ASNT, 1982 
Guazzo, 1996 
Gnanasekharan, et al, 1992 
Hoffmann, 1996 
Gnanasekharan, et al, 1994 
Snow, 1992 
8.18 
Weight Loss/Gain 
Description: The container is filled with either a volatile liquid or solid, or a hygroscopic 
material such as a desiccant. The container is stored’ in an environment intended to promote 
migration of the substances out of the package containing volatile materials, or to promote 
migration of water vapor into the package containing hygroscopic materials. 
Leakage plus 
permeation are measured in units of package weight loss or weight gain. For greater accuracy, it 
is recommended, although not required, that control packages filled with inert materials be tested 
at the same time as the test units. Each time the test units are weighed, the control packages’ 
weight change should be subtracted from the change in test unit weights. 
Validation 
Weight loss or weight gain methods can be validated for the 
measurement of leaks of a wide variety of sizes, as well as for 
permeation measurement. Validation will depend on the test 
method parameters and the sensitivity of the balance used to 
monitor weight change. Acceptance limits for weight loss or 
gain are generally established as a function of the product- 
package.system. 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
40 
Sensitivity 
The sensitivity of a weight loss/gain method is dependent on 
the extent of weight loss or gain. The weight change of the test 
units must vary significantly from the control units, and should 
be above the limit of balance sensitivity. 
Quantitative/Qualitative 
Quantitative 
Critical test parameters 
The volatility (weight loss) or hygroscopicity (weight gain) of 
the packaged material 
Time allowed for weight change 
Challenge environment conditions of temperature, and either 
pressure (weight loss) or relative humidity (weight loss or 
gain) 
Handling of samples and weighing techniques 
Time to complete 
A few minutes may be required for highly volatile materials 
(e.g., dry ice) 
Otherwise, several days or weeks may be required. 
Equipment required 
Balance 
For weight gain: 
l 
Relative humidity storage chamber 
l 
Storage chamber temperature and humidity monitors 
For weight loss: 
l 
Appropriate package storage environment with monitors 
l 
Optional: elevated temperature, differential pressure with 
appropriate monitors and controls 
Stress on package 
Environmental extremes of temperature, pressure, humidity. 
Product/Package Types 
Applicable to all pharmaceutical packages and seal types 
intended to contain products susceptible to weight change over 
shelf-life. 
Literature References 
Amini, 198 1 
Cilento, 1977 
Guazzo, 1996 
Morton, 1987 
USP <661> 
USP <671> 
41 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
9. 
Bibliography 
Adams, T, “Hidden seal defects are target of new acoustic imaging technology,” Food & Drug 
Packaging, April 1995. 
Akers, M.J., Chapter 4: 
“Package Integrity Testing,” Parenteral Quality Control: 
Sterility, 
Pyrogen, Particulate & Package Integrity Testing, 1”’ edition, M.J. Akers, ed., Marcel Dekker, 
NY, copy 1985. 
Amini, M.A., “Testing permeation and leakage rates of pharmaceutical containers,” 
Pharm. 
Technol., p. 39-43, Dec. 1981. 
Amini, M.A., Morrow, D.R., “Leakage and permeation: 
Theory and practical applications,” 
Package Development & Systems, p. 37-44, May/Jun 1979. 
Am. Sot. For Nondestructive Testing (ASNT), Nondestructive Testing Handbook, Vol. 1.) Leak 
Testing, 2”d ed., ASNT pub., Columbus OH, copy 1982. 
Am. Sot. For Testing and Materials (ASTM), 19 16 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 19 103 : 
Testing Methods for: 
D 3078 
Leaks in heat sealed flexible pouches 
D 4991-94 
Leakage testing of empty containers by vacuum method 
E 165-94 
Liquid penetrant examination 
E 493-94 
Leaks using the mass spectrometer leak detector in the inside-out 
testing mode 
E 498-94 
Leaks using the mass spectrometer leak detector or the residual gas 
analyzer in the tracer probe mode 
E 499-94 
Leaks using the mass spectrometer leak detector in the detector 
probe mode 
E 515-94 
Leaks using bubble emission techniques 
E 1002-94 
Leaks using ultrasonics 
E 1603-94 
Leakage measurement using the mass spectrometer leak detector or 
residual gas analyzer in the hood mode 
F1585-95 
Integrity testing for porous barrier medical devices 
F 1608-95 
Microbial ranking of porous packaging materials (exposure chamber 
method) 
Practices for: 
E 427-94 
Testing for leaks using the halogen leak detector (alkali-ion diode) 
E 908-91 
Calibrating gaseous reference leaks 
Guides for: 
E 432-91 
Guide for the selection of a. leak testing method 
E 479-9 1 
Guide for preparation of a leak testing specification 
E 1916: 
Terminology for nondestructive examination 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
42 
Anonymous, “Ciba-Geigy evaluates faster ample test that may spot flaws better,” Food & Drug 
Packaging, p. D-3, Jan 1996. 
Arndt, Jr., G.W., Charbonneau, J., “Nondestructive electroconductivity testing of packages for 
hermetic integrity,” Chapter 16, Plastic Package Integrity Testing. Assuring Seal Quality. B. 
Blakistone, C. Harper, ed., Institute of Packaging Professionals/Food Processor’s Institute, pub., 
copy 1995. 
Artz, W.J., Gloor, Jr., W.T., Reese, D.R., “Study of various methods of detecting leaks in 
hermetically sealed ampules,” J. Pharm. Sci., Vol. 50, p. 258-262, 1961. 
Axelson, L., Cavlin, S., Nordstrom, J., “Aseptic integrity and microhole determination of 
packages by electrolytic conductance measurements,” Pack. Technol. Sci., Vol 3: 141-162, 1990. 
Ball, B., Yamanaka, A., “Validation of Nikka Densok Pinhole Inspector for BFS Applications,” 
Blow/Fill/Seal News, Jan. 1997. 
Bandes, A.S., “Leak detection methods through airborne ultrasound,” 
J. Packaging Technol., 
Vol. 2, No. 3, p. 110-l 11, Jun 1988. 
Blakistone, B., 
Harper, C., “New developments in seal integrity testing,” Chapter 1, Plastic 
Package Integrity Testing. 
Assuring Seal Quality, B. Blakistone, C. Harper, ed., Institute of 
Packaging Professionals/Food Processor’s Institute, pub., copy 1995. 
British Standards Institute, B.S. 3263: 1960, “Specification 
for rubber closures for injectable 
products,” British Standards House, 2 Park St., London, UK, 1962. 
Butler, L.D., Coupal, J.J., DeLuca, P.P., “The detection of ampul leakers using short-lived 
radionuclides,” J. Parenter. Drug Assoc., Vol. 32, No. 1, p. 2-8, Jan/Feb 1978. 
Chen, C., Harte, B., Lai, C., Pestka, J., Henyon, D., “Assessment of package integrity using a 
spray cabinet technique,” J. Food Protection, Vol. 54, No. 8, p. 643-647, 1991. 
Chrai, S., Heffernan, 
G., Myers, T., “Glass vial container-closure 
integrity 
testing-an 
overview,” 
Pharm. Technol., p. 162-173, Sep 1994. 
Cilento., R.D., “Methods for evaluating hermetic closure for screw-capped bottles,” J. Pharm. 
Sci., Vol. 66, No., 3, p. 333-336, Mar 1977. 
Connor, J.T., “In process verification of closure seal integrity,” J. Parenter. Sci. Technol., Vol. 
37, p. 14-19, 1983. 
Crist, B., “Time-dependence of pressure in lyophilization vials,” PDA J. Pharm. Sci. & Technol., 
Vol. 48, No. 4, p. 189-196, Jul/Aug 1994. 
43 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Demorest, R., “Nondestructive 
leak detection of blister packs and other sterile medical 
packages,” J. Packaging Technol., Vol. 2, No. 5, Oct. 1988. 
Demorest, R., “Recent developments in testing the permeability of good barriers,” J. of Plastic 
Film & Sheeting, Vol. 8, Apr 1992. 
Demorest, R., “Measurement of water vapor permeability: 
Recent developments and new 
standards,” presented at Packforsk Symposium, Stockholm, Sweden, Mar 23, 1995 (available 
through MOCON, Modern Controls, Inc., Minneapolis, MN). 
Demorest, R., Mayer, D.W., “Advanced measuring methods enhance WVTR testing,” Packaging 
Technol. & Engineering, May/June 1996. 
Elder, G., “Leak testing; A quality assurance NDT method,” ASTM Standardization News, p. 
46-49, Jan 1995. 
European Pharmacopoeia (E.P.) V1.2.3.1. Rubber closures. Self-sealing test. 
Frieben, W.R., Folck, R.J., Devisser, A., “Integrity 
testing of vial closure systems used for 
parenteral products,” J. Parenter. Drug Assoc., Vol. 36, p. 112-l 16, 1982. 
Gilchrist, J.E., Rhea, U.S., Dickerson, R.S., Campbell, J.E., “Helium leak test for micron-sized 
holes in canned foods,” J. Food Protection, Vol. 48, No. 10, p. 856-860, 1985. 
Gilchrist, J.,E., Shah, D.B., Radle, D.C., Dickerson, Jr., R.W., “Leak detection in flexible retort 
pouches,” J. Food Protection, Vol. 52, No. 6, p. 412-415, Jun 1989. 
Gnasasekharan, V., Floros, J.D., “A theoretical perspective on the minimum leak size,” Chapter 
8, Plastic Package Integrity Testing. 
Assuring Seal Quality, B. Blakistone, C. Harper, ed., 
Institute of Packaging Professionals/Food Processor’s Institute, pub., copy 1995. 
Gnasasekharan, V., Floros, J.D., “ Automated nondestructive package integrity testing,” Food 
Processing Automation II, Proceedings of the May 4-6,1992 conference, Lexington, KY, ASPE 
pub., 02-92, St. Joseph, MI, copy 1992. 
Gnasasekharan, V., Floros, J.D., “Package integrity evaluation: Criteria for selecting a method,” 
Packaging Technol. & Engineering, p. 44-48, Aug/Sep 1994. 
Guazzo, D.M., “Package integrity testing,” Chapter 4 of Parenteral Quality Control: 
Sterility, 
Pyrogen, Particulate, and Package Integrity Testing, 2’ld ed., Akers, M.J., ed., Marcel Dekker, 
NY, copy 1994. 
Guazzo, D.M., “Current approaches in leak testing pharmaceutical packages,” PDA J. Pharm. 
Sci. & Technol., Vol., 50, No. 6, p. 378-385, Nov/Dec 1996. 
Vol. 52, No. 4 ! July-August 
1998, Supplement 
44 
Hansen, J., Jones, L., Anderson, H., Larsen, C., Miller, H., Scholla, M., Spitzley, J., Baldwin, A., 
“In quest of sterile packaging: 
Part I. Approaches to package testing,” 
Medical Device & 
Diagnos. Ind., p. 56-61, Aug 1995. 
Harper, C., “A microbial challenge procedure for identification 
of defective flexible plastic 
pouch seals,” 
Chapter 10, 
Plastic Package Integrity Testing. 
Assuring Seal Quality, B. 
Blakistone, C. Harper, ed., Institute of Packaging Professionals/Food Processor’s Institute, pub., 
copy 1995. 
Health Industry Manufacturers 
Assoc. (HIMA), 
Report 78-411, “Microbial 
methods for 
assessment of package integrity,” Washington, D.C., 1979. 
Her&e, C., Riech, R., “The current status of microbial-barrier 
testing of medical device 
packaging,” Medical Device & Diagnos. Ind., p. 46-49, 94, Aug. 1992. 
Hoffmann, J., “Computerized 
dry-air leak testing for process control,” 
Medical Device & 
Diagnos. Ind., p. 204-208, Jan 1996. 
ISO/DIS 
11607, “Packaging 
for 
terminally 
sterilized 
medical 
devices,” 
International 
Organization for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland, 1995. 
IS0 8362-2, “Injection containers for injectables and accessories - Part 2: Closures for injection 
vials,” International Organization for Standardization, 1988. 
Jones, L., Hansen, J., Anderson, H., Larsen, C., Miller, H., Scholla, M., Spitzley, J., Baldwin, A., 
“In quest of sterile packaging: 
Part 2. Physical package integrity testing methods,” Medical 
Device & Diagnos. Ind., p. 81-85, Sep 1995. 
Kirsch, L., Nguyen, L., Moeckly, 
C., “Pharmaceutical container/closure integrity I: Mass 
spectrometry-based helium leak rate detection for rubber-stoppered glass vials,” J. Parenter. Sci. 
& Technol., Vol. 5 1, No. 5, p. 187-l 94, Sep./Ott. 1997. 
Kirsch, L., Nguyen, IL., Moeckly, C., Gerth, R., “Pharmaceutical container/closure integrity II: 
The relationship between microbial ingress and helium leak rates in rubber-stoppered glass 
vials,” J. Parenter. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 5 1, No. 5, p. 195-202, Sep./Ott. 1997. 
Kirsch, L., Nguyen, L., Gerth, R., “Pharmaceutical container/closure integrity III: Validation of 
the helium leak rate method for rigid pharmaceutical containers,” J. Parenter. Sci. & Technol., 
Vol. 51, No. 5, p. 203-207, Sep./Ott. 1997. 
Korczynski, 
M., “Evaluation 
of closure integrity,” 
Aseptic Pharmaceutical Manufacturing: 
Technology for the 1990’s, W.P. Olson, ed., Interpharm Press, Buffalo Grove, IL, copy 1987. 
Leshniowski, W., Novak, R., Morrissey, R., “Assessment of microbial barrier properties of 
packaging materials,” Chapter 30, Developments in Industrial Microbiology, 
Vol. 22, p. 381- 
392, 1980. 
45 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology 
Lin, R.C., King, P.H., Johnson, M.R., “Examination of closures for integrity,” Chapter 22, FDA 
Bacteriological Analytical Manual, 7”’ ed., p. 289-367, 1982. 
Ludwig, J.D., Nolan, P.D., Davis, C.W., “Automated method for determining Instron residual 
seal force of glass vial/rubber closure systems,” J. Parenter. Sci & Technol., Vol. 47, No. 5, p. 
21 l-253, Sep/Oct 1993. 
Ludwig, J.D., Davis, D. W., “Automated method for determining Instron residual seal force of 
glass vial/rubber closure systems Part II. 13 mm vials,” PDA J. of Pharm. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 
49, No. 5, p. 253-256, Sep/Oct 1995. 
Marcy, J., “Integrity testing and biotest procedures’ for heat sealed containers,” Chapter 6 of 
Plastic Packaging Integrity Testing. Assuring Seal Quality, B. Blakistone, C. Harper, ed., 
Institute of Packaging Professionals/Food Processor’s Institute, pub., copy 1995. 
McEldowney, 
S., Fletcher, M., “The effect of physical and microbiological 
factors on food 
container leakage,” J. Applied Bacterial., Vol. 69, p. 190-205, 1990. 
McVean, D.E., Tuerck, P.A., Christenson, G.L., Cartensen, J.T., “Inadequacies in leakage test 
procedures for flame-sealed ampules,” J. Pharm. Sci., Vol. 61, p. 1609-1611, 1972. 
Moldenhauer, J., Bass, S., Kupinski, M., Walters, M., Rubio, S., “Microbial barrier assessment of 
tyvek stopper packaging for rubber closures,” J. Pharm. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 50, No. ,6, p. 391- 
398, Nov./Dee. 1996. 
Morton, D.K., “Container/closure integrity of parenteral vials,” 
J. Parenter. Sci. & Technol., 
Vol. 41,No. 5, p. 145-158, Sep/Oct 1987. 
Morton, 
D.K., 
Lordi, 
N.G., 
“Residual 
seal force measurement of parenteral vials. 
I. 
Methodology,” J. Parenter. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 42, No. 1, p. 23-29, Jan/Feb 1988. 
Morton, D.K., Lordi, N.G., “Residual seal force measurement of parenteral vials. II. Elastomer 
Evaluation,” J. Parenter. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 42, No. 2, p. 57-61, Mar/Apr 1988. 
Morton, D.K., Lordi, N.G., Ambrosio, T.J., “Quantitative 
and mechanistic measurements of 
container/closure integrity. Leakage quantitation,” 
J. Parenter. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 43, No. 2, 
p. 88-97, Mar/Apr 1989. 
Morton, D.K., Lordi, N.G., Troutman, L.H., Ambrosio, T.J., “Quantitative 
and mechanistic 
measurements of container/closure integrity. 
Bubble, liquid and microbial leakage tests,” 
J. 
Parenter. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 43, No. 3, p. 104-108 May/Jun 1989. 
PDA, “Aspects of container/closure integrity,” PDA Technical Information Bulletin No. 4, PDA, 
Bethesda, MD, pub, copy 1983. 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
46 
Placencia, A.M., Peeler, J.T., “Package integrity of medical devices using microbial test methods 
and comparative studies using physical methods,” World Conference on Packaging 89., 
Hamburg, Proceedings of the IAPRI Congress, Sec. 15.2, p. 53 l-540, Sep 27-29, 1989. 
Placencia, A.M., Arin, M.L., Peeler, J.T., Oxborrow, G.S., “Physical tests are not enough,” 
Medical Device & Diagnos. Ind., Sep 1988. 
Reich, R., “Packaging films: 
A method of microbial barrier evaluation,” Medical Device & 
Diagnos. Ind. p. 19-2 1, Feb 1986. 
Reich, R., R., “A method for evaluating the microbial barrier properties of intact packages,” 
Medical Device & Diagnos. Ind., p. 80-88, Mar 1985. 
Rhea, U.S., Gilchrist, J.E., Peeler, J.T., Shah, D.B., “Comparison of helium leak test and vacuum 
leak test using canned foods: Collaborative study,” J. Assoc. Off. Analytical Chemists, Vol. 67, 
No. 5, p. 942-945, 1984. 
Rice, J., “Nondestructive testing of flexible lid seal integrity,” Food Processing, p. 70-71, Sep 
1986. 
Rose, D., “Microperfusion 
permeation testing,” Chapter 11, Plastic Package Integrity Testing. 
Assuring Seal Quality, B. Blakistone, C. Harper, ed., Institute of Packaging Professionals/Food 
Processor’s Institute, pub., copy 1995. 
Shaw, E.E., Litchfield, J.B., Reid, J.F., Harper, C.L., “Detection of defects in plastic laminated 
foil pouch packages: Machine vision sensing,” Chapter 15, Plastic Package Integrity Testing. 
Assuring Seal Quality, B. Blakistone, C. Harper, ed., Institute of Packaging Professionals/Food 
Processor’s Institute, pub., copy 1995. 
Snow, D.W., “Microprocessor based systems for leak and flow testing,” Medical Device & 
Diagnos. Ind., p. 104-107, Apr 1992. 
Spitz, J., “The relevance of microbial challenge testing to package sterility,” 
Medical Device & 
Diagnos. Ind., p. 142-148, Jan 1994. 
Spitzley, J., “How effective is microbial challenge testing for intact sterile packaging?’ Medical 
Device & Diagnos. Ind., p. 44-46, Aug 1993. 
Stauffer, T., “Non-destructive 
in-line detection of leaks in food and beverage packages-An 
analysis of methods,” J. Packaging Technology, Vol. 2, No. 4, p. 147-149, Aug 1988. 
Tallentire, 
A., Sinclair, C.S., “Microbiological 
barrier properties of uncoated and coated 
spunbonded polyolefin (tyvek),” Medical Device & Diagnos. Ind., p. 5 l-54, Ott 1985. 
47 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science &Technology 
The Parenteral Society, “The prevention and detection of leaks in ampoules, vials and other 
parenteral containers,” 
Technical Monograph No. 3, The Parenteral Society, pub, Wiltshire, 
Great Britain, copy 1992. 
United States Pharmacopoeia (USP) 23, <71> Sterility Tests, United States Pharmacopeial 
Convention, Inc., Rockville, MD, copy 1994. 
United States Pharmacopoeia (USP) 23, <661> Containers, United States Pharmacopeial 
Convention, Inc., Rockville, MD, copy 1994. 
United States Pharmacopoeia (USP) 23, <671> Containers - Permeation, United 
States 
Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc., Rockville, MD, copy 1994. 
United States Pharmacopoeia (USP) 23, ~121 l> 
Sterilization 
and Sterility 
Assurance of 
Compendia1 Articles, United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc., Rockville, MD, copy 1994. 
United States Pharmacopoeia (USP) Pharmacopoeia1 Forum, <1207> Sterile Product Packaging - 
Integrity Evaluation, Vol. 23, No. 6, p. 5066-5068, Nov.-Dec. 1997. 
Varian Vacuum Products, Introduction to helium mass spectrometer leak detection, Varian 
Vacuum Products, Lexington, MA, pub., copy 1995. 
Villiger, T., “Leakage testing of ampules. Validation method for high voltage pinhole detectors,” 
Pharm. Ind., Vol. 49, p. 1071-1074, 1987. 
Wang, Y.J., Chen, H., Busch, M., Baldwin, P., “Headspace analysis for parenteral products: 
Oxygen permeation and integrity test,” Pharm. Technol., Vol. 21, No. 3, p. 108-122, Mar 1997. 
Wu, V., Crist, B., “An automated method for vacuum testing pharmaceutical vials,” J. Parenter. 
Sci & Technol, Vol. 43, No. 4, p. 179-182, JullAug 1989. 
Yam, K., “On-line, nondestructive system impacts integrity of pouches,” Packaging Technol. & 
Engineering, p. 46-49, Jun/Jul 1995. 
Vol. 52, No. 4 / July-August 
1998, Supplement 
46 
PDA Journal of 
Pharmaceutical 
Science and Technology 
Supplement, July-August 1998 
Volume 52 
EDITOR: 
Joseph B. Schwartz 
I998 OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS 
Chairman: 
Joyce H. Aydlett 
Chairman-Elect: 
Robert B. Myers 
Secretary: 
Floyd Benjamin 
Treasurer: 
R. Michael Enzinger, Ph.D. 
Immediate Past 
Chairman: 
Raymond Shaw, Jr., Ph.D. 
James E. Akers, Ph.D. 
Jennie Allewell 
Joyce L.‘DeYoung, Ph.D. 
Stephanie R. Gray 
Frederick A. Gustafson 
Martin W. Henley 
Henry K. Kwan, Ph.D. 
Nikki V. Mehringer 
Robert F. Morrissey, Ph.D. 
Terry E. Munson 
Toshiaki Nishihata, Ph.D. 
Glenn E. Wright 
PDA Journal of Pharmaceutical Science & Technology (ISSN 
1 1076-397X) is published bimonthly by the PDA, Inc., 7500 Old 
Georgetown Rd., Suite 620, Bethesda, MD 20814. 
Suhscriprions-Membership 
dues in the PDA, Inc., include an 
annual subscription to the Journal for each member and corporate 
representative. For an application form and information regarding 
membership, address the Association. Industrial, university and 
public libraries and government agencies may subscribe at the rate 
of $135.00 per year. Back issues of the journal are available from 
the Association for $55.00 ,plus $ I SO postage and handling per in 
stock reprint: or $65.00 plus $3.00 postage and handling for 
photocopies of reprints not in stock. 
Cluims-Issues 
lost in transit will not be replaced if claim is 
received more than 90 days from date of issue or if loss was due to 
failure to give notice of change of address. The Association cannot 
accept responsibility for delivery outside the United States when 
shipment has been made by first-class mail. 
Periodicals postage paid at Bethesda, Maryland and additional 
mailing offices. Postmaster: send address changes to the PDA 
Journal of Pharmaceutical 
Science & Technology, 7500 Old 
Georgetown Rd., Suite 620, Bethesda, MD 20814. 
Printed in the U.S.A. 
President: Edmund M. Fry 
Formerly the 
“Journal of Parenteral Science and Technology” 
Copyright-PDA, 
Inc. 1998 
ISSN 1076-397X 
