8 Operation
8.1 Operational planning and control
The organization shall plan, implement and control the processes (see 4.4) needed to meet the
requirements for the provision of products and services, and to implement the actions determined in
Clause 6, by:
a) determining the requirements for the products and services;
b) establishing criteria for:
1) the processes;
2) the acceptance of products and services;
c) determining the resources needed to achieve co nformity to the product and service requirements9;
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith5ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 9001:2015(E)
d) implementing control of the processes in accordance with the criteria;
e) determining, maintaining and retaining documented information to the extent necessary:
1) to have confidence that the processes have been carried out as planned;
2) to demonstrate the conformity of products and services to their requirements.
The output of this planning shall be suitable for the organization’s operations.
The organization shall control planned changes and review the consequences of unintended changes,
taking action to mitigate any adverse effects, as necessary.
The organization shall ensure that outsourced processes are controlled (see 8.4).
8.2 Requirements for products and services
8.2.1 Customer communication
Communication with customers shall include:
a) providing information relating to products and services;
b) handling enquiries, contracts or orders, including changes;
c) obtaining customer feedback relating to products and services, including customer complaints;
d) handling or controlling customer property;
e) establishing specific requirements for contingency actions, when relevant.
8.2.2 Determining the requirements for products and services
When determining the requirements for the products and services to be offered to customers, the
organization shall ensure that:
a) the requirements for the products and services are defined, including:
1) any applicable statutory and regulatory requirements;
2) those considered necessary by the organization;
b) the organization can meet the claims for the products and services it offers.
8.2.3 Review of the requirements for products and services
8.2.3.1
The organization shall ensure that it has the ability to meet the requirements for products and
services to be offered to customers. The organization shall conduct a review before committing to supply
products and services to a customer, to include:
a) requirements specified by the customer, including the requirements for delivery and post-
delivery activities;
b) requirements not stated by the customer, but necessary for the specified or intended use, when
known;
c) requirements specified by the organization;
d) statutory and regulatory requirements applicable to the products and services;
e) contract or order requirements differing from those previously expressed.
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
10
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT © ISO 2015 – All rights reserved
ISO 9001:2015(E)
The organization shall ensure that contract or order requirements differing from those previously
defined are resolved.
The customer’s requirements shall be confirmed by the organization before acceptance, when the
customer does not provide a documented statement of their requirements.
NOTE In some situations, such as internet sales, a formal review is impractical for each order. Instead, the
review can cover relevant product information, such as catalogues.
8.2.3.2
The organization shall retain documented information, as applicable:
a) on the results of the review;
b) on any new requirements for the products and services.
8.2.4 Changes to requirements for products and services
The organization shall ensure that relevant documented information is amended, and that relevant
persons are made aware of the changed requirements, when the requirements for products and
services are changed.
8.3 Design and development of products and services
8.3.1 General
The organization shall establish, implement and maintain a design and development process that is
appropriate to ensure the subsequent provision of products and services.
8.3.2 Design and development planning
In determining the stages and controls for design and development, the organization shall consider:
a) the nature, duration and complexity of the design and development activities;
b) the required process stages, including applicable design and development reviews;
c) the required design and development verification and validation activities;
d) the responsibilities and authorities involved in the design and development process;
e) the internal and external resource needs for the design and development of products and services;
f) the need to control interfaces between persons involved in the design and development process;
g) the need for involvement of customers and users in the design and development process;
h) the requirements for subsequent provision of products and services;
i) the level of control expected for the design and development process by customers and other
relevant interested parties;
j) the documented information needed to demonstrate that design and development requirements
have been met.
8.3.3 Design and development inputs
The organization shall determine the requirements essential for the specific types of products and
services to be designed and developed. The organization shall consider:
a) functional and performance requirements;
11
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith5ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 9001:2015(E)
b) information derived from previous similar design and development activities;
c) statutory and regulatory requirements;
d) standards or codes of practice that the organization has committed to implement;
e) potential consequences of failure due to the nature of the products and services.
Inputs shall be adequate for design and development purposes, complete and unambiguous.
Conflicting design and development inputs shall be resolved.
The organization shall retain documented information on design and development inputs.
8.3.4 Design and development controls
The organization shall apply controls to the design and development process to ensure that:
a) the results to be achieved are defined;
b) reviews are conducted to evaluate the ability of the results of design and development to meet
requirements;
c) verification activities are conducted to ensure that the design and development outputs meet the
input requirements;
d) validation activities are conducted to ensure that the resulting products and services meet the
requirements for the specified application or intended use;
e) any necessary actions are taken on problems determined during the reviews, or verification and
validation activities;
f) documented information of these activities is retained.
NOTE Design and development reviews, verification and validation have distinct purposes. They can be
conducted separately or in any combination, as is suitable for the products and services of the organization.
8.3.5 Design and development outputs
The organization shall ensure that design and development outputs:
a) meet the input requirements;
b) are adequate for the subsequent processes for the provision of products and services;
c) include or reference monitoring and measuring requirements, as appropriate, and acceptance criteria;
d) specify the characteristics of the products and services that are essential for their intended purpose
and their safe and proper provision.
The organization shall retain documented information on design and development outputs.
8.3.6 Design and development changes
The organization shall identify, review and control changes made during, or subsequent to, the design
and development of products and services, to the extent necessary to ensure that there is no adverse
impact on conformity to requirements.
The organization shall retain documented information on:
a) design and development changes;
b) the results of reviews;
12
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT © ISO 2015 – All rights reserved
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 9001:2015(E)
c) the authorization of the changes;
d) the actions taken to prevent adverse impacts.
8.4 Control of externally provided processes, products and services
8.4.1 General
The organization shall ensure that externally provided processes, products and services conform to
requirements.
The organization shall determine the controls to be applied to externally provided processes, products
and services when:
a) products and services from external providers are intended for incorporation into the organization’s
own products and services;
b) products and services are provided directly to the customer(s) by external providers on behalf of
the organization;
c) a process, or part of a process, is provided by an external provider as a result of a decision by the
organization.
The organization shall determine and apply criteria for the evaluation, selection, monitoring of
performance, and re-evaluation of external providers, based on their ability to provide processes or
products and services in accordance with requirements. The organization shall retain documented
information of these activities and any necessary actions arising from the evaluations.
8.4.2 Type and extent of control
The organization shall ensure that externally provided processes, products and services do not
adversely affect the organization’s ability to consistently deliver conforming products and services to
its customers.
The organization shall:
a) ensure that externally provided processes remain within the control of its quality management
system;
b) define both the controls that it intends to apply to an external provider and those it intends to apply
to the resulting output;
c) take into consideration:
1) the potential impact of the externally provided processes, products and services on the
organization’s ability to consistently meet customer and applicable statutory and regulatory
requirements;
2) the effectiveness of the controls applied by the external provider;
d) determine the verification, or other activities, necessary to ensure that the externally provided
processes, products and services meet requirements.
8.4.3 Information for external providers
The organization shall ensure the adequacy of requirements prior to their communication to the
external provider.
The organization shall communicate to external providers its requirements for:
a) the processes, products and services to be provided;
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
13
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith5ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT
ISO 9001:2015(E)
b) the approval of:
1) products and services;
2) methods, processes and equipment;
3) the release of products and services;
c) competence, including any required qualification of persons;
d) the external providers’ interactions with the organization;
e) control and monitoring of the external providers’ performance to be applied by the organization;
f) verification or validation activities that the organization, or its customer, intends to perform at the
external providers’ premises.
8.5 Production and service provision
8.5.1 Control of production and service provision
The organization shall implement production and service provision under controlled conditions.
Controlled conditions shall include, as applicable:
a) the availability of documented information that defines:
1) the characteristics of the products to be produced, the services to be provided, or the activities
to be performed;
2) the results to be achieved;
b) the availability and use of suitable monitoring and measuring resources;
c) the implementation of monitoring and measurement activities at appropriate stages to verify that
criteria for control of processes or outputs, and acceptance criteria for products and services,
have been met;
d) the use of suitable infrastructure and environment for the operation of processes;
e) the appointment of competent persons, including any required qualification;
f) the validation, and periodic revalidation, of the ability to achieve planned results of the processes
for production and service provision, where the resulting output cannot be verified by subsequent
monitoring or measurement;
g) the implementation of actions to prevent human error;
h) the implementation of release, delivery and post-delivery activities.
8.5.2 Identification and traceability
The organization shall use suitable means to identify outputs when it is necessary to ensure the
conformity of products and services.
The organization shall identify the status of outputs with respect to monitoring and measurement
requirements throughout production and service provision.
The organization shall control the unique identification of the outputs when traceability is a
requirement, and shall retain the documented information necessary to enable traceability.
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
14
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT © ISO 2015 – All rights reserved
ISO 9001:2015(E)
8.5.3 Property belonging to customers or external providers
The organization shall exercise care with property belonging to customers or external providers while
it is under the organization’s control or being used by the organization.
The organization shall identify, verify, protect and safeguard customers’ or external providers’ property
provided for use or incorporation into the products and services.
When the property of a customer or external provider is lost, damaged or otherwise found to be
unsuitable for use, the organization shall report this to the customer or external provider and retain
documented information on what has occurred.
NOTE A customer’s or external provider’s property can include materials, components, tools and equipment,
premises, intellectual property and personal data.
8.5.4 Preservation
The organization shall preserve the outputs during production and service provision, to the extent
necessary to ensure conformity to requirements.
NOTE Preservation can include identification, handling, contamination control, packaging, storage,
transmission or transportation, and protection.
8.5.5 Post-delivery activities
The organization shall meet requirements for post-delivery activities associated with the products
and services.
In determining the extent of post-delivery activities that are required, the organization shall consider:
a) statutory and regulatory requirements;
b) the potential undesired consequences associated with its products and services;
c) the nature, use and intended lifetime of its products and services;
d) customer requirements;
e) customer feedback.
NOTE Post-delivery activities can include actions under warranty provisions, contractual obligations such
as maintenance services, and supplementary services such as recycling or final disposal.
8.5.6 Control of changes
The organization shall review and control changes for production or service provision, to the extent
necessary to ensure continuing conformity with requirements.
The organization shall retain documented information describing the results of the review of changes,
the person(s) authorizing the change, and any necessary actions arising from the review.
8.6 Release of products and services
The organization shall implement planned arrangements, at appropriate stages, to verify that the
product and service requirements have been met.
The release of products and services to the customer shall not proceed until the planned arrangements
have been satisfactorily completed, unless otherwise approved by a relevant authority and, as
applicable, by the customer.
15
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith5ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 9001:2015(E)
The organization shall retain documented information on the release of products and services. The
documented information shall include:
a) evidence of conformity with the acceptance criteria;
b) traceability to the person(s) authorizing the release.
8.7 Control of nonconforming outputs
8.7.1
The organization shall ensure that outputs that do not conform to their requirements are
identified and controlled to prevent their unintended use or delivery.
The organization shall take appropriate action based on the nature of the nonconformity and its effect
on the conformity of products and services. This shall also apply to nonconforming products and
services detected after delivery of products, during or after the provision of services.
The organization shall deal with nonconforming outputs in one or more of the following ways:
a) correction;
b) segregation, containment, return or suspension of provision of products and services;
c) informing the customer;
d) obtaining authorization for acceptance under concession.
Conformity to the requirements shall be verified when nonconforming outputs are corrected.
8.7.2
The organization shall retain documented information that:
a) describes the nonconformity;
b) describes the actions taken;
c) describes any concessions obtained;
d) identifies the authority deciding the action in respect of the nonconformity.
9 Performance evaluation
9.1 Monitoring, measurement, analysis and evaluation
9.1.1 General
The organization shall determine:
a) what needs to be monitored and measured;
b) the methods for monitoring, measurement, analysis and evaluation needed to ensure valid results;
c) when the monitoring and measuring shall be performed;
d) when the results from monitoring and measurement shall be analysed and evaluated.
The organization shall evaluate the performance and the effectiveness of the quality management system.
The organization shall retain appropriate documented information as evidence of the results.
16
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT © ISO 2015 – All rights reserved
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 9001:2015(E)
9.1.2 Customer satisfaction
The organization shall monitor customers’ perceptions of the degree to which their needs and
expectations have been fulfilled. The organization shall determine the methods for obtaining,
monitoring and reviewing this information.
NOTE Examples of monitoring customer perceptions can include customer surveys, customer feedback
on delivered products and services, meetings with customers, market-share analysis, compliments, warranty
claims and dealer reports.
9.1.3 Analysis and evaluation
The organization shall analyse and evaluate appropriate data and information arising from monitoring
and measurement.
The results of analysis shall be used to evaluate:
a) conformity of products and services;
b) the degree of customer satisfaction;
c) the performance and effectiveness of the quality management system;
d) if planning has been implemented effectively;
e) the effectiveness of actions taken to address risks and opportunities;
f) the performance of external providers;
g) the need for improvements to the quality management system.
NOTE Methods to analyse data can include statistical techniques.
9.2 Internal audit
9.2.1
The organization shall conduct internal audits at planned intervals to provide information on
whether the quality management system:
a) conforms to:
1) the organization’s own requirements for its quality management system;
2) the requirements of this International Standard;
b) is effectively implemented and maintained.
9.2.2
The organization shall:
a) plan, establish, implement and maintain an audit programme(s) including the frequency, methods,
responsibilities, planning requirements and reporting, which shall take into consideration the
importance of the processes concerned, changes affecting the organization, and the results of
previous audits;
b) define the audit criteria and scope for each audit;
c) select auditors and conduct audits to ensure objectivity and the impartiality of the audit process;
d) ensure that the results of the audits are reported to relevant management;
e) take appropriate correction and corrective actions without undue delay;
17
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith5ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 9001:2015(E)
f) retain documented information as evidence of the implementation of the audit programme and the
audit results.
NOTE See ISO 19011 for guidance.
9.3 Management review
9.3.1 General
Top management shall review the organization’s quality management system, at planned intervals, to
ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy, effectiveness and alignment with the strategic direction of
the organization.
9.3.2 Management review inputs
The management review shall be planned and carried out taking into consideration:
a) the status of actions from previous management reviews;
b) changes in external and internal issues that are relevant to the quality management system;
c) information on the performance and effectiveness of the quality management system, including
trends in:
1) customer satisfaction and feedback from relevant interested parties;
2) the extent to which quality objectives have been met;
3) process performance and conformity of products and services;
4) nonconformities and corrective actions;
5) monitoring and measurement results;
6) audit results;
7) the performance of external providers;
d) the adequacy of resources;
e) the effectiveness of actions taken to address risks and opportunities (see 6.1);
f) opportunities for improvement.
9.3.3 Management review outputs
The outputs of the management review shall include decisions and actions related to:
a) opportunities for improvement;
b) any need for changes to the quality management system;
c) resource needs.
The organization shall retain documented information as evidence of the results of management reviews.
18
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT © ISO 2015 – All rights reserved
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
ISO 9001:2015(E)
10 Improvement
10.1 General
The organization shall determine and select opportunities for improvement and implement any
necessary actions to meet customer requirements and enhance customer satisfaction.
These shall include:
a) improving products and services to meet requirements as well as to address future needs and
expectations;
b) correcting, preventing or reducing undesired effects;
c) improving the performance and effectiveness of the quality management system.
NOTE Examples of improvement can include correction, corrective action, continual improvement,
breakthrough change, innovation and re-organization.
10.2 Nonconformity and corrective action
10.2.1
When a nonconformity occurs, including any arising from complaints, the organization shall:
a) react to the nonconformity and, as applicable:
1) take action to control and correct it;
2) deal with the consequences;
b) evaluate the need for action to eliminate the cause(s) of the nonconformity, in order that it does not
recur or occur elsewhere, by:
1) reviewing and analysing the nonconformity;
2) determining the causes of the nonconformity;
3) determining if similar nonconformities exist, or could potentially occur;
c) implement any action needed;
d) review the effectiveness of any corrective action taken;
e) update risks and opportunities determined during planning, if necessary;
f) make changes to the quality management system, if necessary.
Corrective actions shall be appropriate to the effects of the nonconformities encountered.
10.2.2
The organization shall retain documented information as evidence of:
a) the nature of the nonconformities and any subsequent actions taken;
b) the results of any corrective action.
10.3 Continual improvement
The organization shall continually improve the suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of the quality
management system.
--``,,,,`,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,```,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
19
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or network©ing pIeSrmOit te2d0 w1ith5ou t– lic Aenlsle rfroimg hIHtSs reserved Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT
ISO 9001:2015(E)
The organization shall consider the results of analysis and evaluation, and the outputs from
management review, to determine if there are needs or opportunities that shall be addressed as part of
continual improvement.
20
Copyright International Organization for Standardization
Provided by IHS Markit under license with ANSI Licensee=Becton Dickinson - Loc 1 - 61, 64/5984713001, User=Chiu, Shelly
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 10/14/2019 19:07:10 MDT © ISO 2015 – All rights reserved
---`,,`,`,,`,,`-`-`,```,,,,,`,`,`,,,,,`,,,,``--
ISO 9001:2015(E)
