--- PAGE 9 (doc p7) ---
This Document is licensed to
Miss Mei-Chun Chou
Taiwan, 
ID number: 1002915
Downloaded on: 10/29/20 3:23 AM
1	
Introduction
1.1	
Background
The development of drug products from the laboratory to production processes entails risks, investment, and time. 
Any technology that can impact one or more of these factors is worth an investigation. Conventional stainless steel 
process equipment has reliably served the industry for many years. With the increasing need to reduce risks and 
quickly start up processing plants with minimum capital costs, Single-Use Technology (SUT) has been more widely 
used. This technology has impacted all three factors: risks, investment, and time.
The growth of SUT has been rapid and continues to expand in the industry. The primary components of SUT are 
polymeric film containers, flexible tubing, and an assortment of connectors and supporting components. The evolution 
of SUT has prompted the industry to redefine procedures to incorporate SUT into drug manufacturing processes. The 
application of this Guide starts after a decision to implement SUT is made; that is, all financial assessments have 
been completed and the results of those assessments support the use of SUT in a process. This Guide is aimed at 
helping the end-users and suppliers of SUT after this decision has been made.
While SUT provides flexibility, the implementation of SUT into a process requires a well-defined plan that minimizes 
surprises during the later stages of implementation. This can be a challenge when dealing with a revolutionary 
technology that is flexible, continues to evolve, and can be customized to the end-user’s requirements. To take 
advantage of the flexibility of SUT, it is important to understand how the single-use products can work together with 
manufacturing operations. This Guide intends to provide a roadmap for the efficient implementation of SUT with 
minimum disruption to existing operations.
1.2	
Purpose and Objectives
This Guide is centered around getting SUT implementation done right the first time, on schedule, and with minimal 
costs and few surprises. When surprises arise, this Guide aims to help address them effectively with the least amount 
of disruption.
This Guide aims to make it easier for single-use product suppliers and drug product manufacturers to select 
components and suppliers, design, and apply SUT. It intends to achieve this by aligning expectations and capabilities 
to minimize surprises.
Due to the inherent flexibility of SUT, the process of selecting, designing, and implementing SUT should be performed 
with sufficient focus while keeping the end state in clear perspective. During the design phase, there are many 
decisions to be made about the components to use. Focusing too closely on the decision at hand and putting the 
overall objective in second place can result in a decision that will need to be changed at a later date. The highly 
flexible nature of SUT allows this to be accomplished. However, it may result in a significant cost later in the project. 
If too many decisions are made in this way, the flexibility becomes its own hindrance. The objective of this Guide is to 
provide an efficient roadmap, based on the experience of the authors.
1.2.1	
Scope
It is recognized that innovation and the fast evolution of SUT leads to a continuous expansion of available products. 
This Guide intends to capture the current technology, the components, and how they are designed into processes. 
The information presented is useful in the following applications:
•	
Liquid or semisolid storage and transfer
•	
Cell propagation and production of bulk biologics
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2018. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE 10 (doc p8) ---
This Document is licensed to
Miss Mei-Chun Chou
Taiwan, 
ID number: 1002915
Downloaded on: 10/29/20 3:23 AM
•	
Mixing of powders and liquids
•	
Filtration and centrifugation
•	
Heat transfer
•	
Chromatography
•	
Fill/finish
1.2.2	
Benefits
The intended benefits of this Guide include:
•	
Learning how to select single-use components and design functional systems
•	
Learning when and how to perform effective extractables and leachables studies
•	
Learning how to evaluate suppliers of SUT
•	
Understanding the critical supplier and end-user (customer) interactions
•	
Learning about the interrelated tasks for implementing SUT
1.3	
Structure of the Guide
This Guide is intended to be used by those new to SUT while still benefiting those experienced with SUT. While 
any section of the Guide can be used at any time, those new to the technology would benefit by following a logical 
progression through the chapters. There are three core chapters. Chapter 2 guides the reader through component 
selection and equipment design. Chapter 3 takes the equipment into the plant and includes validation and training to 
yield a successful operation. Chapter 4 deals with program management topics that occur throughout the activities 
discussed in Chapters 2 and 3.
An overview of the Guide is as follows:
•	
Introduction: This chapter provides the overall objectives of the Guide, background information on the 
technology, and the intended benefits of the Guide.
•	
Selection and Design: Chapter 2 is intended to help the end-user select the components, assemblies, systems, 
and suppliers. The various sections in the chapter focus on identifying the major criteria for selecting the 
components for the single-use equipment and the suppliers that can support a successful SUT operation. The 
chapter details how assemblies are designed and aligned with the multiple-use parts of the system. Chapter 
2 deals primarily with the first phase of any SUT implementation process. These activities require strong 
collaboration between the suppliers and the end-users. An emphasis is placed on how these collaborations are 
to be maintained and what information is expected to be shared between the two groups.
•	
Implementation and Use: Chapter 3 covers topics which are to follow the completion of the activities of Chapter 
2. Once the single-use assemblies, systems, and suppliers have been selected as described in Chapter 2, the 
focus is on using the single-use products in the end-user operation. Chapter 3 deals with the transfer of the 
technology into the plant, meeting regulatory requirements, training, validation, and setting up a strong supply 
chain. The end-users would take leadership in these activities with the supplier providing support.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2018. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE 11 (doc p9) ---
This Document is licensed to
Miss Mei-Chun Chou
Taiwan, 
ID number: 1002915
Downloaded on: 10/29/20 3:23 AM
•	
Program Management: Chapter 4 mostly addresses planning information, including risk management, change 
management, and project schedules.
1.4	
Key Concepts/Terms
This section defines key concepts and terms as they are applied in SUT applications. Refer to Chapter 11 for an 
expanded listing of definitions.
Analytical Evaluation Threshold (AET): An upper limit, at or above which, identification and quantification of an 
unknown extractables and leachables should be performed and reported for potential toxicological assessment. This 
is not applicable to special case compounds such as Polyaromatic Hydrocarbon (PAH, also known as polynuclear 
aromatic hydrocarbons), Mercaptobenzothiazole (MBT) and N-nitrosamine, which should be evaluated individually.
Compatibility: A measure of the extent to which a Primary Packaging Component (PPC), Process Contact Material 
(PCM), and/or proximal material will interact with a dosage form. Such interaction should not be sufficient to cause 
unacceptable changes in the quality of either the dosage form or the packaging component. Such interactions may 
include (ab)adsorption of the active drug substance, reduction in the concentration of an excipient, leachable-induced 
degradation, precipitation, changes in drug product pH, discoloration of the dosage form or packaging component, 
etc.
Container Closure System (CCS): The sum of packaging components that together contain, protect, and deliver the 
dosage form. This includes primary packaging components and secondary packaging components if the latter are 
intended to provide additional protection relative to product stability to the drug product (e.g., foil pouch).
Extractables: Chemical compounds that are removed from a material by exertion of an artificial, exaggerated force 
(e.g., solvent, temperature, or time). This is a material specific characteristic and is independent of the drug product 
with which the material is used.
Leachables: Chemical species that migrate from or through a contact surface into a drug product or process stream 
during storage or normal use conditions. These are specific to the combination of material and drug product with 
which the material comes in contact.
Primary Packaging Component (PPC): A component of the container closure system that potentially comes 
into direct contact with the drug product formulation (e.g., canisters, pumps, actuators, gaskets, syringe plungers, 
stoppers, etc.).
Process Contact Material (PCM): Component which is in direct contact with the process or product fluid, such as 
tubing, hose, filter, bag, connector, etc. Also known as process stream contact material.
Proximal Materials: All packaging materials other than the PPC, such as ink, adhesive, label, carton, protective 
packaging materials, etc.
Qualification Threshold (QT): A level below which a given leachable is not considered for safety qualification 
(toxicological assessment) unless the leachable presents Structure-Activity Relationship (SAR) concerns.
Safety Concern Threshold (SCT): A level below which a leachable would have a dose so low as to present 
negligible safety concerns from carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic toxic effects.
Single-Use Assembly: A combination of single-use components/assemblies designed to be in one continuous, and 
often closed, wetted flow path. The typical assembly is manufactured and sterilized. It primarily contains mechanical 
components (e.g., bioprocess container, tubing, fittings, etc.) with sensor element(s) or allowance for a sensor 
element to be mounted by the end-user. The end-user places the assembly on a support structure prior to filling it 
with fluid. The support structure may also include electromechanical elements (e.g., mixer/motor, bag lift, scale, bag 
carrier, etc.) that interface with the assembly and are integral for its proper use.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2018. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE 12 (doc p10) ---
This Document is licensed to
Miss Mei-Chun Chou
Taiwan, 
ID number: 1002915
Downloaded on: 10/29/20 3:23 AM
Single-Use System (SUS): A combination of single-use components designed to be in one continuous, and often 
closed, wetted flow path. The typical SUS integrates one or several single-use assemblies with multiple-use electrical/
control elements operated by some level of automation. The end-user places the single-use assembly on a support 
structure prior to filling it with fluid.
Single-Use Technology (SUT): Technology based on applications that utilize single-use components individually or 
in assemblies and systems that are designed based on these components. Figure 1.1 provides an overall perspective 
on the relationship between components, assemblies, and systems.
Single-Use versus Disposable: While these terms seem to be used interchangeably, there are significant 
differences between them. Single-use products are a subset of disposable products. Single-use products are used 
one time and then discarded. They are typically used for the duration of a process run. At the end of a process run, 
any drug product is displaced from the single-use product and then the single-use product is discarded. Disposable 
products are often used only once and discarded. However, disposable products may also be used more than once. 
If the disposable product is to be used more than once, it is cleaned and sanitized between uses. Performance 
should be monitored as it normally decreases with each sequential use. Exposure to cleaning chemicals and high 
temperatures tends to degrade the disposable products resulting in a limited useful life.
Support Equipment/Systems: Support systems that are used in conjunction with single-use equipment. These 
include temperature control systems for heating/cooling media and restricted access barrier systems.
Threshold of Toxicological Concern (TTC): The daily intake of a genotoxic impurity that is considered to be 
associated with an acceptable risk (excess cancer risk of < 1 in 100,000 over a lifetime) for most pharmaceuticals.
Toxicological Assessment: An evaluation of the estimated Total Daily Intake (TDI), which is considered similar to 
the Average Daily Intake (ADI) of a chemical species, in order to determine if the level of exposure will present a 
safety concern to the patient. These evaluations include considerations of available literature data for the specific 
compound or class of compounds, SAR, and any qualification data (if available).
Tubing Set: An assembly composed of single-use components that is used to connect between unit operations.
Upstream/Downstream Processing: Upstream processing includes the unit operations up to the harvest 
clarification and recovery from the bioreactor. Downstream processing includes the unit operations that follow such as 
the filtration and chromatography steps to purify and concentrate the product.
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2018. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE 13 (doc p11) ---
This Document is licensed to
Miss Mei-Chun Chou
Taiwan, 
ID number: 1002915
Downloaded on: 10/29/20 3:23 AM
Figure 1.1: Relationship between Single-Use Components, Assemblies, and Systems
For individual use only. © Copyright ISPE 2018. All rights reserved.
