3.0 How Filters Work

Liquid filters are widely believed to function by permitting fluid passage through their pores, while retaining
particles, such as microorganisms, that are too large to fit through these apertures. At first, one might
assume this is accomplished entirely by size-exclusion of the particles on the upstream side of a screen or
sieve-like filter membrane. However, this oversimplification ignores many complexities of the actual
mechanisms of particle retention. Although microporous membranes are very thin to the naked eye, the
thickness of the membrane represents a long path from the microscopic perspective of bacteria or other
particles in the fluid stream passing through the membrane. Sterilizing-grade filtration membranes do not
typically consist of cylindrical pores of well-defined diameter. Rather, the membrane is made up of a
sponge-like depth of filter material, and the porous pathways between them, across a distribution of sizes.
Large particles completely outside this pore size distribution are certainly excluded at the upstream surface
of the membrane (i.e., surface screening). But for more marginally sized particles, size-exclusion also
includes entrapment within the depth of the filter matrix.

Additional retention mechanisms beyond simple size exclusion also apply within the depth of the
membrane: adsorptive sequestration occurs when particles small enough to pass through filter pores are still
captured by the filter, through various chemical or physical effects that cause particles to bind to the filter
material that retains them. The effectiveness of adsorptive-sequestration mechanisms can depend on the
surface chemistry of the filter and the particle (e.g., a microorganism) under the applied filtration conditions.
Many different operational conditions govern a filter's adsorptive removal of particles including differential
pressure, flow rate, number of particles present, binding-site saturation, and the liquid vehicle's makeup in
terms of its surface tension, pH, and ionic strength, among other factors.

If each particle challenging the filter is too large to pass through any of the pores, the number of particles
does not matter – all will be retained by surface-screening. For such large particles, filter efficiency (the
completeness with which a filter retains particles confronting it) is independent of many of the complex
factors listed above, as long as the particle and pores are not deformed. But for small microorganisms,
which can grow, shrink, deform, and divide, the additional retention mechanisms and process factors
become important. For sterilizing applications, a user must recognize that complete retention of
microorganisms in a feed stream may become a probabilistic feature of the process and filter, depending on
the factors discussed above. For this reason, the details of each specific sterilizing-filter application are
important and must be validated to claim the use of filtration as a mode of sterilization. Fortunately, modern
sterilizing filter design and manufacturing processes incorporate robust controls and significant safety
factors that reliably assure sterile filtrates in many applications.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
8 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) © 2025 ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

3.1 Pore Size Rating and Filter Nomenclature

Because of the complex sponge-like distribution of pore sizes in membrane filters, characterization of a
filter by a simple pore-size (diameter) rating has been controversial. Various methods have been proposed
and used by filter manufacturers for filters of varying porosity. For sterilizing filters specifically, a
consensus has arisen in the industry to define sterilizing-grade filters not by physical pore size measurement,
but by its ability to reproducibly retain 107 CFU per cm2 Brevundimonas diminuta according to the ASTM
F838 standard (6). Due to historical reasons, it is the successful demonstration of this retention challenge
that may grant a filter (0.2 µm or smaller) a sterilizing-grade rating (9). To reiterate, quantified pore-size
ratings, such as 0.2 µm, may be assigned without any physical measurement or characterization of pore-size
but based simply on the ability of the filter to pass the standard bacterial retention study. This
characterization has often been used to market filters as sterilizing-grade. As described in Section 6.0, actual
use for critical liquid sterilization applications (where a sterile claim is made for the filtrate) also requires
process-specific validation, only then should a filter be described as a “sterilizing filter.”

Due to the important nuances of these terms, recommended uses of these terms are summarized in Table
3.1-1.

Table 3.1-1 Recommended Terminology Related to Sterilizing-Grade Filters

Term Definition

0.2 µm or
0.22 µm
Rated Filter

These pore-size ratings may be assigned by filter suppliers based on successful
completion of the ASTM F838 retention test (synonymous with “sterilizing-grade
filter”). This rating may also be assigned based on other criteria and may be assigned to
filters intended only for bioburden reduction or filters that have not passed the ASTM
F838 retention test. For this reason, “sterilizing-grade filter” is a more precise term for
describing filters designed for sterilization of liquids.

Note: 0.22 µm and 0.2 µm are considered interchangeable nominal pore-size ratings
(7).

SterilizingGrade
FilterFi
lters, typically with an 0.22 µm /0.2 µm pore size rating or smaller have been shown 
by
 the manufacturer to have successfully completed the standard bacterial retention 
st
udy, that is, complete retention of 107 CFU per cm2 B. diminuta under standard 
co
nditions described by ASTM F838.
No

te: This is a claim about a filter (as marketed by the supplier) independent of any 
pa
rticular application.
St

erilizing 
Fi
lter
Th
is is an additional claim about the function of a filter to actually sterilize a fluid in a 
sp
ecific application, and it depends on successful execution of process-specific 
va
lidation and other controls in addition to the standard ASTM F838 challenge.
No

te: When using this term, a sterile claim for the filtrate is being made.
No

te: The term “sterile filter” is often used to refer to a “sterilizing filter”; however, that should generally 
be
 avoided due to ambiguity whether it refers to the purpose of the filter (sterilizing a fluid) or the state of 
th
e filter (the filter itself is sterilized, e.g., via steam or irradiation).
Li

censed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) © 2025 ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 9

Figure 3.1-1 attempts to further clarify these terms with a Venn diagram. This diagram should be taken as a
generalization only, as exceptions exist.

Figure 3.1-1 Sterilizing Filter Terminology: Venn Diagram

3.2 Evolution of the Sterilizing Filter

Membrane filtration has been used for decades and became a prevalent mode of sterilization especially with
the introduction of heat-sensitive compounds that typically cannot be terminally sterilized.

Membrane filters are used for microbial control in multiple different applications and manufacturing process
steps, such as the filtration of cell-culture media, and intermediate steps like purification column protection,
buffer filtration, and bioburden reduction as well as final sterilization.

These different filtration steps typically have different requirements for an optimal filtration process, which
means that modern membrane filters are optimized for specific applications, with an emphasis on robust and
reliable retention of organisms. For the most critical application of final product sterilization, modern
sterilizing-grade membrane filters are designed and built to meet the strict requirements of the
biopharmaceutical and pharmaceutical industries and regulatory authorities (9-13). These filters have
undergone continuous optimization and development, resulting in a robust filter designs with wellcontrolled
attributes such as (14):

• Steam Sterilization Resistance: Filters can withstand high temperatures making them suitable
for sterilization by in-line steam or autoclaving, even for multiple cycles. The
temperature/differential pressure profiles of a filter are well-established, which supports the
appropriate operating conditions during steam sterilization, preventing any damage.
• Irradiation Resistance: Filter capsules may also be supplied presterilized (e.g., if part of a
single-use system (SUS) assembly/manifold). These filters are compatible with irradiation
sterilization methods, such as gamma or x-ray irradiation. Presterilized filters should be
validated to show proof that they are sterilized, even when they are sterilized within the
assembly, and the SUS is proven to be compatible with the sterilization method (15).
• Minimal Extractable Substances: Even when used straight out of the box, these filters release
extremely low levels of extractables that have been published and are detailed in qualification
documentation from the filter manufacturers.
• Mechanical Resistance: Modern sterilizing filters can withstand high-differential-pressure
conditions, as validated by the filter manufacturers ensuring their durability and reliability.
• Low Unspecific Adsorption: Most filters have been optimized to greatly reduce the amount of
unspecific adsorption, which is important to avoiding the retention of target proteins or other
important fluid components, for example polysorbate.
• Optimal Total Throughputs: Some filters are designed to maximize volume of filtration,
effectively reducing the cost per liter of filtered material. Highly asymmetric and heterogenous
double-layer filter designs are throughput-focused filter types.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
10 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) © 2025 ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

• Flow Rates: Filters are engineered to achieve efficient flow rates, which can reduce processing
times or the required filtration area. Engineering features such as high pleat density, large
effective filtration area (EFA), low-pressure drops, and single-layer membranes are available
for flow rate optimization.
• Robust Integrity-Testing: Sterilizing-grade filters are required to be tested for their integrity
using nondestructive methods such as diffusive flow, pressure decay, or Bubble Point tests.
These tests have been successfully used for decades and are a reliable, essential filter integrity
test.
• Full-Qualification Documentation: Filters are accompanied by comprehensive qualification
documentation, which lists a multitude of tests (e.g., endotoxin release, biological reactivity)
that ensure they meet the necessary regulatory standards.
• Individual Process Validation: The filters undergo process validation specific to the drug
product being filtered under process conditions, confirming their compatibility, performance
and retentivity.
• 100% Integrity-Tested: Every sterilizing-grade filter is individually integrity-tested by the
filter manufacturer as a release criterion for the product.
• Transportation and Shelf Life: Filter suppliers also recommend necessary shelf-life data for
filtration and single-use assembly products and validate the packaging and transportation of
these components to ensure the products are not damaged.
• Membrane Casting Batch Consistency: Filter supplier implemented controls and automation
to assure that the membrane casting process consistently delivers the same membrane quality
and performance.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 11

