6.0 Product and Process-Specific Validation Testing for
Sterilizing Filtration

Process-specific filter validation studies, to provide assurance that the filter will perform as expected under
worst-case processing conditions, are required prior to submission for marketing authorization. However,
filter validation studies may be conducted earlier based on risk assessment. A risk assessment can be based
on prior knowledge from how the product, process and filter interact, leveraging successful filter validations
of similar molecules. This risk assessment can be performed to evaluate whether a product operates within
the design space. Bacterial retention studies, with the final sterilizing-grade filter, are required when a sterile
claim is made and the product is not terminally sterilized (29). This section describes factors to consider
when performing process-specific filter validation studies.

6.1 Performance of Process-Specific Filter Validation

The rationale for selection of a suitable filter for final sterilizing filtration should be documented in an end
user’s CCS. As described in Section 5.0, during PD, end users will review generic information available
from their supplier (i.e., qualification data) to assess suitability of components for the intended process and
identify any potential risks associated with compatibility, adsorption, and extractables as part of their initial
risk assessment. Consideration should also be given if the final sterilizing filter will be part of a SUS, which
could include tubing and bags, as this may impact the maximum processing parameters and potentially the
design of the final process-specific filter validation studies. While it is recognized that process-specific filter
validation studies must be performed prior to commercial manufacture or release of product, there is no
specific guidance that states precisely when such studies should be performed in the development/validation
lifecycle. Consequently, the decision when to perform filter validation is determined largely by the end user.
This usually coincides when the drug product is in late phase development, as it is important that the
proposed critical process parameters (CPPs) and full-scale manufacturing conditions are well understood to
ensure the testing performed validates the intended filtration design space. If a specific risk is identified, it
may be appropriate to conduct process-specific testing earlier during PD (e.g., if the drug is subject to
expedited clinical development). Generation of early process-specific data can also be considered for the
purposes of risk assessment and not the final filter validation.

6.2 Purpose of Process-Specific Filter Validation Testing

The purpose of performing process-specific validation testing for final sterilizing filtration is twofold:

1. To assess any impact the filter may have on the quality of the final drug product.
2. To assess any impact the drug product may have on the performance of the filter.

Table 6.2-1 provides a summary of typical testing that is in scope for process-specific filter validation.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
40 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Table 6.2-1 Test Types for Process-Specific Filter Validation

Objective Test Type Purpose

Determine Any Impact
of Filter on Product*
Adsorption Determine any loss of product
components to the filter membrane and
components.

Extractables Assess potential compounds released from
the filter into the final product under
exaggerated conditions (30). If
documentation is adequate these tests do
not need to be repeated (see Section 4.6).

Leachables Assess potential compounds released from
the filter (and) into the final product under
normal operating conditions.

Determine Any Impact
of Product on Filter
Performance (e.g.,
bacterial retention)

Viability, Inhibition and
Bacterial Retention Study
Determine method for performing
bacterial retention study based on
properties of process fluid.

Demonstrate bacterial retention of B.
diminuta (or other appropriate process
isolate) at a minimum challenge level of ≥ 1
x 107 CFU/cm2 under simulated worstcase
processing parameters.

Chemical Compatibility
Filter
Confirm filter is compatible with process
fluid / operating parameters and will
perform as expected.

Product Wet Integrity
Test Value Determination
(optional – not a
regulatory requirement)

Define integrity test limits for a sterilizinggrade
filter using the process fluid (or
alternative fluid) that are correlated to
bacterial retention.

*Any impact of the filter on the product CQAs should be conducted by the end-user during PD. Refer to
Table 4.1.1.

6.3 Selection of Worst-Case Test Parameters Following Quality-by-Design
Principles

The principles of quality by design (QbD) should be applied when considering the worst-case parameters
and conditions in which the sterilizing-grade filter should be validated. This includes a rationale for
selection of worst-case parameters that must be based on a thorough understanding of the intended design
space, including the normal operating range (NOR) and proven acceptable range (PAR) (8, 31). While it is
expected that an end user will apply a safety factor to validate the use of the final sterilizing-grade filter in
the given application, this should represent reasonable control of a process (based on manufacturing control

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 41

limits) and defines the PAR for use of the sterilizing-grade filter in the application as outlined in Section
5.0.

A summary of worst-case parameters is included under the description of factors to consider for each filter
validation test type.

6.4 Adsorption

While adsorption studies are typically performed during PD, as described in Section 5.0, some end users
elect to have this performed as part of the filter validation package. Considerations for worst-case test
conditions to assess potential adsorption are shown in Table 6.4-1, but the parameters selected for testing
should be based on risk assessment.

Table 6.4-1 Considerations for Worst-Case Test Parameters to Assess Potential Adsorption

Description Worst Case Rationale

Flow Rate Case Dependent Adsorption may occur more rapidly at
lower flow rates but should be based on
risk assessment

Contact Time Shortest Shortest contact time may not allow
filter membrane to become saturated

Longest Extended period of static soak prior to
filtration may not allow filter
membrane to become saturated

Temperature Dependent on Product
Composition
Most adsorption processes are inversely
related to temperature (32)

Product
Component
Concentration

Consider Preservatives,
Surfactants, Active
Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API)

Increased potential for adsorption which
may impact product quality control
specifications

Component
Concentration
Lower Increased potential for adsorption due to
ratio of product concentration:
membrane/surface area

pH Test Extremes May impact surface charge of membrane

6.5 Extractables and Leachables

During filter selection, extractables (and potentially leachables, based on a risk assessment of the
extractables data) should be considered during early-PD. This is typically assessed based on the availability
of supplier data using standardized conditions (e.g., model solvents under specified test conditions) (22, 33,
34). As defined in Section 4.6, an extractable is any chemical component that is removed from a material by
the application of an artificial or exaggerated condition (e.g., solvent, temperature, time). A leachable is
typically a chemical component that migrates from a contact surface into a drug product or process fluid

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
42 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

during storage or normal-use conditions. However, on occasion, interaction with product components may
produce leachables not seen as extractables (20).

Extractables testing may be repeated as part of the final filter validation. After selection of a suitable
extraction solution(s) (model solvent, surrogate or combination of solutions), extraction studies should be
designed to encompass the worst-case process conditions with regard to key variables, such as temperature,
time, pH, and pretreatment steps (e.g., flushing, sterilization) (see Table 6.5-1). Extraction studies are
performed with the filter device using worst-case conditions of contact time and temperature with filters that
have been sterilized by autoclaving or irradiation. Extraction studies may be conducted using methods such
as static soak or recirculation/reciprocation/agitation. For static soak, the filter is submerged in the extraction
solution at a given temperature for a defined amount of time. Extractables may also be generated by
recirculating or reciprocating the extraction solution through the filter for a given amount of time under a
defined temperature. The extract is collected and tested for the presence of filter extractables.

Table 6.5-1 Worst-Case Parameters for Extractables/Leachables Testing Selection Factors

Description Parameters WorstCaseRationaleProcess
Fluid Product Type Solvents Increased potential for extractables
Pr

oduct Type Process 
Fl
uid
Ev
aluate leachables under normal processing 
co
nditions (if required)
pH

 pH 
Ex
tremes
In
creased extraction potential at extreme pH 
va
lues
Pr

ocess 
Co
nditions
Te
mperature Higher Higher temperatures may generate more 
ex
tractables
Du

ration Longer Longer durations may increase potential 
ex
tractables
Fi

lter 
St
erilization
Hi
gher Higher autoclave temperature and/or cycles
in
creases potential for extractables
Hi

gher irradiation dose may increase 
po
tential for extractables
On

ce the filter extracts are obtained, a quantitative and qualitative assessment of the filter-derived materials 
ar
e determined through selection of appropriate analytical methods. Additional information regarding these 
me
thods can be found in BioPhorum’s Disposables: Extractables Testing of Polymeric Single-Use 
Co
mponents Used in Biopharmacetuical Manufacturing (30). In addition to determining identities and 
qu
antities of filter extractables, patient safety is evaluated through a toxicological assessment.
Ba

sed on a qualitative (e.g., extractable chemical name with CAS number) and quantitative assessment of 
ex
tractables to evaluate the patient exposure to potential leachables, the end user may also elect to perform a 
Li

censed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 43

leachables study. This involves using the actual process fluid with the same filter type that will be used in
production. Due to the low levels of potential leachables, extractables testing using a model solvent
approach is usually a prerequisite to having a leachables study performed. Circumstances, such as drug
product interference with analytical methods or the prohibitive cost of the drug product, may necessitate the
use of a surrogate solution. Surrogates should closely resemble the product to be filtered. Another option is
to use several solutions to bracket the properties of pH, ionic strength, or level of organic components of the
actual fluid. When a surrogate or bracketing approach is used, a clear rationale for the selection of solutions
and extraction conditions should be documented.

6.6 Bacterial Retention Study

Bacterial retention studies are used to validate a filter to perform the sterilizing function (i.e., render the
filtrate sterile) by showing complete microbial removal from the challenge fluid, product, or product family,
using a representative challenge microorganism (1, 35, 36). Two primary elements are taken into
consideration for bacterial retention study validation:

1. Classification of the filter membranes as sterilizing-grade by means of bacterial retention studies ,
using standardized test methods (6) . This is the responsibility of the filter supplier as part of the
filter qualification to demonstrate that the filter retains bacteria using standardized methodology
(i.e., proof that the filter retains B. diminuta when challenged at a level of ≥ 1 x 107 CFU/cm2 and
can be classified as a sterilizing-grade filter in accordance with the principles of ASTM F838).
2. Demonstration by the filter user or designated test facility (e.g., filter manufacturer or contract
laboratory) of complete retention of a microbial challenge from each product or product family in
the actual process conditions. Scientific rationale for each product group should be developed and
may be reviewed with the appropriate regulatory agency before validation testing. It is the
responsibility of the end user to confirm that the selected sterilizing-grade filter performs as
expected for process-specific applications (i.e., under simulated worst-case processing conditions
with the intended drug product).

These two filter-testing concepts are not interchangeable and should be validated independently.

6.6.1 Factors Influencing Bacterial Retention

Factors potentially affecting bacterial retention include, but are not limited to (2, 3):

• Filter type (e.g., asymmetric, isometric)

– Base polymer, surface modification chemistry, pore size distribution, and thickness

• Fluid components

– Formulation, surfactants, and additives

• Fluid properties

– pH, viscosity, osmolarity, ionic strength, and surface tension

• Process conditions

– Filter reuse, temperature, pressure differential, flow rate, filtration time, total
filter/product contact time, and volume throughput.* The potential impact of
intermittency should be considered.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
44 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

• Potential bioburden in the product (quantitative and qualitative)

*Note: As sterilization of the filter is part of the supplier qualification performed during development, exact
simulation of the end user’s sterilization method (e.g., irradiation, autoclave, SIP temperature, number of
cycles) is not generally required for process-specific bacterial retention study.

In addition to these factors, process bioburden should be evaluated in order to establish B. diminuta as a
relevant organism. Evaluation should be based on bioburden identification and a risk assessment to ensure
the absence of potentially more penetrative organisms in the prefiltration bioburden (see Section 6.6.2).
Consideration should be given to potential product formulations or process conditions affecting cell size or
other physiological or morphological microorganism attributes that might allow organism passage.

6.6.2 Challenge Organism Selection Criteria

Historically, Pseudomonas diminuta, reclassified as B. diminuta , has been the microorganism of choice for
bacterial retention studies. Although a product may be bactericidal to B. diminuta under normal processing
conditions, other microorganisms may survive under the same conditions. Another bacterial retention study
method for bactericidal products is the use of "indigenous bioburden." Indigenous bioburden consists of
bacterial isolates from the manufacturing environment or the product formulation that have demonstrated
the ability to survive within the product formulation under actual production processing conditions.

In process bacteria should be propagated or equilibrated in the product in order to ensure that their
morphological and physiological characteristics are representative of process isolates. The smallest, or worst
-case, indigenous organism should be used based on a risk assessment against use of B. diminuta as the
challenge organism. For additional discussion of preparation and use of challenge organisms, see Section
6.6.3.

If diminutive microorganisms are known to exist in the product, they or an appropriate model organism,
may be used to challenge test filters. Typically, these challenges are conducted in addition to B. diminuta
testing, and it is strongly recommended that appropriate measures be taken to remove these organisms as a
potential contaminant.

If other bacteria are used, they should be small enough to challenge the retentivity of the sterilizing-grade
filter and should simulate the smallest microorganism found in production (4). A risk assessment should
determine the likelihood of any prefiltration bacteria potentially being able to penetrate a 0.2 µm sterilizinggrade
filter (37).

The size of the challenge microorganism should be confirmed by demonstrating passage through a 0.45 μmrated
membrane as a positive control for each challenge performed. This confirms the challenge organism is
appropriately sized and monodispersed. B. diminuta grown under standard culture conditions penetrates
0.45 μm-rated membranes in small numbers at high challenge levels, typically ≥ 107CFU/cm2 (see Section
6.6.3). In some cases, B. diminuta may not be a representative worst-case model. Documented rationale
should be provided if a different challenge organism is chosen.

6.6.3 Culture Maintenance and Challenge Preparation

B. diminuta ATCC® 19146 TM can be obtained in lyophilized form from bacterial culture collections such as
the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). After reconstituting the microorganism according to the
manufacturer’s instructions, stocks can be maintained (either refrigerated or frozen) on appropriate media

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 45

per standard microbiological practice. Maintenance conditions for process isolates to be used for challenge
studies should be established.

Two standard techniques have been recognized as suitable for preparation and maintenance of B. diminuta
for bacterial retention studies. These are the SLB and the frozen cell paste (FCP) methods. Both methods
have been found to be effective in producing suitable suspensions of B. diminuta of approximately 0.3 – 0.4
µm in diameter by 0.6 – 1.0 µm in length.

Alternate media and culture methods may be equally valid to prepare B. diminuta provided they produce
single, monodispersed cells suitably sized to penetrate 0.45 µm-rated membrane filters. Alternate culture
methods should be validated. Bacterial retention study stock cultures can be screened for aggregation by
optical microscopy. In cases where aggregation is observed, immersion of the stock culture in an ultrasonic
cleaning bath filled with cold water for a qualified duration is one means of dispersing the aggregate. The
cavitation action of the bath is effective in disaggregating bacterial cells without the loss of viability. This
effect should be confirmed by optical microscopy, viable count, and recovery downstream of the 0.45 µmrated
size control filter (38).

The bacterial challenge concentration should provide a uniform challenge over the duration in which
viability of B. diminuta is assured to yield a final challenge level of at least 107 CFU/cm2 of filter surface
area. Operational parameters (e.g., flow rate, time, and pressure) should be taken into consideration when
calculating the bacterial retention concentration.

A bacterial challenge level of ≥ 1 x 107 CFU/cm2 is, therefore, the requirement for a sterilizing-grade filter
(historically a filter rated at 0.2 μm). This level was derived from Bowman's observations that B. diminuta
could penetrate a 0.45 µm-rated membrane at > 104
–106 CFU/cm² bacterial challenge level, and her
suggestion for qualifying 0.2 µm-rated membranes as "sterilizing-grade" with B. diminuta at 107 CFU/cm²
to assure minimally sufficient sensitivity to detect oversized pores (39). Bacterial challenge concentration
(CFU/mL) should not be confused with bacterial challenge level (CFU/cm2
).

The viability and titer of the B. diminuta suspension should be confirmed using a suitable recovery medium
such as soybean-casein digest agar (also known as tryptic soy agar), Mueller Hinton Agar, or other qualified
growth medium. When performing filter challenges, the viable titer of the bacterial retention suspension
should be determined immediately prior to and after the challenge; the bacterial titer should be determined
using an accepted microbiological testing method. For situations when this is not possible (e.g., extremely
short-duration bacterial retention studies), a rationale should be provided to justify the use of either a pre- or
post-input viability sample. The same culture medium should also be used to determine any recovery of B.
diminuta downstream of the test and control filters.

6.6.4 Viability/Filter Flush Qualification Testing Procedure and Protocol Development

Prior to completing the bacterial retention study, the test organism's viability should be verified by direct
inoculation into the carrier fluid (ideally, product or surrogate fluid, if justified) in order to determine the
appropriate challenge test methodology (see Figure 6.9-1). Scientific justification should be provided if
viability testing is not performed before finalizing the bacterial retention study design (e.g., nonaqueous
process fluids). The microorganism should be grown in the same manner as that used for challenge-testing
to preserve its morphological and physiological characteristics. The test exposure time chosen for the
viability studies should equal or exceed the maximum filter/product contact time, unless viability of the test
organism is demonstrated to decline by ≥ 1 log before the actual process filtration time is reached.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
46 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Note: It is not necessary to determine the exact point in time at which viability of the test organism declines
by ≥1 log; however, the viability test time should be sufficient to allow meaningful measurements to be
taken during the bacterial retention study.

The organism should be added to the process fluid (or surrogate solution) such that the inoculation volume
does not cause significant dilution of the drug product and viability should be monitored by taking
appropriate samples over the intended process duration to determine cell concentration in accordance with
standard methods. A control (e.g., water, buffer) should be spiked at the same ratio and viability of the
organism monitored over the same duration. If the temperature may be inhibitory to the viability of the
challenge organism (typically, over 40⁰C for B. diminuta), consideration should be given to assessing
viability at ambient temperature so the bacterial retention study could be conducted by inoculating the
organism directly into the process fluid (40). In addition, for broad processing temperature ranges,
consideration may be given to the impact of the extremes of the temperature range on viability of the
challenge organism. If there is less than an approximately 1 log difference between the test and control over
at least 30 minutes, direct inoculation of the organism into the process fluid may be an option for the
bacterial retention study. Additional consideration should be given for situations where the viability of the
challenge organism in the process fluid is reduced by close to 1 log at the desired time point. For such cases,
it may be necessary to reduce the total exposure time of the challenge organism in the process fluid to
reduce the likelihood of die-off, which could prevent the minimum challenge level being met during the
bacterial retention study. A decision should be made between ensuring the minimum challenge level of ≥ 1
x 107 CFU/cm2 is met and ensuring the bacterial retention study duration is sufficiently long to allow
adequate measurements of differential pressure, flow rate, volume throughput and temperature.

Filter flush schemes should also be considered prior to performing a process-specific bacterial retention
study. If the drug product is bactericidal to the challenge organism, then adequate removal/neutralization of
bactericidal effects resulting from residual process fluid should be ensured prior to introduction of the
bacteria to the test system. If the process fluid is nonbactericidal and used as the challenge vehicle, the lack
of potential inhibitory effects to the challenge organism should be ensured during the incubation period.

After the test organism's viability within the product has been established, the challenge methodology and
protocol should be developed.

6.6.5 Bacterial Retention Validation Studies

The goal of bacterial retention validation studies is to have documented evidence demonstrating that the
filtration process will consistently remove a high level of a standard bacterium, or relevant bioburden
isolate, suspended within the product or surrogate fluid under simulated process conditions.

The decision to test membrane discs or a full-size process filter depends upon the study goal. Ideally, the test
filter should mimic the process filter unit as closely as possible, including the membrane type and pore size.
If the study is to validate the bacterial retention efficiency of a particular membrane material, the use of a
small test membrane disc is generally regarded as sufficient, but the filter selected should be justified. The
test methodology used for determining physical integrity of process filters should yield results that are
meaningful in terms of bacterial retention studies, and correlation data should be available from the filter
supplier. If different test methods are used, a relationship between the two should be demonstrated.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 47

The following should be considered when conducting process-specific bacterial retention validation studies
on membrane filters:

• A thorough assessment of the filtration process should be conducted, including the nature of the
process fluid (e.g., aqueous, acid, base, organic), active filtration volume, total product/filter
contact time, process pressure, process flow rate, process temperature, number and/or frequency
of intermittent cycles (“on/off”), and process-filter design specifications.
• Multiple filter membrane lots (typically three) should be included in process-specific bacterial
retention validation studies. In cases where the product may be considered aggressive to the
membrane, the exact number of filters and the test design will depend on the process.
• At least one of the three filter membrane lots used for the process-specific bacterial retention
validation study should have a pre-study or pre-use physical integrity-test value as close as
possible to the filter manufacturer's test specification. The filter manufacturer is responsible for
defining the criteria for the minimum specification filter. Due to improved process control
during membrane manufacturing, it may not be possible to obtain membranes at or near the
filter manufacturer’s production limit. In this case, test membranes should be selected from a
manufactured lot whose pre-use integrity test values are as low as practical but representative of
the standard filter-manufacturing process.
• Membrane physical-integrity test values from bacterial retention validation studies should be
included in test reports. The physical integrity should be determined prior to and after
challenge-testing using water, product, or other wetting fluid for which specifications exist. Use
of a low-surface-tension wetting fluid for post-use integrity-testing may be required to remove
residual product.
• An investigation should be conducted if the test organism is recovered downstream of any filter
after the product bacterial retention study. If the investigation confirms penetration of the filter
by the test organism and the filter meets its integrity-test specification, then the applicability of
this filter under these process conditions should be reconsidered.
• Families of products with the same ingredients, varying only in concentration, may be validated
by challenging the concentration extremes and accepting the intermediate concentrations by
bracketing. If a single product is determined to be a worst-case representative, then rationale
and data should accompany the model. A placebo (without the API but belonging to the same
product family) may be considered for product bracketing with appropriate justification.
• During bacterial retention studies, incorporation of pressure increases to simulate integritytesting
(e.g., PUPSIT) should be based on risk assessment performed by the end-user (e.g., if
process fluid is used for PUPSIT that could potentially pose a risk to bacterial penetration).
Examples of factors to consider for risk assessment include the potential bioburden in the
wetting fluid (based on a qualitative and quantitative assessment), type of integrity-test
performed, and maximum number of integrity-tests that the filter could be exposed to. Filter
suppliers qualify the filter to be able to withstand the elevated pressures resulting from
integrity-testing. Therefore, the risk assessment should be focused on the potential for any
bioburden in the wetting fluid to penetrate the filter as a result of PUPSIT.
• Under typical manufacturing conditions with controlled conditions, the risk of bacterial
penetration due to PUPSIT is considered low. If PUPSIT simulation is deemed necessary, the
test design should be accompanied by a technical rationale.
• Filter reuse is typically not practical or recommended for pharmaceutical purposes. However, if
a sterilizing-grade filter is reused, justification should be provided, and reuse parameters should
be validated. Scale-down laboratory studies are unlikely to be able to simulate the conditions of
filter reuse by an end user (e.g., multiple sterilization cycles, clean in place, excessive
handling). Therefore, consideration should be given to testing process filters that have been
exposed to the entire cycle of reuse by the end-user to supplement the small-scale study.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
48 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

6.6.6 Bacterial Retention Validation Studies: Considerations for Selection of Worst-Case
Test Conditions

There are different levels of risk associated with process-filtration parameters. Some are associated with
microbial proliferation in the product prior to filtration, while others are associated with a higher risk of
passage of bacteria through the filter. While some generalizations can be made with respect to selection of
worst-case test parameters, it is important that worst-case parameters are determined on a case-by-case
basis. Further, the worst-case parameters should be selected such that the intended manufacturing conditions
are covered by the process-specific bacterial retention studies but should be reflective of the processing
parameters established during PD (with an appropriate and justified safety factor). Bacterial challenge over
the full process time assesses the potential for time-dependent factors, such as filter compatibility,
maintenance of integrity and occurrence of time-dependent penetration.

The pressure differential across the test filters demonstrated during bacterial retention studies should meet or
exceed the maximum pressure differential permitted during processing, within the filter manufacturer's
design specifications. The intended process flow rates should be incorporated when designing the challenge
conditions. It may not be possible to maintain both the target pressure and flux for the full duration of a
retention study, while also achieving the desired total filter wet time and (scaled) batch size. In such cases,
static wet hold times, recirculation, or intermittent filtration, can be incorporated into the study design when
justified.

Bacterial retention study conditions should simulate the production process as closely as possible, but
variations may be acceptable when they are well-justified and unlikely to affect the risk of bacterial
penetration. Since bacterial retention studies are generally performed in a laboratory, the methodology
should be scaled accordingly. The flux should be scaled to an equivalent flow rate per unit area, expressed
for example in (ml/min)/cm2
. If filtration is regulated by pressure, the challenge test pressure should
represent the NOR with consideration to the maximum filtration pressure allowed within the process and the
likelihood of operating the filtration process at the PAR. Product recovery by blowdown may be performed
at a higher pressure than maximum pressure during normal filtration and should be simulated at the end of
the bacterial retention study.

Table 6.6.6-1 lists examples of factors to consider when selecting worst-case parameters for processspecific
bacterial retention studies.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 49

Table 6.6.6-1 Considerations for Selection of Bacterial Retention Study Parameters

Description Parameters Worst-Case Rationale

Drug Product
Properties

Viscosity Higher Potential to cause higher pressure to the filter

Surface
Tension
Lower Potential to contribute to bacterial penetration (based on higher-risk fluids, such as
liposomes)

Osmolarity Higher Potential for reduction in cell size over prolonged exposure

Components Liposomes,
Emulsions
with Lipids

Potential to contribute to bacterial penetration

Bioburden Diminutive
Organisms
Potential to contribute to bacterial penetration

pH Neutral Neutral pH more likely to support bioburden

Ionic Strength Consider
Extremes
Potential impact to adsorptive retention

Process
Conditions

Temperature Case-specific Lower temperatures may increase product viscosity leading to increased pressure
to filter

Ambient temperature more likely to support bioburden

High temperatures may identify any potential compatibility issues

Duration Longer Extended durations may increase possibility of bacterial penetration. Consideration
should be given to the total filter/product contact time (e.g., account for time
needed for any potential product-wet integrity-testing prior to filtration)

Pressure Higher Higher pressures may contribute to bacterial penetration under specific conditions
(e.g., higher-risk fluids)

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
50 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Description Parameters Worst-Case Rationale

Process
Conditions

Flow rate Higher Higher flow rates may contribute to bacterial penetration under specific conditions
(e.g., higher risk fluids)

Throughput Higher Increased volume throughput may increase potential prefiltration bioburden to the
filter

Intermittency Case Specific Consider if pressure spikes following an “off” cycle could impact potential filter
performance; exact simulation of “on/off’ cycles may not be possible in scale-down
test

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 51

6.6.7 Factors to Consider for Bacterial Retention Study Design

If questions arise during protocol development regarding the acceptability of a testing methodology, it may
be advisable to contact the appropriate regulatory agency for guidance. Figure 6.6.7-1 reflects key steps to
be considered when selecting the appropriate validation strategy for a specific filter and product/process
combination.

*Note: Concurrence of the appropriate regulatory agency should be sought prior to using this methodology.

Figure 6.6.7-1 Sterilizing Filtration Process Validation Strategy

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
52 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Irrespective of the test design used, it is important to include a 0.4/0.45 µm positive control filter in parallel
with the test filters to assure organism size, monodispersion and viability. Other modifications for the 0.45
µm control filter may be appropriate if fully justified and still demonstrate the challenge organism is fit for
purpose.

6.6.7.1 Non-bactericidal Processes and Fluids

Direct inoculation of the product with the challenge microorganism is the preferred method of validating
microbial retention of a sterilizing-grade filter. This is possible with products and process fluids that have
demonstrated no bactericidal effects from the product or processing conditions. For these processes, the
product should be directly inoculated with the challenge organism at sufficient concentration and under
simulated processing conditions, including time, pressure, flow rate, volume throughput and other critical
variables (e.g., temperature) as indicated in Table 6.6.6-1. Dilution from bacterial inoculation should be
minimized to prevent altering the product any more than necessary.

6.6.7.2 Bacteriostatic/Bactericidal/Nondispersive Challenge Fluids

Performing bacterial retention studies on bactericidal products makes it more difficult to answer questions
relating to validation, such as What effect does the product have on the filter and what effect does the
product have on flora within the product? Bacterial retention studies performed on a bactericidal
formulation, or under challenge conditions adverse to microbial viability (e.g., elevated temperature), may
not produce valid results.

To evaluate the potential effect of the product/process on the filter, the filter may be preconditioned with the
product under simulated processing conditions, including flow rate, pressure, temperature, volume
throughput and time. This preconditioning may be performed by recirculating the product through the test
filter in a closed-loop system or by a single pass (which could include a static soak to meet required contact
time) through the test filter, followed by the bacterial challenge. Section 6.6.7.3, Section 6.6.7.4, and
Section 6.6.7.5 discuss examples of test-method modifications that may be used to accommodate this type
of bacterial retention study. Other modification methods may be equally appropriate, however, if justified.

6.6.7.3 Reduced Exposure Time

In some instances, the challenge organism may not survive in the product for the total processing time. The
product should be inoculated directly with the challenge organism at sufficient concentration near the end of
the preconditioning phase of the challenge (see Figure 6.6.7-1). The duration of the bacterial retention study
should be supported by the viability data.

An alternative is to expose the challenge microorganisms in the challenge fluid under static conditions. After
exposing the challenge bacteria in the product at process temperature and preconditioning the filter by
recirculating the product (without the bacteria) under simulated processing conditions, the filter could be
challenged under worst-case processing conditions (e.g., differential pressure and flow rate). The challenge
duration should be minimized to ensure the challenge microorganisms remain viable during the actual
exposure, challenge, and recovery periods.

6.6.7.4 Modify Test Method Parameters

Test-method parameter modification is useful for challenging bactericidal products, since it can involve
changing only one process variable, such as temperature. Using this approach maintains the
product/challenge organism interaction. This approach does not account for all possible process/product

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 53

interactions but should allow the use of the standard challenge organism. After preconditioning the filter
with the product under actual process conditions, the bactericidal component of the process (e.g.,
temperature) is modified and the bacterial retention study performed. The product should be inoculated
directly with the bacterial retention study microorganism at a sufficient concentration (see Figure 6.6.7-1).

6.6.7.5 Modifying Test Product Formulation

Another modified method is to remove the bactericidal component from the product for the bacterial
retention study following preconditioning of the filter with the actual product. This may be as simple as
adjusting the pH to a nonbactericidal range, removing or diluting the bactericidal component, or using a
surrogate fluid. Whatever approach is used should be supported by a technical rationale.

The modified formulation should be inoculated directly with the challenge organism at a sufficient
concentration under simulated product processing conditions (see Figure 6.6.7-1). The bactericidal agent
should be removed to a level that eliminates its interference with the challenge microorganism.

Another option is to precondition the test and control filters with the bactericidal process fluid under
simulated worst-case processing conditions. After removing the bactericidal fluid from the test rig, the filters
can then be challenged with the test organism suspended in surrogate fluid that has been justified to
resemble the process fluid (e.g., chemical or physical properties). Other test modifications may also be
acceptable if justified.

6.6.8 Filtrate Sampling

Analysis of the entire challenge effluent is necessary to determine the ability of a sterilizing-grade filter to
retain the bacterial challenge. This can be done either by direct passage through an appropriate analytical
membrane installed downstream of the test filter (whereby any penetrating bacteria would be captured on
the analytical membrane) or by filtrate collection in a sterile vessel and subsequent filtration through
analytical membrane(s). The analytical membranes should have been qualified as fit for purpose and will
usually have a maximum rating of 0.4 µm or 0.45 µm. Selection of the size and porosity should be based on
the application conditions and should not prevent achieving the desired differential pressure across the test
filter. Sampling a portion of the filtrate is insufficient to validate sterilizing filtration, because a small
number of cells may have penetrated the filter and remain undetected in the portion of the filtrate not
sampled and analyzed.

6.6.9 Results Interpretation

Acceptance criteria for sterilizing-grade filter performance are met when no passage of the bacterial
challenge is detected in three test filters with a valid positive control (i.e., bacterial recovery through the
0.45 µm-rated control filter). If passage is detected in one filter, and no assignable cause can be determined,
retesting may be conducted (e.g., three filters from the failed membrane lot) following an investigation and
risk assessment to determine a potential root cause. If bacterial penetration occurs in any of the triplicate
tests, then the filter cannot be considered validated under the specified conditions. If an assignable cause for
the failure can be determined (e.g., damage to the filter or breach in aseptic technique), the suspect lot of
filters should also be retested for confirmation of the proposed root cause for the initial failure. If the filter
fouls prior to achieving the target volume throughput, the bacterial retention study should be terminated and
the resultant total challenge determined. An investigation into the cause of fouling should be performed and

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
54 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

documented, and a new bacterial retention study design should be proposed to ensure volume throughput is
met based on filterability test results.

6.7 Considerations for Sterilizing-Grade Filters Configured in Series

When two final sterilizing-grade filters are configured in series, it is necessary to clarify whether the setup is
redundant filtration or double filtration, sometimes referred to as additive filtration (see Section 5.5.1 for
detailed descriptions of various filter train designs). When redundant filtration is used (i.e., only one filter is
required to meet sterility and only one filter must meet post-use integrity-test specifications), the processspecific
bacterial retention study should be based on only one filter. Double filtration means both filters are
required to achieve sterility (usually determined from process-specific bacterial retention study), and both
filters must therefore meet post-use integrity test specifications.

Regardless of whether the setup is redundant filtration or double filtration, extractables should be considered
for both filters.

6.8 Chemical Compatibility of Filter

While compatibility of the filter is assessed during initial filter-selection by the end user, compatibility
testing may also be performed as part of the final sterilizing-grade filter validation testing. Chemical
compatibility testing should encompass the entire device and depends on the fluid, filtration temperature and
contact time.

A summary of worst-case conditions for conducting compatibility testing is shown in Table 6.8-1.

Table 6.8-1 Worst-Case Considerations for Compatibility Testing

Description Worst-Case Rationale

Temperature Higher Higher temperatures increase
potential for chemical reactions

Duration Higher Longer durations may increase
potential for chemical reactions

Properties of drug
product
Consider pH extremes, solvent and
product components
Based on risk assessment

Sterilization Maximum sterilization conditions (e.g.,
maximum temperature, number of
cycles)

Worst-case sterilization conditions
may impart more stress on the filter

An assessment of chemical compatibility could include bacterial retention study data, post-exposure
integrity-testing, tensile strength, nonvolatile residue (NVR), extractables, particulates, flow rate, optical or
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), burst pressure, and membrane/O-ring thickness (23).

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 55

6.9 Revalidation Considerations

Once a filter is validated for use in a given application, further validation may be required if changes to the
filter or manufacturing process are made. Some changes that may require revalidation include, but are not
limited to:

• Change in membrane type or filter materials of construction.
• Increase in process parameters (e.g., volume to be filtered through a given filter area, flux,
pressure, duration)
• Change in filter configuration (e.g., cartridge to encapsulated device). While the processspecific
bacterial retention study data will likely not be impacted, consideration should be given
to a reassessment of extractables/leachables and compatibility.
• Product formulation changes (e.g., change in product concentration, pH)
• Change in sterilization method (revalidation of the extractables/leachables assessment and
filter-integrity post-sterilization should be considered based on risk assessment with appropriate
justification)
• Temperature of filtration.
• Use of a filter with the same membrane type but not from the same supplier.

A well-structured risk assessment should be performed by process and filtration experts to evaluate the
potential impact of these changes. In line with internal policy for filter management, the filter end user
should approve all changes that potentially impact the current good manufacturing processes (GMP)
compliance of the system.

6.10 Miscellaneous

With the introduction of newer manufacturing modalities, such as advanced therapy medicinal products
(ATMPs), additional factors may need to be considered for the purposes of filter validation. For example,
small batch sizes, short shelf life, and physical properties (e.g., shear sensitivity) may require careful
planning and potentially modified test procedures to achieve the goals of filter validation while meeting
regulatory expectations.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
56 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) ©2025ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

