2.0 Glossary

Definitions have been provided to help clarify
the concepts discussed in this document. While
some definitions used vary, for instance, among
companies and geographic location, the
definitions described below are consistently used
within this technical report. Where a definition
is based on another published source, the source
is cited.

Adsorption
The retention of solutes, suspended colloidal
particles or microorganisms to fluid contact
surfaces, e.g., the surfaces of pores in filtration
membranes.

Aseptic
Conditions that minimize viable microbial
population.

Assay
Analytical method used to determine purity or
concentration of a specific substance in a
mixture.

Bacterial Retention Study
An experimental test study used to demonstrate
that a filter can effectively retain a defined level
of challenge microorganism under specified
conditions.

Note: This is also referred to as “Bacterial
Challenge Test”.

Bioburden
The type and number of microorganisms per unit
of material (7).

Bracketing Approach
A validation method that tests the specification
extremes of a process or product. The method
assumes the extremes will be representative of
all the samples between the extremes.

Bubble Point
The measured differential gas pressure at which
a wetting liquid (e.g., water, alcohol or product)
is pushed out of the largest pores of a wetted
porous membrane and a steady stream of gas
bubbles or bulk gas flow is detected.

Note: This is also referred to as “Transition
Point”.

Bubble Point Test
A test to indicate the maximum pore size of a
filter. The differential gas pressure at which a
liquid (usually water) is pushed out of the largest
pores and a steady stream of gas bubbles is
detected from a previously wetted filter under
specific test conditions. Used to test filter
integrity with specific, validated, pressure
values, wetting liquids and temperatures for
specific pore-size (and type of) filters.

Capsule Filter
A self-contained filter device or assembly.

Cartridge Filter
A filter device requiring a housing for use.

Compatibility
Proof that no adverse interaction between the
filter, process fluid and filtration conditions has
occurred.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) © 2025 ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 3

Critical Process Parameter (CPP)
A process parameter whose variability has an
impact on a critical quality attribute and
therefore should be monitored or controlled to
ensure the process produces the desired quality
(8).

Diffusive Flow
The movement of a dissolved gas across a
liquid-wetted membrane based on concentration
(e.g., gas pressure) differential.

Diffusive Flow Test
A test to determine the integrity of a filter based
on a measurement of the diffusive flow rate of a
gas through wetted filter membrane at a set
pressure limit.

Note: “Diffusive Flow” and “Forward Flow” are
generally synonymous terms, “diffusive flow”
will be used in this document.

Double Filtration
Filtration through two filters configured in series
whereby both filters are required to achieve a
sterile effluent as determined by the product and
process-specific bacterial retention validation
study (i.e., both filters must meet post-use
integrity test specifications).

Note: This is also referred to as “Additive
Filtration”.

Downstream Side (of a Filter)
The filtrate or outlet side of the filter.

Effective Filtration Area (EFA)
The total surface area of the filter available to
the process fluid.

Effluent
Fluid that flows out of a process step.

Endotoxin
The major constituent of the outer membranes of
Gram-negative bacteria composed of lipid A, the
core polysaccharide, and the O-antigen
polysaccharide. Endotoxin is also known as
lipopolysaccharide (LPS).

Extractable
A chemical component that is removed from a
material by application of an artificial or
exaggerated force (e.g., solvent, temperature,
time).

Filter (noun)
A device used to remove particles from a fluid
process stream that consists of a porous medium
and a support structure.

Porous material through which a liquid or gas is
passed to remove viable and nonviable particles
(6).

Filter (verb)
To pass a fluid through a porous medium
whereby viable and nonviable particles are
removed from the fluid.

Filterability Test
A test to determine the suitability and sizing of a
filter with a given fluid that typically involves
measuring the rate at which a liquid can be
filtered through a specific filter and the
maximum filter capacity before the filter
becomes clogged/fouled.

Filter Efficiency
A measurement of how well a filter retains
particles. It is usually expressed as the
percentage, or ratio, of the retention of particles
of a specific size by a filter.

Filter Element
The basic filter unit from which cartridges or
capsules are assembled.

Filtrate
Fluid that has passed through a filter.

Filtration
The process by which particles are removed
from a fluid by passing the fluid through a
porous material.

Flow Rate
The volumetric rate of flow of a solution,
expressed in units of volume per time (e.g.,
L/min or gal/day).

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) © 2025 ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

Flux
The rate of filtrate flow divided by the
membrane area.

Forward Flow Test
See “Diffusive Flow Test”.

Fouling
The result of solutes blinding or blocking
membrane pores. It is observed as a decrease in
the flux (at constant pressure) or an increase in
the filtration differential pressure (at constant
flux).

Gamma Irradiation
Ionizing radiation, generated by decay of a
radioactive nucleus, that can be used to sterilize
a material.

Gauge Pressure
Gauge pressure is the difference between a given
fluid pressure and that of the atmosphere.

Hydrophilic
Literally “water loving”, a filter that will wet
with aqueous solutions to allow flow at low
pressure differential.

Hydrophobic
Literally “water fearing”, a filter that repels
aqueous and other high surface tension fluids
and therefore cannot be wetted unless subjected
to a high-pressure differential. When prewetted
with low surface tension fluid, such as alcohol,
the membrane will allow water flow at low
pressure differential.

Influent
Fluid that flows into a process step.

Note: This is also referred to as “Feed”.

Integrity Test
A nondestructive physical test that can be
correlated to the bacterial retention capability of
a filter/filter assembly (6).

Leachable
A chemical component that migrates from a
contact surface into a drug product or process

fluid during storage or normal use conditions.

Materials of Construction (MoC)
Polymers or other materials that make up the
components of the filter.

Medium
In filtration, the porous material that retains
particles as a fluid passes through during the
process of filtration.

Membrane
A thin, microporous medium used to remove
particles and microorganisms from a fluid
stream under pressure.

Module
Filter element that is incorporated into a
cartridge or capsule.

Multi-Round Housing
Filter housing designed to allow multiple filter
elements installed in parallel to increase the
effective filtration area (EFA).

Non-Fiber Releasing
Refers to a filter that does not shed fibers into
the filtrate.

Particle
Any discrete unit of material structure; a
discernible mass having an observable length,
width, thickness, size and shape.

Particulate
Relating to, or occurring in the form of,
particles.

Pore
The channel(s)/path(s) in a membrane through
which a fluid may pass.

Porosity
The ratio of void volume to bulk volume of the
filter media.

Prefilter
Any filter placed upstream of the sterilizing
filter(s).

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) © 2025 ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 5

Pressure
Force applied per unit area usually expressed as
psi, mbar, kPa or kg/cm2
.

Back Pressure
Pressure applied downstream of a filter or
other piece of equipment, via restriction in
flow.

Differential Pressure
The difference in pressure between the
upstream (feed or influent) and downstream
(effluent) sides of the filter. (May be
modified with the following terms: applied
differential pressure, available differential
pressure, clean differential pressure, dirty
differential pressure, initial differential
pressure, or maximum differential pressure.)

Note: This is also referred to as “Delta P (Δ
P)”, “Psid”, or “Pressure drop”.

Inlet Pressure
The applied pressure entering the upstream
side of the filter.

Note: This is also referred to as “Influent”,
“Upstream Pressure” or “Line Pressure”.

Outlet Pressure
The pressure exiting the downstream side of
the filter.

Note: This is also referred to as “Effluent
Pressure” or “Downstream Pressure”.

Redundant Filtration
A type of serial filtration where a second
sterilizing filter is used as a backup in the event
of an integrity failure of the primary sterilizing
filter.

Serial Filtration
Filtration through two or more filters of the
same or decreasing pore size, one after the other.

Sterilization
Validated process used to render a product free
of viable microorganisms.

Note: In a sterilization process, microbiological
death or reduction is described by an exponential
function.  Therefore, the number of
microorganisms that survive a sterilization
process can be expressed in terms of
probability.  While the probability may be
reduced to a very low number, it can never be
reduced to zero.

Surface Tension
The tendency of the surface of a liquid to
contract to the smallest area possible under
defined conditions. It is expressed as dynes per
centimeter.

Surfactant
A soluble compound that reduces the surface
tension of a liquid or reduces interfacial tension
between two liquids (causing formation of
micelles), or between a liquid and a solid.

Throughput
The amount of solution that passes through a
filter. It is described as volume through the
membrane area.

Note: This is also referred to as “Capacity”.

Upstream
The influent, or inlet side of the filter.

Validation
A documented program that provides a high
degree of assurance that a specific process,
method or system will consistently produce a
result meeting predetermined acceptance
criteria.

X-ray Irradiation
Ionizing radiation, generated by an electron
beam accelerator coupled with a metal target,
that can be used to sterilize a material.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6 Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) © 2025 ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc.

2.1 Abbreviations

CCS Contamination Control Strategy

CFU Colony Forming Unit

EFA Effective Filtration Area

MoC Materials of Construction

NOR Normal Operating Range

PD Process Development

PUPSIT Pre-Use, Post-Sterilization
Integrity Test

SIP Sterilize in Place or Steam in Place

SLB Saline Lactose Broth

SUS Single Use System

TOC Total Organic Carbon

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No.26 (Revised 2025) © 2025 ParenteralDrugAssociation,Inc. 7

