27
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Family
Chemical 
Abbreviation
Chemical Name
Brand Name*
Applications
Reasons to Use
Comments
Silicone elas-
tomers
Silicone elas-
tomer
Poly(dimethylsiloxane)
(May contain other silicone 
monomers)
Silastic®
Tubing, fitting, 
overmolding
Flexible, elastic
Broad temperature resistance
High tensile strength
Elongation and tear resistant
Low compression set at elevated and 
reduced temperatures compared to 
many organic rubbers
Not sealable or weldable
Peroxide-cured types can have higher 
extractables than platinum-cured types
Elevated silicone leachables can depress 
bubble point of downstream membranes
Thermoplastic 
elastomer 
TPU
Thermoplastic polyurethane 
Ellastolan®
Irogran®
Tubing
Flexible—can be stretched to moder-
ate elongations and return to close to 
original shape
Processable as a melt at elevated 
temperature
Absence of significant creep
Autoclavable
TPUs have a large variety of chemical 
structures
Critical to specify manufacturer and 
grade of TPU resins
Thermoplastic 
elastmomer 
blends 
SEBS-PP
Styrene-ethylene-butyl-styre-
ne + polypropylene
C-Flex®
Kraton®
Tubing, fittings, 
overmolding
Flexible—can be stretched to moder-
ate elongations and return to close to 
original shape
Processable as a melt at elevated 
temperature
Absence of significant creep
Weldable
Autoclave conditions may cause tub-
ing to deform—tubing should be eval-
uated on a case-by-case basis.
Kynar® and Kynar Flex® are registered trademarks of Arkema, Inc. Evatane® and Rilsan® are registered trademarks of Arkema SA. Teflon®, Rynite®, Elvax®, Crastin®, and Zytel® 
are registered trademarks of E.I. Dupont de Nemours and Company. Dowlex® and Engage® are registered trademarks of The Dow Chemical Company. C-Flex® is a registered 
trademark of Saint-Gobain. Elastollan® and Ultramid® 6,6 are registered trademarks of BASF. Lexan® is a registered trademark of SABIC. Makrolon® is a registered trademark of 
Bayer Material Science. Fluon® is a registered trademark of AGS. Moplen® and Pro-fax® are registered trademarks of Basell NV. Irogran® is a registered trademark of Huntsman.
Table 4.8-1 (Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
28
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
4.8.1	 Fluid Management
Fluid management describes the delivery of process fluids (e.g., buffers and culture media, process 
intermediates, and bulk drug product) to the point of use in the manufacturing stream.
4.8.1.1	Technological Examples
A fluid management system may include the following components:
• An SU bag to hold the process fluid
• A fluid-transfer manifold
• A storage container (usually reusable) to support the bag
• Packaging material (as required) for intra- or interfacility transportation (refer to Section 4.17, 
Transportation).
A fluid-transfer manifold can be integrated directly with a bag to establish a complete fluid delivery 
system. The specific considerations for fluid management are summarized in Table 4.8.1.1-1.
Table 4.8.1.1-1	
Specific Considerations for Fluid Management
Factor
Consideration
Desired integration 
level
Simplify the design of the SUS by evaluating its functionality and complexity. Explore 
opportunities for implementing either a standard configuration or an application-specific 
configuration.
Packaging materials
Evaluate SUS or the reuse of storage containers and packaging material.
Microbial control
Investigate either the need to use presterilized components or a nonsterile system in 
a particular application. Compare the value of commercially available presterilized fluid 
pathway assemblies to that of traditional d fluid pathway assemblies and containers 
produced in-house.
Sterilization
Assess the value of presterilized fluid pathway assemblies supplied by the assembly 
supplier versus in-house cleaning and sterilization responsibilities.
Freedom from leaks
Evaluate supplier steps taken to assure a leak-free assembly.
Inspect SUS for leaks through a standardized method prior to implementation.
4.8.2	 Mixing
Mixing is the process used to achieve homogeneity of process liquids and solids. The process can 
involve liquid to liquid, solids dispersion, powder dissolution, powder to powder, or other combina-
tions. Some mixing processes may require temperature regulation. The choice of mixing technology 
depends on the type of mixing required; the solubility, viscosity, or particle size of the constituents; 
and the scale of the operation.
4.8.2.1	Technological Examples
The particular method of mixing can be used to classify SU mixers into five main categories:
1.	 Rocker-style bag mixer — A rocker bag system is composed of a pillow-style bag attached to the 
top of a rocker platform. The bag is partially filled with liquid and inflated to create a pillow-shaped 
structure. The liquid is agitated in a back-and-forth or orbital movement to create a waveform on 
the liquid surface. The angle and frequency of rocking affects the size and speed of the resulting 
wave. Mixing is controlled by the intensity of the rocking action and the length of time the fluid is 
mixed. Addition of an electric blanket to the platform is used for temperature regulation.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
29
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
2.	 Stirred-tank mixer — A stirred-tank mixer is composed of a 3D bag inserted in an open-tank support 
structure made from rigid plastic or metal (e.g., aluminum or stainless steel). In this configuration, 
mixing is accomplished via an internal impeller driven by electromagnets. The purpose of the 
support structure is to support the shape of the bag and to counter the hydrostatic pressure in the 
bag. The bags are designed to be similar to the internal geometry of the support structure. An 
electric blanket or water jacket is used for temperature regulation. Although cylindrical systems 
are the most common, cube-shaped systems are available in various process sizes.
3.	 Vibromixer — A vibromixer is composed of a 3D bag with integrated polymeric disk impellers 
containing multiple conical perforations and a shaft, which is inserted into an outer support 
container or tank made of rigid plastic or stainless steel. The temperature regulation of a 
vibromixer is similar to that of stirred-tank mixers.
4.	 Recirculation loop — A recirculation loop provides a simple method for mixing using, for 
example, dip tubes and a peristaltic pump. These can be readily integrated into a bag.
5.	 Unique configurations — Novel mixing methods, including bellows, acoustic, and hybrid 
systems, continue to emerge. They rely on specific bag geometry and other unique design aspects 
for liquid movement (e.g., collapsible and expandable bellows sections designed into a container).
The specific considerations for selecting a mixing technique are summarized in Table 4.8.2.1-1.
Table 4.8.2.1-1	 Specific Considerations for Mixing
Factor
Consideration
Process performance
Factors such as mixing time, agitator speed, and temperature may have to be ad-
justed to achieve desired process goals.
Mixing components
Because the components are mass produced, the ability to customize each compo-
nent to suit a particular process may be limited.
Powder handling 
Evaluate powder containment and handling options for ease of use, recovery, and 
potential interference with SUS materials.
Temperature control
Check the system for efficient heat transfer and proper alignment of mixing bags to 
container wall.
Mixing homogeneity
It is important for the operation of the SUS that a homogeneous solution can be 
produced from either emulsion or powder dispersion.
Heat transfer
To facilitate proper mixing, it may be necessary to transfer heat to the mixing bag. 
Consider impact of temperature control on component solubility during mixing.
4.8.3	 Fermenters and Bioreactors
The fermenter or bioreactor is the system that maintains appropriate growth conditions to support 
the drug-product-producing strain.
4.8.3.1	Technological Examples
The following are the three main design categories of SU fermenters or bioreactors:
• Rocker-style bag bioreactor — A rocker-style bag bioreactor is a rocker mixer that can be used to 
monitor and control cell growth–related process parameters like pH and dissolved oxygen and also 
allows for product sampling. The rocking action is used to control mixing and dissolved oxygen. 
Headspace gas, sparge tubes, or a combination can also be used to regulate dissolved oxygen. 
Temperature regulation is achieved via heat transfer to the surface of the rocker.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
30
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
• Stirred-tank bioreactor — An SU stirred-tank bioreactor comprises a tube-shaped 3D bag inserted 
into an open-tank support structure made from plastic or stainless steel. The support structure 
retains the shape of the bag, counters hydrostatic pressure, and restrains the bag from moving 
around. Temperature regulation of the bioreactor is via an electric blanket or water jacket. A 
jacketed temperature regulation system allows for cooling of the culture during growth or prior 
to harvest and clarification. An agitator can be mounted either above or below the bioreactor. The 
impeller, shaft, and shaft cover (if used) and seal (if used) are integrated into the bag.
• Other SU fermenters and bioreactors — Hollow fiber systems remain in use for cell culture applications 
that are operated in perfusion mode. In addition, scaled-up versions of rigid, plastic cell-culture ware, novel 
bioreactor designs with unique mixing techniques (e.g., vibromixers, orbital shakers, paddle, and airlift) 
are being produced along with hybrid systems. These emerging systems often rely on bag geometry and 
other unique design aspects to achieve mass transfer. Novel SU fermenters and bioreactors are becoming 
commercially available. Technological advances in the method of agitation seem to be driving innovations 
in the new generation of SU fermenters and bioreactors. SU fermenters require unique strategies for heat 
and mass transfer in order to control temperature and the necessary oxygen transfer rates.
The specific considerations for fermenters or bioreactors are summarized in Table 4.8.3.1-1.
Table 4.8.3.1-1	 Specific Considerations for Fermenters or Bioreactors
Factor
Consideration
Process control
SU sensors and the mating control systems may have different capabilities from a tradi-
tional MUS.
Process limitations
Compared to MUS, SU fermenters and bioreactors may be limited in the regulation of tem-
perature, pressure, and oxygenation rates.
Polymer-specific 
effects
Make sure that the components neither adsorb nor produce reactive leachables, which could 
have adverse effects on cell viability, productivity, and the quality of the molecule of interest.
Design attributes
Investigate the quality of mixing and the magnitude of induced shear during the evaluation 
of specific, user-application requirements for the SUS bioreactor.
Light sensitivity
Determine the impact of exposure to ambient light on cells cultured in a transparent fer-
menter or bioreactor bag.
Mass transfer
Determine the capability of SUS to achieve desired power input, KLa*, and oxygen transfer rate.
Heat transfer
Determine the capability of SUS to transfer heat to and from the culture.
Cell viability and 
growth rate
Determine the capability of SU bioreactor to support cell viability and growth rate.
Sensors
Compare requirements for process sensors (e.g., temperature, pH, and dissolved oxygen) 
to the sensor technology used, effects on the sterile boundary, level of SUS integration, and 
sensor accuracy, robustness, and calibration.
*	 KLa = the volumetric mass-transfer coefficient that describes the efficiency with which oxygen can be deliv-
ered to a bioreactor for a given set of operating conditions
4.9	 Storage
Appropriate storage is necessary in order to maintain the quality of process solutions (e.g., buffers and 
culture media), intermediates, and bulk drug substance until they are ready for further processing. 
Long-term storage of process intermediates often requires rapid, controlled freezing or cryogenic 
preservation. The storage bag must be qualified for the specific use, with a focus on maintaining bag 
integrity at the lower of the storage or freezing temperatures.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
31
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
4.9.1	 Technological Examples
A storage bag with a polyethylene fluid contact layer is normally used to store aqueous-based liquid 
intermediates. Polyethylene polymers (particularly low-density grades) have broad chemical compat-
ibility and very low reactivity to most intermediates and process fluids. Other materials like fluo-
ropolymers are used to address specific process compatibility concerns.
Typical plastics used for freezing applications include poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) and poly(ethylene 
vinyl acetate) (EVA). These materials are particularly good at retaining their mechanical strength at very low 
freezing temperatures. Specific bag systems have been integrated into commercially available controlled 
freeze-thaw systems. A gas barrier such as ethylene vinyl alcohol (EVOH) is typically used with EVA to create 
a multilayered composite film that offers mechanical strength and resistance to gas permeation.
For short-term storage, process intermediates in standard bags are normally kept at ambient tempera-
ture or in a refrigerator. Long-term storage of process intermediates often requires rapid, controlled 
freezing or cryogenic preservation (refer to Section 4.10, Freezing). Factors that affect the storage of 
process intermediates are summarized in Table 4.9.1-1.
Table 4.9.1-1	Specific Considerations for the Storage of Process Intermediates
Factor
Consideration
Potential for loss of qual-
ity (e.g., chemical, physi-
cal, or functional) of the 
process intermediate
In some cases, the process intermediates may have adverse interactions with the 
polymeric bag containers of the SUS. A special protective film may have to be ap-
plied to a bag containing oxygen-sensitive or photolabile process intermediates. It is 
vital to make sure that chemicals leaching from the polymer in the course of storage 
do not have adverse effects on the intermediates, buffer, or culture media that might 
get carried to unit operations.
Maintenance of system 
integrity
Ensure the integrity of the SUS by the careful choice and qualification of the bag, use 
of a supporting structure, and adherence to good laboratory practices.
Microbial quality
Ensure that sterility and bioburden control are maintained. 
4.10	 Freezing
The end user may use freezing techniques to separate process pools or intermediates and hold them 
for a short time at the process temperature and conditions or for a longer duration before another 
production step. For long durations, the end user may freeze the intermediate directly in an SUS that 
is designed for freezing. Uncontrolled freezing is performed in standard laboratory freezers, purpose-
designed blast cells, or nitrogen freezing chambers. Controlled freeze-and-thaw equipment (e.g., a 
plate freezer) is used to regulate the rate of freezing and thawing of the contents of each SU bag. To 
maintain the integrity of the bag containing the frozen process intermediates or bulk drug substances, 
careful attention must be paid to the reusable storage container design and logistics of shipping and 
handling.
4.10.1	Technological Examples
• Unprotected small-scale bag: It is common practice to freeze an unprotected bag (less than 20 L) 
that is not specifically designed for the application. Compared to other technologies, the failure 
rates of frozen unprotected bags tend to be higher (Table 4.10.1-1).
• Separate bag shell — The purpose of a bag shell is to maintain the structural integrity of a frozen 
bag by protecting it from bumps and drops during handling at low temperatures. Bag shells are 
made of either rigid plastics or rigid foam construction.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
32
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
• Integrated shell-protected bag — The shell design includes a tubing and fitting compartment for 
security and storage at the most common point of failure. Off-the-shelf International Safe Transit 
Association (ISTA) and ASTM-qualified shipping containers can also be used (10).
• Controlled freeze-thaw system, bag, frame, and logistics equipment — A controlled freeze-thaw 
system uses contact freezing technology to allow for the reproducible freezing of the contents of 
the bag. Contact freezing plates maintain freezing distances by maintaining the filled bag between 
two freezing contact plates. In addition, the rate of heat transfer from the bags is increased in a 
controlled freeze-thaw system, and this decreases the time required for freezing. Thus, a controlled 
freeze-thaw system is part of an integrated refrigeration system for maintaining the integrity of the 
bag and the quality of its contents during fill, transport, freezing, and thawing.
The specific considerations for freezing are summarized in Table 4.10.1-1.
Table 4.10.1-1	
Specific Considerations for Freezing
Factor
Consideration
Storage temperature 
At the typical storage temperature range of -40°C to -70°C, most polymer films, 
tubing, and fittings become brittle due to being below their glass transition tempera-
ture. Therefore, it is important to perform a structural integrity test on each freezing 
system.
Handling
Effective staff training is critical to the successful implementation of a freeze-thaw 
step in an SUS.
Shipping
Cold-chain logistics manufacturers are making robust, off-the-shelf solutions com-
mercially available to the biopharmaceutical industry.
4.11	 Filtration
Normal flow filtration (NFF) or direct flow filtration (DFF) devices are used in biopharmaceutical 
manufacturing to remove contaminants such as particulates, microbial cells, and virus particles. Cross 
flow filtration (CFF) or tangential flow filtration (TFF) devices are used to reduce the volume of a 
buffer and/or perform buffer exchange as part of the downstream process.
4.11.1	Technological Examples
CFF devices are commercially available in the following structural formats: flat-sheet cassettes, and 
hollow fiber cartridges. Currently, only a hollow-fiber cartridge can be classified as an SU filter device. 
Structurally, there is little difference between SU and MU CFF hollow fiber devices. Functionally, an 
SU CFF hollow fiber device provides a higher degree of cleanliness and sterility compared to that of 
a SU flat sheet device. Current flat sheet devices marketed as single-use contain a disposable flow path 
(e.g., ports, gaskets, and the filter device), which is then assembled into a stainless steel holder that 
provides the compression and support required for filtration NFF devices have been commercially 
available in an SU format for many years, and structurally, they contain a depth filter media or mem-
brane for separation via size exclusion. The specific considerations for filtration are summarized in 
Table 4.11.1-1.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
33
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.11.1-1	
Specific Considerations for Filtration
Factor
Consideration
Device design
Versions of most NFF and hollow fiber CFF devices can be easily accommodated in 
a self-enclosed sterilized assembly (e.g., tubing, bags, and filters).
Microbial control
In general, flat-sheet devices are not supplied presterilized; however, they can be 
steam sterilized on-site. As an SU device, they allow a way to integrate a known 
separations technology into an SU unit operation.
Pre- and post-use 
integrity testing
From a technical perspective, it is less important to conduct a pre-use integrity test 
of a sterilizing filter that has been sterilized with gamma radiation. The pre-use test 
has a primary purpose of detecting a damaged filter, a purpose that has roots in 
steam sterilization, which has known mechanisms by which filters can be damaged. 
These mechanisms do not exist with gamma radiation sterilization.
4.12	 Centrifugation 
Centrifugation is often used for cell harvest as an alternative to filtration, and SU formats of this 
technology are emerging for low shear separations, including harvest clarification; cell concentration, 
wash, and harvest; and cell separation. These systems utilize a gamma-irradiated single-use module 
or polymeric liner for product contact and, as such, eliminate the need for CIP or manual cleaning and 
SIP or hot water for injection (WFI) for bioburden sterilization and control of traditional centrifuges. 
Flow rates vary depending on the manufacture and design of the equipment, ranging from <10 to 
100 L per minute at <100X to 8000X G force. Continuous and batch centrifugation technologies are 
available.
4.13	 Chromatography
Biomolecules are purified using chromatographic techniques that separate them according to differ-
ences in their specific physical or chemical properties. SU formats for various chromatography steps 
are available.
4.13.1	Technological Examples
Chromatographic media can be divided into two main categories: resin- or bead-based and mem-
brane-based. Membrane-based chromatographic devices are also known as membrane adsorbers, and 
because they are membrane-based, they share similar physical and structural features with traditional 
filter devices. In order to produce membrane-based chromatographic devices with specific properties, 
the membrane is chemically derivatized with ligands.
Disposable bead-based chromatographic devices tend to contain the same resins and have the same 
general physical structure as traditional packed-bed columns that are made of glass and stainless steel. 
Bead-based chromatographic devices are commercially available as prepacked units made of plastic 
structural parts. They are useful for product campaigning because they can be used more than once. 
As with traditional packed-bed columns, sterilization methods such as gamma irradiation or moist 
heat cannot be used with disposable bead-based chromatographic devices; instead, rigorous chemical 
sanitization is used. As with multiple-use columns, the preservative solution in the SU device must be 
flushed before the unit is used. Conventional chromatography and SU chromatography both require 
large amounts of process fluids like buffers (refer to Section 4.8.1, Fluid Management, and Section 4.17, 
Transportation). The specific considerations for chromatography are summarized in Table 4.13.1-1.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
34
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Table 4.13.1-1	
Specific Considerations for Chromatography
Factor
Consideration
Scaling
Make sure that the method of choice can be scaled to a larger SUS or to an MUS.
Flow rate and capacity
Membrane adsorbers are used in polishing steps because they have a relatively high 
flow rate and low binding capacity.
4.14	 Drug Product Final Filling
The impact of any failures in final fill operations is high, since further processing cannot reduce qual-
ity failures at this stage. Common strategies for reducing the risk of failure include performing filling 
operations in aseptic environments, use of physical barrier systems to separate operators from the 
process, and validating the sterility of process components (refer to Section 4.15, Isolators).
SU components are widely used in product final filling operations. For example, flexible plastic tub-
ing is used between the filling pump head and needle. Another example is a peristaltic filling system, 
which employs disposable peristaltic tubing inside the pump head. Both types of tubing are normally 
replaced between batches.
4.14.1	Technological Examples
An SU dosing system comprises a product hold bag, supply tubing, and a filling needle. These compo-
nents are assembled in a cleanroom and sterilized using gamma irradiation. The complete assembly 
is removed from its outer pouch and connected to the filling machine immediately before use. The 
filling machine may be as simple as a single pump or may contain multiple pumps to achieve com-
mercial production speeds.
SU filling systems are controlled volumetrically or gravimetrically.
• Volumetric dosing system — This type of system involves a volumetric system that consists of a 
peristaltic pump and specialized tubing, within which flows the product to be dispensed. Peristaltic 
pumps work by mechanically compressing the tubing within the pump head to push a specified 
volume of fluid through the dosing path. Accurate dosing depends on factors such as the mechanical 
life of the pump tubing. A positive displacement pump-based system relies on the use of either a 
rotary-piston or rolling-diaphragm pump design. In both cases, fluid is forced out of the pump by 
the action of the piston. Accurate dosing depends on the precision of the piston stroke length.
• Gravimetric dosing system — A gravimetric system is normally used in low-throughput applications. 
It uses an optical sensor to dose a specified weight of the product based on the calculation of the interior 
volume of a given length of tubing or glass. The entire product path comprises SU components. The 
accuracy and precision of the system with aqueous solutions is comparable to that of other dosing 
systems. The dosing speed and accuracy are directly related to the fluid temperature and viscosity. 
Dosing time is the speed at which a liquid will flow through the tubing based on gravity; thus, viscosity 
influences dosing time. Relatively small temperature changes over the course of a filling event can affect 
product viscosity enough to have a significant effect on the dose volume.
The specific considerations for drug product final filling are summarized in Table 4.14.1-1.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
35
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.14.1-1	
Specific Considerations for Drug Product Final Filling
Factor
Consideration
Filling environment
Make sure that the filling system has appropriate connectors and disconnectors. Ascer-
tain that the filling system is capable of being transferred into a restricted-access barrier 
system or an isolator.
Check that the filling system is compatible with vapor-phase hydrogen peroxide (shadowing, 
material compatibility, and permeability). Alternatively, determine that the filling system can 
be aseptically transferred into a presanitized isolation system.
Sterility assurance
Maintain the integrity of packaging and assembly during transportation and installation.
Particulates
Ensure that filling system particulate contribution is low enough to meet USP <788> 
requirements (10).
Endotoxins
Ensure that the filling system endotoxin contribution is low enough to meet USP <85>, 
EP 2.6.14 requirements, WHO 3.4, and JP XVI 4.01 (11–14).
Physical properties
Check that the system is compatible with the required pressure and flow rate.
SU Part Lifetime
For SUS to be used in campaign manufacturing, qualify the lifetime of SU parts to be used 
to ensure they perform properly for the entire process 
Needle design
Ensure that the needle design is compatible with the requirements for fill accuracy, flow 
rate, integration to filling machine, and vial opening. Make sure that the needle does not 
induce foaming or dripping.
Product handling 
and dispensing
Evaluate shear effects on product quality.
Accuracy and 
precision
Qualify the design and installation of the system to dispense the specified volume from the begin-
ning to the end of the filling process (may need in-line weight check). Account for physical chang-
es to polymeric parts (such as pump tubing) that can lead to a systematic drift in dosing volume.
Throughput
Peristaltic pump-based and most gravimetric dosing systems have relatively high fill 
times. The resultant throughput constraint may be reduced by using a more highly mani-
folded flow path compared to an MUS.
4.15	 Isolators
If the canister of a traditional alpha-beta (A-B) port is replaced with an SU bag or connector, SU technol-
ogy can be used for the aseptic transfer of liquids, powders, stoppers, plungers, tools, materials, and waste 
into and out of isolators or restricted-access barrier systems (RABS) (15). To avoid compromising the ste-
rility of the isolator, SU bags are designed to prevent reuse. Categories of an SU product format include:
• Gamma-sterilizable bag with mating A-B connector — Manufacturers of stoppers use this as 
packaging for prewashed, siliconized, and sterile ready-to-use stoppers or plungers.
• Gamma-sterilizable bag with mating A-B connector and tubing set — This bag design includes 
one or more tubing sets for the transfer of liquids into the isolator or RABS. These are normally 
available as stand-alone components or as part of a presterilized SUS.
• Autoclavable bag with mating A-B connector — Manufacturers of stoppers use autoclavable bags 
as packaging for prewashed, siliconized, and ready-to-sterilize stoppers or plungers. In addition, 
autoclavable bags are used for in-house stopper processing, tool, and component transfer.
• A-B connector — A connector is used for liquid transfer. Connectors can be used with either an 
SUS or an MUS because they can be sterilized by gamma irradiation or autoclaving.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
36
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
The specific considerations for isolators are summarized in Table 4.15-1.
Table 4.15-1	Specific Considerations for Isolators
Factor
Consideration
Sterilization method
The SU transfer bag must withstand the chosen method of sterilization (e.g., gamma 
irradiation or autoclaving).
Port compatibility
Commercially available aseptic transfer ports have complementary bags that must be 
obtained from the same suppliers.
Film properties
Films with antistatic properties may be used to transfer small parts or powders.
Sleeve or pipe
Transfer bags may include a sleeve or pipe that extends past the port interface in order to 
avoid contact between the bag and the mechanical clearance in order to prevent possible 
contamination.
Port size
For complex SU assemblies containing filters, tubing sets, and needle canisters, make 
sure that the A-B port size is large enough for ease of use.
4.16	 Sampling and Laboratory Analysis
Sampling is the process of removing a volume of process fluid from an SU assembly. This sample fluid 
is then usually submitted for laboratory analysis.
4.16.1	Technological Examples
Techniques for obtaining a sample fluid include:
• Use of a sampling port with or without the aid of a needle to collect the sample
• Use of a Luer-containing sampling bag or via the connection of a Luer-style syringe to a Luer 
adapter on the bag
• Use of a preassembled manifold of sampling bags that may be filled and detached from the assembly 
one at a time using crimping tools or a tube sealer
• Use of an SU sample valve integrated with one or more sample bags
The specific considerations for sampling and laboratory analysis are summarized in Table 4.16.1-1.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
37
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.16.1-1	
Specific Considerations for Sampling and Laboratory Analysis
Factor
Consideration
Sterility
Determine the degree to which maintenance of the sterility of the contents of the bio-
process bag or that of the sample is required on a case-by-case basis. Although using 
alcohol to sanitize a port before entry does not ensure sterility, it tends to reduce biobur-
den load. One should be cautious of the possibility of contaminating the sampled fluid 
with alcohol.
Number of samples
Use established standards to determine how many samples are required, and design the 
sampling aspects of the SUS accordingly.
Sample quality 
(uniformity and 
compatibility)
Assess the impact of the sample container and the sample storage conditions on the 
quality of the eventual analytical results. Evaluate the system for positive or negative 
interference in the analytical method and for sample degradation related to the sampling 
technology. Make sure that the sampling apparatus is designed to yield a representative 
sample. Recognize stagnant parts of the tubing in which fluid accumulation may occur, 
and flush the fluid out before sampling.
Sample handling
For critical process samples kept in long-term storage in bags or other SU sample con-
tainers, conduct a test and/or validation to ascertain sample stability and container in-
tegrity during handling and storage. The competence of the laboratory staff at sample 
handling is critical to the success of the process.
4.17	 Transportation
Transportation is the movement of process solutions such as buffers, culture media, WFI, and process 
intermediates either within a facility or between facilities.
4.17.1	Technological Examples
The supply of process solutions in large-volumes bags (≤1000 L) from the point of manufacture to the 
point of use is a well-established practice involving the following components:
• A bag designed to fit a rigid-wall outer container
• A rigid-wall outer container such as a plastic drum or tote, or a stainless steel bin
• Secondary packaging materials (e.g., dunnage) and lids or other mechanical devices to suppress 
the fluid wave action in the bioprocess bag
Transportation of process solutions in bags in small volumes (nominally ≤20 L) is an equally well-
established process that requires less complex packaging solutions. The exception is the transporta-
tion of frozen material, which requires special temperature-resistant materials and processes (e.g., 
bags, shells and secondary packaging materials, operating procedures, and cold chain logistics; refer 
to Section 4.11, Freezing).
Shipping systems must be qualified for their intended use through proper design and testing in con-
sultation with a packaging engineer. The ISTA and ASTM D4169 are good references for testing 
standards (16,17).
The specific considerations for transportation are summarized in Table 4.17.1-1.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
38
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Table 4.17.1-1	
Specific Considerations for Transportation
Factor
Consideration
Mode of transport
Compare the use of ground and air shipping over long distances versus wheeled dollies 
that are pushed from suite to suite.
Environmental 
controls
This involves temperature and relative humidity regulation and documentation. Check for 
material compatibility and protection from excessive cold or heat.
Functionality
Ensure forklift access plus the ability to stack outer containers. Make sure that process 
fluids can be transferred in and out of the bioprocess bag.
Room classification
This involves the deployment of the outer container and bioprocess bag in classified ar-
eas, and the transfer of fluids across the same grade level versus transfer across different 
grade levels (e.g., from a C to B grade).
Bioburden and 
particulate
Ensure that the bioprocess bag is suitable for room classification and protect it from con-
tamination (e.g., by the progressive removal of various packaging layers, wipe and/or sanitize 
outer container and polybag, as appropriate) before placing it into a classified area.
Material 
management
This encompasses the complexity of logistics, freight efficiency, and availability and inter-
nal flows of supplies to the point of use while taking into account room classifications, in-
suite staging, recycling of packaging materials, removal of SU components, and capacity 
of the staging area for cleaning of outer containers. Material management capability may 
vary significantly between an existing facility and a new facility when integrating SUS.
4.18	 Sensors
An SU sensor enhances the functionality of an SUS by providing parametric data that allows for 
manual or automated process control or monitoring. Modern sensors can be directly integrated into 
SU systems, and traditional sensors equipped with a fluid-path barrier can be used to measure factors 
such as temperature and pressure. A hybrid sensor uses a combination of a sensor and a transducer. 
Although sensor and transducer technologies have been available in many industries for a consider-
able time, the application of SU sensor technology in bioprocessing is relatively recent.
4.18.1	Technological Examples
SU sensor technology is routinely used to measure factors such as temperature, pressure, and con-
ductivity. Recently, advanced sensors for measuring pH, dissolved oxygen, and CO2, as well as other 
sensors that employ chemical and/or optical technologies, have become available in an SU format. As 
the use of SU sensors becomes more widespread, challenges such as their compatibility with steriliza-
tion methods and the physical design of the SUS are beginning to emerge.
The dynamic range, accuracy, and robustness of a particular sensor must be taken into account dur-
ing sensor evaluation for a particular SUS application. Other factors to consider are the need for a 
common sensing platform across several unit operations (i.e., from small- to large-scale operations); 
the impact of employing multiple sensing technologies, each with different quantification attributes 
(such as range, accuracy, and precision); and assessment of sensor calibration requirements and the 
ease of performing a post-use verification.
The specific considerations for sensors are summarized in Table 4.18.1-1.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
