69
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 6.10-1	Main Fixed Operating Costs
Fixed Costs
Description
Cost of capital
This is the cost of borrowing capital, and it depends on the internal interest rate of the 
project. Asset capitalization strategies may differ for a CMO, an established producer, or 
a startup.
Depreciation
This is the value loss over time; process equipment depreciates faster (e.g., 7 to 15 
years) than buildings.
Staff
This refers to the cost of staff including wages and salaries. Additional functions of qual-
ity personnel may include monitoring incoming supplier documents, site auditing, and 
verification of control strategy.
Value-added 
activities
These include the management of materials, operations, qualification, verification, vendor 
audits, materials testing, and shop-floor oversight for allowing the SUS to be used in 
operations.
Maintenance
Cost of maintenance of production systems, scheduled renewal of valve diaphragms, 
calibration, and systems inspection. Although costs will decrease for SUSs, not all main-
tenance costs can be eliminated.
Opportunity costs 
This is defined as the value of the next-best choice available when choosing between 
several mutually exclusive choices (e.g., the decision to expand a facility may result in 
losing the opportunity to invest the maintenance funds in the financial markets). Oppor-
tunity costs are often excluded from the estimates of fixed operation costs because they 
can be difficult to compare.
Facility operation
This is the cost of maintaining and keeping the facility running (e.g., CIP/WFI/HVAC, 
gowning, and revalidation), and it may vary according to the scope of the project. There 
can be significant differences in facility operation costs between SU and MU systems.
6.10.1	Cost of Capital
The cost of capital represents a fixed cost that is independent of the number of batches produced. 
The capital required for the investment may be borrowed at a certain interest rate or it could be at 
hand. Because fixed costs are added to variable operating costs to obtain the average batch cost, capi-
tal costs would affect batch costs through depreciation and amortization.
6.10.2	Depreciation
The rate of depreciation may be faster for an SUS compared to an MUS because new models and 
technology appear on the market regularly. In addition, some equipment (e.g., reusable storage con-
tainers, SUS holders) undergoes inevitable wear and tear with time. It is important to distinguish 
between building and equipment depreciation. SU facilities tend to have more storage and warehouse 
space but less utility and process space. The type of space required may affect the overall cost of the 
facility and its depreciation.
6.10.3	Staff
The cost of staff depends on the number of batches produced through direct processing operations and 
indirectly through activities like sample analyses, preparation of batch documentation, and the release of 
batches. Since over the short term the payment of wages, hiring, and training would occur irrespective 
of the number of batches produced, it is a good simplification to keep staff costs separate. However, if a 
production slot is allocated at a CMO, the cost of staff needs to be included as a variable operating cost. 
This is because both process suite occupancy and the cost of staff can be viewed as direct variable costs.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
70
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
The cost of training may increase for an SUS because additional effort may be required to ensure that 
the facility is established and run in a reproducible manner. Staff costs can be broken into two groups: 
direct-production (production staff) and indirect-production related (e.g., administration, manage-
ment, automation and maintenance). A time study or production modeling may be used to deter-
mine the comparative cost of staff between SUSs and MUSs.
6.11	 Project Duration, Time, and Productivity
6.11.1	Overall Project Duration
Overall project duration may be an overarching decision driver that makes all other economic analy-
sis secondary. The comparison of the project duration for a facility that depends heavily on SUS to 
one that utilizes primarily MUSs may be compelling enough to make further analysis unnecessary. 
In general, SUS-based facilities have shown significantly shorter project durations when compared 
to MUS-based facilities. This reduced project duration can be used to delay capital investment or to 
speed time-to-clinic, time-to-market, or a combination thereof. The benefit of delay of capital invest-
ment may be measured by both the reduced cost of capital and the significantly reduced risk of a 
bad investment due to more clinical data being available at the time the decision must be made. For 
novel drugs under patent protection, the benefit of reduced time-to-clinic or time-to-market may be 
calculated based on the assumed revenue and profits to be realized during the period of exclusivity. 
Reduced time-to-clinic and time-to-market effectively extends the period of exclusivity by the differ-
ence in the project duration.
6.11.2	Process Operation Time
A SUS may increase the capacity of the facility by reducing process downtime for:
• Cleaning and sterilization
• Equipment setup
• Product changeover
• Calibration
• Maintenance
With an SUS, there is an opportunity to streamline the process by combining process steps because of 
better turndown ratios. However, the end user must consider the entire process because limitations 
in mass and heat transfer capacities may delay important setup or preparative operations for SUS, 
such as hydration, process fluid transfers, temperature adjustments, pH adjustments, and charges and 
discharges.
6.11.3	 Time Constraints
An SUS may remove time and capacity constraints and improve scheduling because of the reduced 
need for WFI, clean steam, and cleaning. Increases in solid waste may be tackled without any adverse 
effects on the main process schedule. In this case, an SUS still requires time to bring components to 
the facility for setup and deployment. The planned batch time should account for time spent in set 
up, deployment, process adjustments, temperature and pH control, and dismantling the systems (67).
6.11.4	 Speed of Process Development
The factors mentioned above, as well as the inherent flexibility of an SUS, lead to an increase in the 
speed of process development without a major change in the design of the facility.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
71
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.11.5	 Equipment and Process Validation
The implementation of an SUS reduces the need to install support systems, and this leads to a re-
duction in the time required for validation activities. Similarly, the time required for cleaning and 
sterilization validation as part of the process validation activity is also reduced. These time savings 
are somewhat countered by the need to evaluate E&L during material and equipment qualification 
(refer back to Section 5). This additional activity for SUS should be based on a risk assessment that is 
performed prior to process validation.
6.11.6	 Construction Time
For a retrofitting facility project, the effect of an SUS on construction time may be evaluated by com-
paring lead times for SU and MU systems. A new facility project may benefit from SU technology 
because processes and buildings are decoupled and many systems then can be installed and validated 
in parallel. The end user must include the following factors in the evaluation study:
• Design and specification
• Qualification and validation
• Space considerations
• Piping tie-ins
• Impact on utility capacity
• Training
• Project risk
• Number of welders and testers in the facility
• The ability to perform commissioning and 
qualification activities in parallel
SUS equipment skids may reduce custom engineering design and computer-aided design piping and 
instrumentation drawing (CAD PID) because they can be built from standardized parts with shorter 
delivery times.
6.11.7	 Self-Assembly
It is possible to create a custom SUS by assembling and sterilizing the various components (e.g., tub-
ing, strips, barbs, filters, and bags). If the quality is similar to that of a commercially available ready-to-
use SUS, the customized SUS should be evaluated against a combination of time considerations and 
fixed and variable costs incurred from the following factors:
• Operator time
• Training for making assemblies
• Validation of assembly and sterilization 
procedures
• Documentation of assembly and sterilization
• Parts storage
• Sterilization equipment capacity
The quality system of the end user must be able to source SUS components as well as their assembly, 
testing, and release in-house. This is a good exercise for a quality unit within a company to perform 
as part of developing control strategies for a commercially supplied SUS.
6.12	 Logistics
A significant difference between SU and MU systems is that the essential components of an SUS must 
be sourced from outside on a continuous basis. An MUS is also dependent on outside supply, but in-
terchangeability between different suppliers is much better. The need for continual sourcing imposes 
another cost, which is addressed in the following paragraphs.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
72
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
6.12.1	Supply
Maintaining a steady supply of an SUS requires additional process activities that comprise a single step 
for an MUS. These include:
•  Procurement
•  Establishing service and confidentiality agreements
•  Auditing suppliers
•  QC testing of leachables and extractables
Apart from the testing of extractables and leachables, the preceding activities may be construed as 
extensions of existing functions with some additional complexities. In addition, the quality system 
will need to interact with the supplier’s quality systems and their supply chain.
6.12.2	 Storage
The number of pallet spaces required for storage must be included in the evaluation of the SUS. In 
addition, storage space depends on the lead times and inventory levels of suppliers. In general, an SUS 
requires more storage (e.g., especially larger SU assemblies such as an SU bioreactor) than an MUS. 
The end user must be aware that storage space may be required for the following functions:
• Central site storage
• Local facility storage
• Point-of-use storage
• Storage area for disposal shipping
• Storage area for final disposal off-site
6.12.3	Transportation
An SUS may incur costs associated with the transport of supplies, products, and waste. The specific 
areas may include:
•  Transporting staff and equipment
•  Establishing transport routes on-site and within the facility
•  Handling equipment dock levelers and jacks
The transportation of biologically contaminated waste on public roads may result in additional costs 
for an SUS. The physical protection (e.g., trucks capable of cold storage and minimizing vibrations) 
required during the transportation of frozen product bags may also add costs.
6.12.4	 Waste
Waste management costs vary significantly according to the specific requirements of the municipality 
in which the facility is located. An SUS tends to increase the costs of solid waste disposal while reduc-
ing that of liquid waste inactivation and neutralization. It is important for the end user to consider the 
following cost factors in the evaluation of waste disposal:
• Liquid waste inactivation and neutralization costs
• Solid waste on-site inactivation (chemical or 
heat inactivation)
• Transport off-site
• Incineration
• Landfill or other disposal method
In addition, the end user must consider other parameters such as extra wrappings, boxes, and storage 
areas for solid waste.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
73
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
6.13	 Disposal of an SUS
Despite the recognized benefits in biological and pharmaceutical manufacturing of SU technologies, 
the end user must still address issues such as residual solid waste from used components and systems. 
Options for used SU equipment include reuse, material repurposing, or solid waste disposal, includ-
ing landfill, incineration, and energy recovery. Solid waste is typically measured in tonnage units, so 
while the implementation of SU manufacturing may appear to introduce a significant increase in solid 
plastics waste, it is often not perceived as significant by waste management professionals compared to 
other industrial and municipal plastics waste.
Some SU technologies may be amenable to limited reuse in continuous processing or campaign 
modes. Examples include nonsterile mixing containers, buffer preparation systems, disposable pre-
packed preparatory chromatography columns, or membrane chromatography units used in dedi-
cated campaigns.
At the moment, it is not commercially feasible to recycle SU materials because of the potential need to 
inactivate biohazard waste or separate SU assemblies with multiple components. Furthermore, there 
is often inadequate volume of total waste for most recycling programs. Recycling is more effective 
and economically feasible when there is a critical mass of materials that can be recycled. However, the 
increasing adoption of SU technologies has led to an increasing concern for the amount of clean poly-
meric/elastomeric material that is either deposited into landfills or incinerated. Most of the SU materi-
als used in the biopharmaceutical industry are either nonhazardous or rendered nonhazardous before 
being shipped out to either a landfill or an incinerator. Although previous technology was restricted to 
the recycling of only homopolymers, modern technology now allows for the recycling of mixed plas-
tics. Silicone tubing can be fully converted to base silicone, which can be used to make sealants, gums, 
and other products. Although some challenges still remain, biopharmaceutical companies are looking 
for cleaner and greener alternatives, and suppliers are starting to provide alternative solutions (68,69).
Repurposing of mixed-plastic solid waste may require cleaning and sterilization, followed by grinding 
into particulate form for use as a filler material. Some companies accept clean mixed-plastic wastes 
for repurposing.
Where SU components or systems cannot be reused, recycled, or repurposed, some form of solid-
waste disposal must be explored. Burial (landfilling) or incineration may be either controversial or 
preferred for a variety of reasons. The waste management professionals of the facility would be fa-
miliar with local municipal regulations for the disposal of solid-waste plastics (including wastes from 
discarded packaging materials, laboratory and cafeteria use, and maintenance). Grind and autoclave 
systems are widely used to pretreat contaminated medical device and other hospital plastic wastes 
prior to landfill disposal (65). This approach is also used by government agencies such as the National 
Cancer Institute (NCI) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), “incineration is a widely-accepted waste 
treatment option with many benefits. Combustion reduces the volume of waste that must be disposed 
in landfills, and can reduce the toxicity of waste” (66). Incineration is a widely practiced method in many 
countries and municipalities. In a waste-to-energy process, incineration may result in significant energy 
recovery. Waste-to-energy technology is employed throughout much of Europe, and it is increasingly 
being implemented in the Americas. Waste-to-energy is used to capture the trapped energy in municipal 
and industrial wastes and convert it to heat or electricity. SU waste may be considered for internal waste-
to-energy conversion or may be transferred to other municipal or industrial waste-to-energy facilities 
(e.g., cement manufacturers who are now using mixed plastics instead of coal or used rubber tires to 
fuel their kilns). Although estimates vary widely, the heat value of mixed-plastics waste is conservatively 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
74
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
estimated to be about 15,000 to 20,000 BTU/lb (34,890 to 46,520 kJ/kg), which compares favorably to that 
of coal at 9,000 to 12,000 BTU/lb (20,934 to 27,912 kJ/kg) and to that of gasoline/petrol (66,70). Table 
6.13-1 shows a comparison of the methods for treating waste from SUSs (64).
Table 6.13-1	Treating and Discarding Waste from SUSs
Option
Advantages
Disadvantages
Landfill, untreated
Lowest operating cost, no capital 
cost
Not an option for hazardous waste, 
perceived as environmentally 
unfriendly
Landfill, treated
Inexpensive, no capital cost
Perceived as environmentally 
unfriendly
Landfill, grind and autoclave
Generally accepted as safe, re-
duced landfill volume
Significant capital cost, extra 
handling
Recycling
Environmentally appealing
Not practical for mixed materials
Incineration
Generally accepted as safe
May be legally restricted, costly
Incineration with generation of 
steam or electricity (cogeneration)
Most environmentally benign, 
some return on investment
May be legally restricted, highest 
capital cost
Pyrolysis
Produces usable pure diesel fuel; 
fuel produced is cleaner burning 
than fuel produced from the refinery
New technology—few options 
available; subpar efficiency
Despite the generation of solid plastics waste, SU manufacturing is considered environmentally 
friendly because it reduces energy consumption and eliminates tedious cleaning and validation stud-
ies associated with stainless steel systems.
6.14	 Sustainability
Green manufacturing and chemistry are fast becoming important business drivers for the sustain-
ability of SUSs. Green chemistry involves the use of chemicals and chemical processes that reduce or 
eliminate adverse effects on the environment. The use and production of these chemicals may lead 
to reduced waste products, nontoxic components, and improved efficiency. SU manufacturing has the 
advantage of being environmentally friendly and energy efficient.
6.15	 The Value Added
Unlike an SUS, an MUS requires several preparative procedures (value-added activities) prior to the 
beginning of each manufacturing batch. In an SUS, these steps are outsourced to the supplier and 
managed under the supplier’s quality control (QC) systems. The cost of these value-added activities 
is shifted from the company’s fixed-cost stream (e.g., labor) to a variable-cost stream (e.g., dispos-
ables per batch). This is because in SU manufacturing, high-quality, presterilized, disposable parts 
are supplied to the end user by the supplier, and this value-added cost and the cost of quality for any 
deficiencies that the end user encounters must be included in the assessment; otherwise, it would 
lead to inaccurate results. Capturing the major value-added activities of process design, qualification, 
operation, and verification across the supply chain ensures that all the required value-added activities 
are included in the assessment.
During a typical MUS operation, the quality unit verifies the activities performed by operations. Adop-
tion of an SUS eliminates many of the preoperational activities (e.g., assembly, cleaning, and steriliza-
tion) from the work performed by operations. However, the quality unit must maintain the same stan-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
75
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
dard of quality even though these preoperational activities have been outsourced to the SUS supplier. 
This quality check may be achieved through a combination of verification and trending activities that 
allow the supplier’s quality unit to determine that the steps were performed successfully. Any devia-
tions or weaknesses in the supplier’s quality system or documentation will affect the end user’s cost of 
quality because it is the responsibility of the end user to ascertain that the SUS is fit for purpose.
6.15.1	Value-Added Analysis
It is necessary to assess the value added and how it affects COG and operating cost in order to de-
termine the benefit of an SUS implementation. This can be achieved by mapping both the separate 
value-added activities and the primary reason for which they were performed. For example, a com-
parison between an SUS and an MUS should include the entire supply chain—from system design 
to final process verification activities and product release. Table 6.15.1-1 depicts a mapping of the 
separate, value-added activities performed (blue), the primary reason for which they were performed 
(green), and the group that normally performs the activity for an SUS and an MUS, respectively (yel-
low). The last column shows the main attributes affected by a change in manufacturing technology.
Table 6.15.1-1	
Comparison of Value-Added Activities
Activity
SUS
MUS
Value Added
Value-Added 
Attribute
Design
Supplier
Engineering
Efficiency
Overall cycle time
Vendor audit
Quality/technology
Quality
Process robustness
Records per cycle
Factory testing
Supplier
Engineering
Process robustness
Records per cycle
Qualification
Technology
Technology
Process robustness
Process capability 
index
RM release
Quality
Quality
Product safety
Records per cycle
Assembly
Supplier
Operations
Reliability
Records per cycle
Cleaning
Supplier
Operations
Product safety
Records per cycle
Sterilization
Supplier
Operations
Product safety
Records per cycle
Production
Operations
Operations
Product
Process capability 
index
Investigation
Quality/technology
Quality
Product safety
Investigations per 
batch
Release tests
Quality
Quality
Product safety
Tests performed per 
cycle
Disposition
Quality
Quality
Product safety
Records reviewed 
per cycle
Post-operations
Operations
Operations
Changeover 
Records reviewed 
per cycle
SUS change control
Supplier/quality/ 
technology
Quality
Process robustness
Consistency
Product management
Operations
Operations
Product
Product capacity
Verification
Quality/technology
Technology
Process robustness
Process capability 
index
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
76
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
A review of the value-added attributes would show a reduction in the number of preoperational steps 
required by operations, thus reducing the overall workload. Although there may be a reduction in the 
number of records produced by manufacturing, the quality unit must still ascertain that these pro-
cesses were completed satisfactorily; therefore, the type and number of supplier records needed for 
quality verification may actually increase. For example, the quality unit may periodically audit a ven-
dor to make sure that the vendor’s quality systems are acceptable and on par with systems employed 
for an MUS. This might represent a different type of activity from an MUS, and within this verifica-
tion step, the associated labor costs and the impact on fixed costs must be considered. As a strategic 
concern, this shift in production concept represents increased reliance on the supply chain; hence, the 
outsourcing of related quality costs is likely to increase. Examples of such costs that contribute to the 
cost of quality are increased auditing, supplier investigation, end-user operational testing of SUS, and 
quality control activities, as well as increased demand for SU storage in order to avoid interruptions to 
facility production as a result of unforeseen events in the supply chain.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
77
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
7.0  Implementation of a Single-Use System
This section provides a framework for the implementation of an SUS. A successful implementation of 
an SUS takes into account the unique situation and requirements of the project and then communi-
cates these needs effectively to stakeholders, suppliers, and sponsors. Although good project manage-
ment skills are essential for any successful project implementation, SUS implementation tends to be 
enhanced by a stage-gate approach in which the details of the application are evaluated and the results 
communicated to the broader team. The approach presented in this section allows for important deci-
sions to be taken at appropriate times to facilitate the success of the overall project.
7.1	 Implementation Road Map
Figure 7.1-1 shows an implementation road map based on a natural progression of workflows. These 
workflows use a manufacturing strategy that provides the foundation for the main SUS implementa-
tion process described in this section (see also Figures 3.0-1 and 3.0-2). Table 7.1-1 provides a more 
detailed overview of each of the implementation stages together with key documentary outputs for 
the entire SUS implementation process.
Stages 3 to 7, as outlined in the figure below, can also be aligned with ICH Q8 and Q9 (Quality-by-
Design and Quality Risk Management) processes/tools: stakeholder management, risk management, 
and process validation and verification.
The SUS implementation road map consists of a series of gateways (G1 to G8) and stages (S1 to S7). 
The stages (shown in yellow, blue, and green boxes) describe the natural progression of workflows in 
which information is gathered and documented. Specific goals (summarized in the drop-down boxes) 
must be attained before progressing to the next gateway. The process starts with a manufacturing strat-
egy (S1 and S2; described in detail in Section 3.5) and proceeds into the main project-implementation, 
stage-gateway process via G3.
The implementation process is not necessarily linear: a more in-depth study of elements during S1 
and S2 may negate the need for some of these activities at the later stages. For example, if a more 
elaborate technical assessment and definition of general principles in the SUS scope document are 
performed in S1 and S2, entry can occur at G4. A parallel approach from G1 to G3 and from G4 to G8 
may facilitate or accelerate effective project completion. S3 and S4 may also be pursued in parallel. 
However, if one or more of these modifications are applied to the road map, care should be exercised 
that the implementation process does not lose structure and that the comprehensive treatment of all 
of the elements necessary remains in place.
Sections 4, 5, and 6 of this technical report provide additional information for reviewing the scope 
and activities of various workflows.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
78
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Figure 7.1-1	 SUS Implementation Road Map
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
79
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Table 7.1-1	 Focus and Output for Each SUS Implementation Stage
Stage
Section  
Cross-Reference
Project 
Implementation 
Focus
Project Description
Outputs:
Document Title(s)
1
3.5 Implementation 
of a Single-Use 
System
Technical survey 
and alignment 
with business 
objectives
Manufacturing Strategy, Part 1. This is a review 
of SUS suppliers and designs, process capabili-
ties, and compatibility with business objectives.
• Concise review of SUS suppliers
• Concise review of SUS designs
• Process capability assessment
• Business objectives
• Confidential disclosure agreement/Nondisclosure agreement (CDA/NDA) 
with suppliers 
2
3.5 Implementation 
of a Single-Use 
System
Impact 
assessments and 
implementation 
approach
Manufacturing Strategy, Part 2. This comprises 
impact assessments for product, process, and 
facility.
• Product impact assessment
• Process impact assessment
• Facility impact assessment
• Implementation strategy
• CDA/NDA with suppliers
3
7.3 Scoping
Technical scope 
definition of the 
SUS project
The SUS strategy provides general guidance and 
the policies to be applied for SU project imple-
mentations (might be combined with outputs 
from stages 1 and 2)
• SUS strategy 
4
7.4 Business Case
Articulation and 
selection of busi-
ness scenarios 
that can impact 
technical choices 
and preparation of 
the project plan
Initiation of a project execution plan (PEP) and 
identification of SUS suppliers
The PEP describes the project, its business and 
technical scenarios and approach, customer 
deliverables, planning, and quality issues associ-
ated with the project
• Project execution plan
• Facility-level plan
• Implementation-level plan
• Operational-level plan
• Process mapping
• Regulatory assessment tables 
(RATs)
• Good engineering practice (GEP) 
outputs
• Risk management processes
• CDA/NDA with suppliers
• Supplier selection and supply 
chain review
• Technology survey
• Technical diligence reports
• Extractables and leachables data
• Validation master plan
• PVV documentation
• Non-GxP documentation such as 
local and national government 
permits
5
7.5 Development
Capture of 
essential and 
nonessential user 
requirements and 
procurement
A description of the user’s requirements for the 
SUS, including layout, design, and specifications, 
ready for the procurement process with the rais-
ing of a purchase order or equivalent
• PVV documentation
• User requirements
• Equipment purchase order
• Supplier’s order confirmation, 
including the agreed terms and 
conditions of sale and guarantees
• Import/export permits
• Change notifications approved and 
executed as part of procurement 
change-control process
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
80
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Stage
Section  
Cross-Reference
Project 
Implementation 
Focus
Project Description
Outputs:
Document Title(s)
6
7.6 Testing and 
Validation
Commissioning 
and qualification 
(C&Q), process 
qualification, and 
operator training
Development of methods and documentation for 
equipment SOPs, maintenance, qualification and 
process validation, impact assessments and risk 
management processes, HSE processes, and 
personnel training
• Goods received/Reception and 
verification checklists
• Supplier documentation including 
operating manual, maintenance, 
and spare parts lists
• Testing and installation reports
• Validation master plan
• Cleaning validation master plan
• Qualification plans, protocols, and 
reports
• Process validation plans, protocols, 
and reports
• HSE plan
• Training plans
• Non-GxP documentation such as 
safety certificates (e.g., CO2/O2 
detection)
7
7.7 Launch
Materials 
management
The routine management of suppliers, purchas-
ing, technical diligence, and quality audits, quality 
and supply agreements, and logistical and waste-
handling strategies
• CDA/NDA
• SUS supplier qualification 
programs
• Technical diligence reports
• Audit reports
• Service contract
• Quality and supply agreements
• Routine purchase orders
• PVV documentation
• Non-GxP documentation, 
including sustainability plans, 
environmental/GMO assessments, 
filings, approvals, and
• waste disposal contracts
The end user should adjust the outputs from this table to match the desired level of project structure in the SUS implementation process. Strict adherence to this 
workflow provides a structured and practical approach; however, it may be equally beneficial to operate on an ad hoc basis by selecting specific documents and add-
ing to them as the project lifecycle progresses. The time at which some of the documents are created may be adjusted as required by changes in the circumstances 
of the end user. A subject matter expert (SME) may implement a simplified SUS project plan whereas a fully established and large company may opt for a complete 
project implementation. Note that regardless of the approach the end user adopts, there is a minimum level of project organization and documentation necessary 
to provide structure and clear deliverables without which the implementation process may falter.
7.2	 Implementation Themes
As shown in Figure 7.1-1, three themes represent a series of concepts and principles that span SUS implementation, and each theme can be applied either as a tool 
in support or as part of the implementation method.
7.2.1	 Stakeholder Management
Stakeholder management is important throughout the SUS implementation process. It helps an organization to achieve strategic objectives by 1) interpreting and 
influencing both the external and internal environments, and 2) creating positive relationships with stakeholders by appropriately managing their expectations and 
agreed objectives.
Table 7.1-1 (Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
81
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
A structured approach is important and beneficial to every stage of implementation (Table 7.1-1). 
Identifying stakeholders who are involved across multiple functional areas would encourage team-
work and facilitate effective communication. Deficient stakeholder management may lead to adverse 
conditions such as diverging implementation and missed opportunities for standardization and pro-
cess streamlining (e.g., the parallel pursuit of several different types of sterile connectors or storage 
bags, when multiple SUS technologies or suppliers are engaged). It may be helpful to create a “power” 
grid that classifies stakeholders according to their influence and their interest in the project. Figure 
7.2.1-1 shows an example for preparing user requirements and managing stakeholders.
Figure 7.2.1-1	
An Example of a Stakeholder Power Grid
The power grid allows the project team to identify, gather input from, and manage internal or exter-
nal stakeholders. It is also useful for preparing SUS user requirements, and it fosters effective commu-
nication among project team members.
Effective stakeholder management may be achieved by 1) evaluating company governance and man-
agement processes in order to identify functional areas, and 2) using a responsible, accountable, con-
sulted, and informed (RACI) template to clearly define roles and responsibilities within functional 
areas and between stakeholders (71).
7.2.2	 Risk Management
As shown in Figure 7.1-1, risk management is important throughout the lifecycle of a project (spe-
cifically from Sections 7.4 to 7.7). Application of a quality risk management (QRM) program dur-
ing SUS project implementation confers benefits on the manufacturer, patients, quality auditors, and 
regulators. These benefits come from an understanding of product and process risks, individual as-
sessments, mitigation or acceptance, communication, and review as outlined in Section 3.3.1 (4,7,72).
Manage Satisfaction
Management Board
Quality Department
Manage Carefully
Shareholders
Parent Company
Regulators
HSE Staff
Keep Informed
Project Team
Suppliers
Customer
Be Informed
Internal memos & positions
Industry initiatives (external)
Websites, Blogs
Conferences
Motivation or Interest
High
Low
Low
High
Influence or Power
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
82
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
It is critical for an organization to use a QRM program to underpin product quality. An effective QRM 
program must be organized as a team effort with regular review meetings involving stakeholders. A 
company charter should provide policies and guidelines for when and how to apply risk management, 
along with the necessary implementation level and control. The risk assessment and risk mitigation 
tools used should be commensurate with the objectives of the project and the quality impact of the 
SUS being addressed.
Risk Assessment Tools
• Information gathering (data mining) and data evaluation
• Ad hoc applications (e.g., using simple tables that delineate some risks associated with predefined 
implementation scenarios)
• Directional-risk profiles
• Fishbone analysis
• More robust applications such as failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA), in which events are 
assessed in terms of impact, severity, probability, and detectability
Risk Mitigation Tools
• Identification and ranking of risks, their impact, and acceptance or mitigation (i.e., applying and 
comparing current and future states)
• At a minor level, mitigation can range from the requirement for further data mining to simple 
process adjustments
• For more elaborate subjects, quality audits that employ an efficient document management 
system are appropriate
• A specified risk-review period commensurate with the risk in question
In-depth reviews of common risk-assessment techniques and their applications in risk management 
are available in specialized literature (4,7,72,73). A more detailed evaluation of the risks associated 
with SUS implementation and the necessary qualification and validation studies is reviewed in Sec-
tion 5.2. Some examples of QRM application in SUS implementation are shown in Tables 7.2.3-1 to 
7.2.3-3. 
Once the severity of the risk and the likelihood of its detection have been assessed, the most suitable 
detection tool can be selected.
Table 7.2.3-1	
Guidelines for the Application of Risk Management During SUS Implementation
Severity
Likelihood of Detection
Recommended Tool
Impacts product quality
May or may not be detectable
FMEA
May impact product quality
Detectable after the event
FMEA
May impact product quality
Detectable during the event. There 
may be latency
Data mining, process mapping, risk 
profiling, fishbone analysis
Could impact process yield or 
robustness
Rapid detection
Data mining, process mapping, ad-
hoc risk table
No impact
Immediate detection
Continuous verification
Table 7.2.3-2 ranks SUS implementation risks by correlating the complexity and process-specific risks 
of a potential application. The highest level of risk is shown in red, moderate in orange, and the lowest 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
83
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
in green. Such a relative risk ranking may be useful in prioritizing the qualifications of SUS suppliers.
Table 7.2.3-2	
Directional Risk Profile of SUS Items and Applications
Directional Risk 
Profile
Complexity of SUS Items
Low
Moderate Low
High
Risk of SUS Application
Low
Tubing & Connectors
Sampling Systems: 
Not a direct impact
Clarification/ 
Concentration
Moderate
Manifolds: 
Externally sourced
Storage using SUS: 
raw materials, media, 
supplements, buffers, drug 
intermediates, product
Drug product formulation
High
Manifolds: Self-assembled
Sterile connectors
Cell & virus culture
Table 7.2.3-3 shows risk-mitigation tools and the levels of control for current and future states in an 
SUS. The risk evaluation of future process states would be lower (i.e., a greater level of control over 
the process or system) if the level of risk were reviewed, assessed, and mitigated on a regular basis. 
Table 7.2.3-3	
Risk Management and Mitigation in Current and Future SUS Implementation
Process State
Examples of Areas or Subjects 
Where Risk Mitigation can be Applied
Status
Current 
Stakeholders
Unknown
Process status
Not understood or is in initial design 
phase; no data collection or analysis and 
no CQAs identified
Risk assessment
Does not exist
Corrective actions or control strategies
Do not exist
Supply or quality agreements or contracts, 
technical diligence, or audit process
Do not exist
Future 
Stakeholders
Identified; stakeholder management on-
going
Process status
Process is understood and CQAs identified; 
qualification phase and data collection and 
analysis are in continued verification
Risk assessment
Valid risk assessments are available
Corrective actions or control strategies
Corrective actions and/or control strate-
gies exist
Supply or quality agreements or contracts, 
technical diligence, or audit process
Agreements and contracts in place; tech-
nical diligence is ongoing and quality au-
dit process is in place
Increased Control/Desired Tendency
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
84
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
7.2.3	 Process Validation and Verification (PVV)
In pharmaceutical manufacturing, process validation (PV) is the collection and evaluation of data 
from the process design stage through commercial production that establishes scientific evidence that 
a process is capable of consistently delivering quality product (8). The U.S FDA and EMA consider PV 
a requirement in both general and specific terms in Good Manufacturing Practice (74,75). Verification 
is a systematic approach for ensuring that manufacturing systems (acting either singly or in combina-
tion) are suitable for their intended use, have been properly installed, and are operating correctly. This 
is an umbrella term that encompasses all types of activities to assuring systems are fit for use, such as 
qualification, commissioning and qualification, verification, system validation, and others (18). Verifi-
cation (or process verification) is an important concept for SUSs and is a primary control strategy for 
sourcing from suppliers. This remains active throughout the lifecycle of the project. 
PVV is a tool that requires an integrated project management approach that involves all pertinent 
stakeholders (e.g., a cross-company project team) and full support from management. A science- 
and risk-based approach to PVV tends to generate a thorough understanding of the manufacturing 
process, which in turn enhances product quality and patient safety (8,74). ICH guidance documents, 
such as ICH Q8, Q9, and Q10, provide useful guidelines for development, risk analysis, and product 
control (3–5). A draft guideline on process validation for the manufacture of biotechnology-derived 
active substances and a guideline on process validation for finished products has been published by 
EMA (75,76).
SUS process validation and verification is normally performed using a lifecycle approach. The FDA 
2011 process validation guidance and PDA Technical Report 60: Process Validation - A Lifecycle Ap-
proach provide useful models (8,74). Within that model, SUS implementation becomes part of pro-
cess validation stages 1 and 2 (S1 and S2). Productive use of SUS is part of process validation S3. Ad-
ditional technical guidance is available for this and for a phased approach to quality systems and the 
application of GMP as well (63,77). 
Continuous quality verification can also be used. The knowledge obtained as the product lifecycle 
progresses will allow a framework to be established in order to attain mitigation of risks, reduction of 
process variability, enhancement of process capability, definition of enhancement of process design 
space, and improvements in product quality. These may lead to other benefits that address both com-
pliance and operational goals (e.g., continuous process improvement) (78). Figure 7.2.3-1 illustrates 
two component elements—validation prerequisites and conformance batches—for process validation 
S2 that confer greater clarity on SUS implementation.
Figure 7.2.3-1	
SUS Implementation and the Validation Lifecycle
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
