39
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 4.18.1-1	
Specific Considerations for Sensors
Factor
Consideration
Process compatibility
Assess the compatibility of polymeric materials used in the fluid contact of the sensor.
Connectivity
Sensors may come with standard hose barb or TC fittings for integration into a tube fluid 
path. Designs that are more specialized allow sensors to be integrated into the wall of 
an SU container (e.g., that of a bioprocess or bioreactor bag).
Sterilization method 
Assess the suitability of an SU sensor for gamma irradiation or other means of sterilization.
Sensor performance
Reevaluate sensor parameters (e.g., dynamic range, accuracy, stability, reproducibility, 
and robustness) after sterilization. Some optical-chemical sensors are sensitive to mois-
ture and drift after gamma irradiation.
Calibration
Determine the calibration and recalibration procedures of each sensor. For example, 
some chemical-optical sensors may require a four-point calibration while others may be 
precalibrated by the supplier.
4.19	 System Integration
System integration encompasses all the activities and components related to creating a functional 
SUS or MUS. A schematic representation of a system integration process is shown in Figure 4.19-1.
Figure 4.19-1	
System Integration
4.20	 Supply Chain Integration
The final SUS may involve a large number of supply-chain integration pathways that are currently 
in use. A company with an SU manufacturing strategy should have highly trained procurement and 
quality staff with a good understanding of how to manage the several supply chains related to the 
SUS products that will be used to produce their drug products.
4.20.1  Factors Which Affect the Quality of Supply Chain
The quality of the supply chain has a profound effect on the quality of the SUS. A SUS supplier will 
typically have a supply chain encompassing aspects of insourcing (i.e., the manufacture or assembly of 
a part in-house) and outsourcing (i.e., the procurement of a part from a subsupplier). Insourcing and 
outsourcing both have advantages and disadvantages. A high-quality supply chain ensures that the qual-
ity of raw materials and final products is consistent; that the supplier can maintain business viability 
and continuity; and that the supplier has access to technical experts for product design and support.
Having ready access to technical design and manufacturing experts ensures that both the design and 
the ongoing manufacture of parts will be executed correctly (refer to Section 6, Business Drivers for 
the Adoption of Single-Use Systems). If the end user chooses an insourcing model, technical experts 
would exist in-house, but they may be too few in number or may be sequestered due to business pri-
oritization. With an outsourcing model, a well-chosen business partner would have core competency 
and experts, but the partner might be less accessible and require confidential disclosure agreements to 
be executed before substantive discussions can begin. What concerns the end user is the availability 
of technical experts to assist in troubleshooting any problems with the SUS.
Resins/Processing 
additives
Film
Bag chamber
Functional 
chamber
Functional 
assembly
Bioprocess 
system
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
40
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
5.0	
Qualification and Verification of Suppliers, 
Materials, Components, and Completed Assemblies
5.1	 Introduction
The qualification and verification of suppliers, materials, components, and completed assemblies re-
quire attention to several factors. It is important to use a risk-based and science-based approach to qual-
ify both materials and completed assemblies for SUSs in pharmaceutical development and manufacture 
(18). The assessment of risk must be based on the complexity of the system and its intended use (e.g., 
product contact versus non-product contact, upstream versus downstream use, short-term contact 
versus long-term storage). See PDA’s Technical Report No. 54 on Quality Risk Management for more 
information (7). In addition, scientific principles must be applied to 1) identify and monitor extractable 
materials from films and other components; 2) investigate potential interactions with product CQAs 
or significant process parameters like cell culture media; and 3) assess the effects of assembly processes 
such as welding, fusing, mechanical stress, and sterilization (e.g., gamma irradiation) on the materials 
during manufacturing. In assessing the suitability of the SUS with respect to potential leachables in the 
final product, extractables may be considered as potential in-process leachables. Finally, the design and 
functional integrity of the completed SUS must be verified and maintained by appropriately trained 
end users via suitable processes for construction, packaging, shipping, and deployment.
The supplier of the SUS must provide sufficient data to qualify the materials and components used to 
assemble the final SUS. In this regard, the end user may use the documents from the supplier to meet 
most of the verification criteria required to make sure that the SUS is fit for the intended application 
and purpose. This requires a thorough qualification of the supplier by the end user to ascertain an ac-
ceptable supplier quality system, documentation, and an appropriate level of technical capability that 
extends all the way to the original sources of materials to the supplier. In addition, the suppliers must 
be able to provide documented evidence of performance claims for off-the-shelf component designs 
for the SUS. A supplier quality agreement must underpin any custom designs that the end user may 
need from the supplier.
The first step in a science- and risk-based approach is to identify and assess the risks associated with 
using an SUS. The end user must identify that the SUS supplier’s approach to the design and selection 
of materials of construction includes components and materials such as: 
• Filters 
• Sensors
• Polymers
• Lubricants
• Slip agents 
Supplier quality, manufacturing and analytical capabilities should also be evaluated. The end user 
must fully qualify and audit a number of potential suppliers before embarking on extensive studies of 
specific materials because it is preferable to have more than one supplier for the SUS.
It is important for the end user to have access to controlled documentation of the qualification stud-
ies conducted on the materials and components of the assembled SUS. Such documentation may 
include:
• Batch numbers traceable to the raw materials
• Product shelf life
• Certificate of quality
• Certificate of integrity
• Endotoxin certification (to required and 
specific endotoxin level)
• Animal-free certification
• Sterilization certification (if sterility is claimed)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
41
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
A robust change control communication and assessment process between the end user and the sup-
plier (including sub-suppliers) must be established to monitor any changes in processing conditions, 
equipment, analytical methods, manufacturing site, resins, films, additives, and more. If the supplier 
does not have an appropriate assessment process in place, the end user may have to perform inde-
pendent testing. After performing material and component qualification of the assembled products, a 
functional verification of the SUS should be performed according to the following:
• Risk assessment — To confirm that the assembled products are fit for purpose
• Process verification and validation — To confirm that the completed SUS functions within 
process constraints, including repetitive use or extended storage (if required)
• Safety — To make sure that the SUS conforms to safety requirements as a pressure vessel 
(especially for larger volumes) or for containment in the event of rupture or leak
If the SUS assembly includes SU sensors, calibration and additional verification documentation must 
be supplied.
5.2	 Risks Associated with Using Single-Use Systems
The risks associated with the use of SUSs include that to the patient, the process, and operators. The 
risk to the process may occur as a result of process failure, but it rarely affects patients because of 
process discontinuation. Normal safety precautions for handling large volumes of liquids, which may 
also be hazardous, must be maintained. The main focus of this discussion is the risk to the patient. 
Begin risk assessment by considering the potential for the SUS to interact with product or process flu-
ids. Some of the important parameters are point of use, duration of contact, process conditions (e.g., 
temperature, presence of solvents, and the ratio of surface area to volume). The greatest risk is associ-
ated with long-term (>30 days) storage containers of certain drug products (19). The degree of risk 
is different for upstream applications because of the ability to use further processing steps to remove 
modified products or leached compounds and the dilutive effect of multiple filtration and washing 
steps. Ishikawa (fishbone) diagrams can be used to map the process and then identify and characterize 
potential areas of concern (Figure 5.2-1). Table 5.2-1 identifies the risk complexities of SUSs.
Figure 5.2-1	 Example of an Ishikawa (Fishbone) Diagram for Determining Risk Sources
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
42
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Table 5.2-1	 Risk Complexities of SUS Items and Applications
System Complexity
Low
Moderate
High
Impact to Process
Low
Buffer/Storage
UF*/DF†/ 
Concentration
Clarification/ Re-
covery
Low
Impact to Process
Moderate
Transport/ Shipping
Connectors/Mixing/ 
Medium Storage
Cell Culture/ 
Fermentation
Moderate
High
Freeze/Thaw
Purification/ Product 
Storage 
Fill and Finish
High
*UF – ultrafiltration	
	
†DF – diafiltration
For assembly error or individual component failure, complex systems with multiple valves, manifolds, and 
sensors may present more risks than simple systems (horizontal axis). Applications that are more demanding 
or close to the final step may pose higher risks (vertical axis). Condensates may get back to the process if fluid 
pathways are not designed properly. In order of increasing risk are the following components:
1.	 Nonfluid contact systems
• Vent tubing and filter assemblies
• Samples and sampling systems for repetitive use
Sampling bags are considered a separate category, as the contained product is removed from the pro-
cess; however, the potential for interactions with bags to interfere with the outcome of assays must 
be determined.
2.	 Fluid contact systems
• Short-term contact, simple components (e.g., bags for cleaning materials, buffer storage and concentrates, 
antifoam, additives, and media)
Mixing systems have additional requirements for establishing functional performance and are avail-
able in a range of designs (refer to Section 4.8.3):
• Bottom and top mixing
• Rocking mixing
• Cleaning, flushing, and draining
• Long-term storage (storage, holding, and delivery systems with impact on temperature, moisture 
loss, and gas adsorption)
3.	 Complex systems
• Bioreactors, including instrumentation (pH, temperature, pressure, conductivity, gases, nutrients 
with impact on mixing, cell viability, cell integrity, adhesion, and shear)
• Predispensed buffer or media additives (concentrates as well as commercial and proprietary blends 
of media)
4.	 Product contact and storage systems
• Tubing, filters, valves, connectors, and manifolds
• Process intermediate storage containers
• Bulk drug-substance storage containers
• Shipping containers
• Disposable filling needles
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
43
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.3	 Single-Use System Assembly
SUSs include fittings, tubing, filters, connectors, bag material (film), and outer packaging. SU compo-
nents are normally received and stored in areas with minimal environmental control. It is critical for 
the components to remain in their sealed packaging, and they should be handled with gloves to avoid 
contamination. Transport into the assembly room must follow standard clean-room practices. All the 
external packaging of the SU components should be wiped with a suitable antimicrobial or cleansing 
agent before moving them into the assembly room. The assembly rooms are typically ISO 7 or 8 with 
a combination of particle and microbial sampling. It is important to design manufacturing suites with 
HEPA-filtered air, low returns, smooth surfaces, and airlocks for entry and exit. Avoid introducing any 
sharp edges or corners into the assembly room because they may perforate the SUS bags. Personnel 
must be trained and wear appropriate clothing for an ISO 7 operation and the assembly room must 
be cleaned regularly. Where SUSs are preassembled, the supplier takes these steps.
5.4	 Supplier Qualification of Single-use Systems
Since a typical SUS installation requires the acquisition of several components from various external 
suppliers, it is important for the end user to qualify suppliers to ensure that they can deliver SU com-
ponents that meet or exceed regulatory and customer expectations.
5.4.1	 Supplier Audits and Technical Diligence
It is important to audit the supplier’s quality systems as part of the supplier qualification process to 
ensure delivery of consistent SU components to the end user. An understanding of the supplier’s ca-
pabilities may lead to a better understanding of end-user expectations and can help identify any gaps 
in the capabilities of the supplier. Therefore, the auditing step must encompass manufacturing and 
technical aspects, and both parties must agree on corrective actions as appropriate. Microbiological 
control measures for SUSs must be evaluated as part of a supplier audit.
The auditor should review the procedure and records for quarterly dose audits where the SUS is sub-
jected to gamma-irradiation sterilization.
Standard auditing practices, extending to a review of quality systems and complaint handling, should 
be followed. Unique to SUSs for inclusion in audits would be the supplier’s definition of change and 
how the change-control process functions, including customer notification. The specific particulate 
control and reduction schemes in place at the supplier should also be evaluated.
Many SUS suppliers may either be ISO 9001 or medical device manufacturers under FDA and ISO 
registration. ISO 9001 registration means a company operates in a quality management framework 
that has been audited by a registrar and confirmed as adhering to ISO 9001 guidelines (20). The manu-
facturing facilities of registered medical devices are subject to inspection and follow 21 CFR Part 820 
(cGMPs for Medical Devices) and ISO 13485 (21,22). SUSs, including bulk drug containers, are con-
sidered process equipment rather than medical devices; therefore, the manufacturing facilities of SUS 
suppliers are not subject to regulatory registration or inspection. Although SUS manufacturers tend 
to design their quality systems along GMP guidelines, the auditor should not expect these systems to 
adhere strictly to cGMPs for drug or medical device manufacturing (21,23). ISO 9001 is considered a 
minimum requirement.
Pertinent factors for a technical diligence assessment and an interpretation of its implementation over 
the clinical development lifecycle are reviewed in greater detail in Section 7.7.3.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
44
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
5.4.2	 Supplier Quality Agreements and Responsibilities
The purpose of a supplier quality agreement is to set quality expectations, identify and develop a 
mutual understanding of pertinent regulations and guidance documents, and provide advice on 
managing quality concerns such as audits, complaints, and change control. Change control can be 
a complex process for an SUS because of the diverse number of suppliers (e.g., compounders, film 
producers, and bag assemblers) and materials (e.g., resins and additives) involved in the supply chain. 
The supplier must provide full transparency on the full supply chain of the SUS and guarantee qual-
ity oversight of the supply chain. The supplier must have a robust supply chain, which may require 
improvements, which can be developed with the support of the customer in a partnership mind-set. 
The extent to which the primary supplier manages the overall supply chain should be assessed, and 
if necessary, audit and technical diligence activities should be extended to the original supplier of 
materials and components. It is important to establish a cordial working relationship between the end 
user and supplier because an SUS supplier will inevitably become an extended part of the end user’s 
manufacturing and quality systems.
5.5	 Qualification of Alternative Suppliers
The use of SUS permits considerable flexibility in the choice of materials, designs, and suppliers. This 
flexibility can be used to minimize risk by ensuring that multiple configurations are viable options for 
any given requirement. There are multiple combinations of films, bag designs, tubing, filters, connec-
tors, and so on, that are capable of delivering or receiving a specified volume of process fluids to the 
required standard. Therefore, it is advisable for the end user to qualify an alternative supplier as part 
of the SUS risk management system (7). Risk- and science-based assessment must be used to deter-
mine the level of testing and validation required. In a case involving minimal risk, it may be sufficient 
to treat an SUS from a secondary supplier as representative of the same class of system or material 
from the primary supplier. The data generated for the original SUS can be used and compared to 
that from the secondary supplier. With higher-risk cases (e.g., bioreactor bags or product storage), 
the secondary supplier’s component must be subjected to the same comprehensive qualification pro-
cess as that of the primary supplier. Note that different suppliers may adopt different approaches to 
tackle a particular issue and still remain within the bounds of an acceptable supplier quality system. 
For instance, supplier A may test systems for bioburden from every lot whereas supplier B may test 
representative samples from different lots as proof of an overall bioburden management system. 
Both approaches may be acceptable and should be reflected in the user specifications (Table 5.5.2-1). 
An industry effort to standardize SUS testing methods would improve end users’ ability to compare 
alternative SUS suppliers and adequately assess testing differences between suppliers.
5.5.1	 Qualification of Alternative Sources
End users typically have two options when it comes to alternative sources: 1) the same SUS supplier 
with alternative sources of raw materials, or 2) an alternative SUS supplier. Regardless of the choice, 
the qualification of an alternative source should be part of the drug substance manufacturer’s risk-
management system. The user should qualify the alternative supplier or raw material source in the 
same thorough way as the primary supplier or source.
With each option, the risk- and science-based assessment will continue to determine the level of test-
ing and validation required.
The issues under consideration differ somewhat for each option. Suppliers may qualify alternate raw-
material sources as part of their risk mitigation strategy at the level of the resins, additives, or the 
film itself (if sourced separately). For applications with low potential for process or product impact, 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
45
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
it might be sufficient to review the data from the supplier’s qualification. For applications with high 
potential for impact, the user may need to consider additional testing (e.g. cytotoxicity, stability). For 
films sourced separately, differences in formulations and manufacturing processes may occur, and the 
physiochemical properties and extractable profile of the alternate film can be quite different from the 
original. Such differences, however, should not be the deciding factor for the suitability of this alterna-
tive material for the SUS. The suitability of the alternative material should be determined by the end 
user depending on the intended use of the SUS.
For an alternative supplier, data generated for the original material can be used and compared to the 
data of the alternative supplier source. In high-risk cases (e.g., bioreactor bags or storage of bulk drug 
substance), the second supplier’s component has to be treated as a specific instance, and full-scale 
qualification is required.
5.5.2	 Interchangeability
It is important for end users to qualify alternative sources of films to safeguard against supply disrup-
tions and possible shortages. In some situations this may be a minimal risk (e.g., sampling bag used for 
monitoring cell growth or nutrient conditions), so a comparison of extractables and leachables data 
from different suppliers may be acceptable; other situations may be more demanding (e.g., storage 
of bulk drug substance). SUS interchangeability can be considered if functionally equivalent substitu-
tion provides a contingency or process alternative while ensuring process performance and product 
quality. When considering SUS interchangeability, it is important to assess the component’s intended 
function, anticipated processing conditions, and fitness for use (Table 5.5.2-1). In every case, the ap-
proach taken should be supported by a sound risk- and science-based assessment with appropriate 
evaluation and performance verification for the type of substitution desired.
For example, a bag or assembly used simply as a container for process fluids with no product contact 
has limited critical attributes—the bag should not leak and there should be an acceptable leachables 
profile. If the assembly has the additional function of acting as a mixer, the design would need to be 
assessed for functional performance, in this case minimum mixing conditions (time, speed, and so 
forth, depending on the mechanism) to achieve homogeneity. Once the design is qualified, this would 
not need to be established for every lot. For an in-process product container potential interaction 
with the product would need to be examined and deemed appropriate for the conditions (e.g., liquid, 
frozen, storage time). The presence of particulates may also need to be assessed, depending on where 
the alternative component is used in the process. For a complex assembly such as a bioreactor, a full-
scale assessment should be conducted on the design for performance parameters and attributes (mix-
ing, pH control, sparging, temperature control, cell growth, viability, titer/yield, etc.). The potential 
impact of differences in growth conditions on product quality should be included.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
46
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
Table 5.5.2-1	
Component Interchangeability Evaluation
Change
Description
Risk Assessment 
Focus*
Performance Verification
Like-for-like
Identical components, dimensions, 
and materials of construction made 
by more than one supplier for the 
same processing conditions
1, 2
Design and user specification 
monitored through change control
Functionally 
equivalent
Combinations of materials with 
the same performance but differ-
ent material suppliers (e.g., bag/
filter/tubing) or processing condi-
tions
1, 2, 3, 4, 6
Monitor performance attributes, 
leachables, and CQAs
Process or 
functional 
modification 
or improvement
Similar function or performance 
with different design and materi-
als of construction and may require 
some process or equipment modifi-
cation for operation (e.g., virus filter 
housing changed)
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Monitor performance attributes, 
leachables, and CQAs in a scaled-
down development study
*Risk Assessment Focus Descriptions
1.	
Design, dimension, performance, and materials 
claims of the proposed substitute (form, fit, and 
function)
2.	
Materials of construction and process contact 
fluid compatibility, contact area, and time
Availability and extent of supplier biosafety (USP 
<87> and/or <88>, as appropriate for the ap-
plication) and extractables data (24,25)
4.	
Suitability of supplier extractables data to bracket 
process fluid and conditions
5.	
Application and potential for subsequent leach-
able removal or dilution
6.	
Product impact assessment
When considering interchangeability, in most cases other than like-for-like, the end user will need to 
do some level of operational or extractable/leachable testing to verify fitness for use. Different dimen-
sions or even top or bottom mixing can have product impact. As discussed in Section 5, Business Driv-
ers for the Adoption of Single-use Systems, the cost of quality can be defined as “any cost that would 
not have been expended if quality were perfect.” The additional end-user operational testing of SUS 
and related quality control activities to ensure process comparability for SU interchangeability could 
be included in the cost of quality and should then be considered in the overall SUS implementation 
costs. After all, if a supplier had perfect interchangeability, this end-user cost would be zero.
5.5.3	 Using Supplier Quality Documentation
The end user may employ the supplier documentation as part of the SUS document verification 
process so long as the end user has audited the supplier and collected the requisite evidence of an ac-
ceptable supplier quality system, technical capability, and application of Good Engineering Practices 
(GEP) guidelines (Table 5.5.3-1) (18). If there is not strict adherence to GEP, then there should be 
assurance that documentation is accurate and suitable to meet the purpose of verification.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
47
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.5.3-1	
Example Supplier Testing and Reference Standards
Vendor A
Vendor B
Vendor C
Compendial
USP <87>, <88>
USP <88>
USP <87>,<88>
Biocompatibility
ISO 10993-4
ISO 10993-4
ISO 10993-4
Testing	
EP 5.2.8
EP 5.2.8
EP 5.2.8
Extractables
USP <661> 
11 solvents
EP 3.1.5  
USP <661>
Nothing unless the User 
Contracts
Testing	
90 days at 40°C 
“Pass” no values
“Pass” no values
5.6	 Extractables and Leachables (E&L)
Extractables may be defined as chemical entities that can be extracted from the components of a material by 
exertion of an exaggerated force (e.g., organic solvent, extreme temperature, ionic strength, pH, contact time). 
Leachables may be defined as chemical entities that can migrate from product-contact or non-product-contact 
surfaces into a process stream. Leachables may also include chemical entities that can migrate from contact 
surfaces into the bulk drug substance or final product under specified conditions of production, storage, and 
use. While leachables are considered a subset of extractables, they can also be derived from product-contact or 
non-product-contact materials, under typical process conditions and detected in final dosage. The evaluation 
of extractables is an essential step in the accurate prediction of leachables and in the selection of a suitable SUS 
dedicated to the manufacture of a given product. When chemical substances are identified that could be cleared 
or sufficiently diluted by downstream processes so as to be undetected, these can be termed as in-process leach-
ables for the final dosage and may need to be accounted for during risk assessment. Refer to Table 4.8-1 for a 
summary of common materials of construction and comments regarding their respective E&L properties.
Drug manufacturers are encouraged to perform a risk-assessment analysis as part of an E&L evaluation 
within the overall context of enhancing process performance and product safety and efficacy. The accu-
mulation of extractables and leachables in a process fluid is governed by thermodynamic (i.e., the extent to 
which the materials would migrate) and kinetic (i.e., the rate at which materials would migrate) factors, as 
well as the amount of time during which such migration would occur. Higher temperatures increase the 
migration rate of leachables from the bulk of the plastic to the surface in contact with the process stream 
or formulation. The user can determine the worst-case extent of the extractables by determining the high-
est temperature at which extractions cease and the entire additive has been removed from the plastic. E&L 
risk factors can be generally categorized as risk to the patient and risk to the process. In evaluating risks, an 
extractable or leachable and the level at which it appears will need to be evaluated for impact on process and 
product quality and for patient safety. The following risk factors may be considered:
• Proximity of the process steps undergoing a change to the final product
• Storage and processing conditions (e.g., duration of exposure, temperature, pressure, pH extremes, 
buffer extraction propensity)
• The type of process fluid (e.g., purification buffer versus formulated drug substance, presence of 
solubilizing agents)
• Construction materials (e.g., PVC containers, bags, and tubing are prone to leaching diethylhexyl 
phthalate, which has adverse effects on the liver, testis, mammary, nerve, immune system, blood, 
and fatty tissue) (26,27).
• Potential adverse effects, including synergistic and additive affects
• Drug dose, mode, and frequency of administration
• Therapeutic necessity of the drug (included in drug dose, mode, and frequency)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
48
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 66
The presence of leachables during any stage of the production process or storage may pose a safety 
risk due to their potential to cause toxicity, carcinogenicity, immunogenicity, and/or endocrine dys-
regulation (28,29). In addition, these substances may adversely impact the physicochemical character-
istics (e.g., via aggregation, oxidation, degradation, and formation of particulates) of the final protein 
product. It has been demonstrated that leachables have adverse effects on cell growth and viability 
(30). Lastly, the potential for leachables to impact quality control tests should be considered. For these 
reasons, proper selection and handling of an SUS that supports the production and processing of safe 
and efficacious therapeutic biologic products is of paramount importance.
Potential sources of extractables and leachables include SU materials used in manufacturing, packaging, stor-
age, filtration, and transfer systems. These include but are not limited to SU bioreactors, bags for intermediate 
and long-term storage, containers, filters, transfer tubing, valves, fittings, housings, and so on. Extractables and 
leachables are chemically diverse compounds that may include but are not limited to phthalates (e.g., plasticiz-
ers), organic acids, hydrocarbons, cyclic esters derived from urethane adhesives, antioxidants, residual solvents, 
antistatic and cleaning agents, as well as trace metals and degradation products from irradiation.
5.6.1	 Material and Supplier Qualification
It is important for end users to qualify alternative sources of films to safeguard against supply disrup-
tions and possible shortages. There will be situations where this may be a minimal risk (e.g., bags used 
for sampling), so a comparison of extractables data from different suppliers may be acceptable; other 
situations may be more demanding (e.g., storage of bulk drug substance). In every case, the approach 
taken should be supported by a sound risk- and science-based assessment.
Detection, characterization, identification, and quantitation of leachables may present analytical chal-
lenges, since these substances represent diverse chemical classes of organic and/or inorganic compounds 
that coexist in complex mixtures in trace amounts (31). Therefore, well-designed extractables studies are 
important to provide an analytical road map and to identify early warning signs regarding leachables re-
leased during upstream or downstream operations or in storage. Emerging analytical technologies with 
appropriate sensitivity and specificity may be considered in addition to the currently available methods 
during the design of such studies. If an extractable may have an adverse effect on the physicochemical or 
biological properties of a protein, performing characterization studies in which the extractable is spiked 
into the product may be of value in assessing the potential risk to product quality.
In order to isolate chemicals from plastic components, the study of extractables begins with the selec-
tion of a suitable exaggerated condition that is not stipulated for the normal manufacture, storage, or 
use of the SUS. It is recommended that the extraction studies be performed with material components 
using the exaggerated conditions with regards to pH, ionic strength, contact time, temperature, surface 
area–to–volume ratio, and, if applicable, organic solvents of varying polarity and surfactant properties 
as the extraction media. If the material component in question is not compatible with organic solvents, 
aqueous media may be used. If a prerinse step is used in routine manufacturing and use of material 
component, it should be included in the design of the leachables studies but not in the extractables 
studies because the latter are intended to represent a worst-case situation. Additional pretreatment of 
plastics such as gamma irradiation and steam treatment can also impact the E&L profile.
A representative sample of process fluid (e.g., cell culture media and buffer) can be used as the extrac-
tion media in addition to others listed above for accurate prediction of extractables. If a representative 
process fluid cannot be obtained (e.g., due to interference with the analytical method), a similar solu-
tion to the original may be an acceptable alternative. The extraction study may be performed using a 
soaking or a recycling method for a specific contact time, under accelerated temperature conditions 
and preselected surface area–to–volume ratio. USP chapters <661> and <381> contain recommenda-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
49
Technical Report No. 66
© 2014 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
tions for extraction conditions with regards to surface area–to–volume ratio, temperature, and time of 
extraction (32,33). The USP <661> monograph also includes general analytical testing for the content 
of nonvolatile residue, residue on ignition, buffering capacity, and heavy metals. However, because 
such methods are not equipped to identify specific contaminants, their scope and applicability may not 
be sufficient in every instance. Several industry organizations, such as BioPhorum Operators Group 
(BPOG) and the Bio-Process Systems Alliance (BPSA), have developed standardized testing approach-
es. Please see the latest protocols at their websites as they are periodically updated (33-36).
Testing of E&L substances includes the analysis of nonvolatile, semivolatile, and highly volatile organic 
compounds as well as analysis of trace light and heavy metals. Less specific tests such as pH, conductivity, 
chemical identity via Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, and analysis of total organic carbon 
(TOC) may be performed. TOC analysis cannot be used with extract solvents that contain carbon. High-
ly selective analytical techniques for the detection, characterization, and quantitation of these chemical 
entities include high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectroscopy (HPLC-MS), 
gas chromatography coupled with mass spectroscopy (GC-MS), inductively coupled plasma with mass 
spectroscopy (ICP-MS), proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H-NMR), and atomic spectroscopy (e.g., 
atomic absorption and atomic emission spectroscopy). For instance, nonvolatile compounds may be ana-
lyzed with HPLC-MS, whereas highly volatile and semivolatile organic compounds may be resolved with 
GC-MS. Other methods such as ICP-MS may be used for the detection of residual metals.
The extractables study must be complemented with an appropriately designed leachables study. In 
addition to monitoring the substances that are leaching under the recommended conditions of use 
and storage, leachable studies must be designed to identify any interactions and the resulting effect 
of such interactions on the in-process material and/or on the product. In many cases, drug substance 
and drug product stability studies may be used to support conclusions concerning the effects of these 
substances on product quality over time. This is particularly important where there is no downstream 
purification process to eliminate impurities (e.g., drug product formulation buffer storage container).
In addition to determining the chemical identity, quantity, and composition of E&L, and the impact 
on process fluid or product quality, E&L must be assessed for cytotoxicity and toxicity in animals 
in order to preserve patient safety and clinical efficacy (24,25). This information may be obtained 
from publicly available literature sources such as ICH Q3C (R3) or Product Quality Research Institute 
Leachables and Extractables Working Group, which stipulates the safety threshold levels for such im-
purities (37,38). In the absence of specific toxicity data, the threshold of toxicological concern (TTC) 
approach may be applied in order to judge the risk associated with a particular leachable.
When an SUS is used to grow cell culture, the end user must determine the effect of cell growth on 
both individual components and the complete SUS. This is important because a recent study showed 
that the breakdown products of gamma-irradiated antioxidants can have adverse effects on the vi-
ability of the cell culture. Spiking studies showed that the phenomenon can occur at levels well below 
parts per million in a cell line-specific manner (39).
Cell-based assays can be used to identify the particular combinations of cell lines and plastic extractables 
that may reduce cell culture viability and growth profiles. End users must evaluate the compatibility of 
the supplied SUS with their specific application, because certain applications (e.g., media storage, bioreac-
tor bags) have been reported to be sensitive to certain combinations of materials and cell lines (30).
The mechanism of interaction of the SUS and contact solution can include leaching from the plastic into the 
contact solution or the adsorption of the contained solution or its constituents onto the SUS. These interac-
tions can be modeled through science-based assessments of the physicochemical interactions of the solution 
and SUS. The use of model solvents for the extractables and leachables is an industry standard that limits the 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
