
ISO 13485:2016(E)
c)	
controlled in accordance with the requirements of this International Standard and applicable 
regulatory requirements.
4.1.5	
When the organization chooses to outsource any process that affects product conformity to 
requirements, it shall monitor and ensure control over such processes. The organization shall retain 
responsibility of conformity to this International Standard and to customer and applicable regulatory 
requirements for outsourced processes. The controls shall be proportionate to the risk involved and the 
ability of the external party to meet the requirements in accordance with 7.4. The controls shall include 
written quality agreements.
4.1.6	
The organization shall document procedures for the validation of the application of computer 
software used in the quality management system. Such software applications shall be validated prior to 
initial use and, as appropriate, after changes to such software or its application.
The specific approach and activities associated with software validation and revalidation shall be 
proportionate to the risk associated with the use of the software.
Records of such activities shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
4.2	 Documentation requirements
4.2.1	
General
The quality management system documentation (see 4.2.4) shall include:
a)	 documented statements of a quality policy and quality objectives;
b)	 a quality manual;
c)	
documented procedures and records required by this International Standard;
d)	 documents, including records, determined by the organization to be necessary to ensure the 
effective planning, operation, and control of its processes;
e)	 other documentation specified by applicable regulatory requirements.
4.2.2	
Quality manual
The organization shall document a quality manual that includes:
a)	 the scope of the quality management system, including details of and justification for any exclusion 
or non-application;
b)	 the documented procedures for the quality management system, or reference to them;
c)	
a description of the interaction between the processes of the quality management system.
The quality manual shall outline the structure of the documentation used in the quality management 
system.
4.2.3 
Medical device file
For each medical device type or medical device family, the organization shall establish and maintain one 
or more files either containing or referencing documents generated to demonstrate conformity to the 
requirement of this International Standard and compliance with applicable regulatory requirements.
The content of the file(s) shall include, but is not limited to:
a)	 general description of the medical device, intended use/purpose, and labelling, including any 
instructions for use;
﻿
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
7
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
b)	 specifications for product;
c)	
specifications or procedures for manufacturing, packaging, storage, handling and distribution;
d)	 procedures for measuring and monitoring;
e)	 as appropriate, requirements for installation;
f)	
as appropriate, procedures for servicing.
4.2.4	
Control of documents
Documents required by the quality management system shall be controlled. Records are a special type 
of document and shall be controlled according to the requirements given in 4.2.5.
A documented procedure shall define the controls needed to:
a)	 review and approve documents for adequacy prior to issue;
b)	 review, update as necessary and re-approve documents;
c)	
ensure that the current revision status of and changes to documents are identified;
d)	 ensure that relevant versions of applicable documents are available at points of use;
e)	 ensure that documents remain legible and readily identifiable;
f)	
ensure that documents of external origin, determined by the organization to be necessary for the 
planning and operation of the quality management system, are identified and their distribution 
controlled;
g)	 prevent deterioration or loss of documents;
h)	 prevent the unintended use of obsolete documents and apply suitable identification to them.
The organization shall ensure that changes to documents are reviewed and approved either by the 
original approving function or another designated function that has access to pertinent background 
information upon which to base its decisions.
The organization shall define the period for which at least one copy of obsolete documents shall be 
retained. This period shall ensure that documents to which medical devices have been manufactured 
and tested are available for at least the lifetime of the medical device as defined by the organization, 
but not less than the retention period of any resulting record (see 4.2.5), or as specified by applicable 
regulatory requirements.
4.2.5	
Control of records
Records shall be maintained to provide evidence of conformity to requirements and of the effective 
operation of the quality management system.
The organization shall document procedures to define the controls needed for the identification, 
storage, security and integrity, retrieval, retention time and disposition of records.
The organization shall define and implement methods for protecting confidential health information 
contained in records in accordance with the applicable regulatory requirements.
Records shall remain legible, readily identifiable and retrievable. Changes to a record shall remain 
identifiable.
The organization shall retain the records for at least the lifetime of the medical device as defined by the 
organization, or as specified by applicable regulatory requirements, but not less than two years from 
the medical device release by the organization.
﻿
8
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
5	 Management responsibility
5.1	 Management commitment
Top management shall provide evidence of its commitment to the development and implementation of 
the quality management system and maintenance of its effectiveness by:
a)	 communicating to the organization the importance of meeting customer as well as applicable 
regulatory requirements;
b)	 establishing the quality policy;
c)	
ensuring that quality objectives are established;
d)	 conducting management reviews;
e)	 ensuring the availability of resources.
5.2	 Customer focus
Top management shall ensure that customer requirements and applicable regulatory requirements are 
determined and met.
5.3	 Quality policy
Top management shall ensure that the quality policy:
a)	 is applicable to the purpose of the organization;
b)	 includes a commitment to comply with requirements and to maintain the effectiveness of the 
quality management system;
c)	
provides a framework for establishing and reviewing quality objectives;
d)	 is communicated and understood within the organization;
e)	 is reviewed for continuing suitability.
5.4	 Planning
5.4.1	
Quality objectives
Top management shall ensure that quality objectives, including those needed to meet applicable 
regulatory requirements and requirements for product, are established at relevant functions and levels 
within the organization. The quality objectives shall be measurable and consistent with the quality policy.
5.4.2	
Quality management system planning
Top management shall ensure that:
a)	 the planning of the quality management system is carried out in order to meet the requirements 
given in 4.1, as well as the quality objectives;
b)	 the integrity of the quality management system is maintained when changes to the quality 
management system are planned and implemented.
﻿
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
9
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
5.5	 Responsibility, authority and communication
5.5.1	
Responsibility and authority
Top management shall ensure that responsibilities and authorities are defined, documented and 
communicated within the organization.
Top management shall document the interrelation of all personnel who manage, perform and verify work 
affecting quality and shall ensure the independence and authority necessary to perform these tasks.
5.5.2	
Management representative
Top management shall appoint a member of management who, irrespective of other responsibilities, 
has responsibility and authority that includes:
a)	 ensuring that processes needed for the quality management system are documented;
b)	 reporting to top management on the effectiveness of the quality management system and any need 
for improvement;
c)	
ensuring the promotion of awareness of applicable regulatory requirements and quality 
management system requirements throughout the organization.
5.5.3	
Internal communication
Top management shall ensure that appropriate communication processes are established within 
the organization and that communication takes place regarding the effectiveness of the quality 
management system.
5.6	 Management review
5.6.1	
General
The organization shall document procedures for management review. Top management shall review 
the organization’s quality management system at documented planned intervals to ensure its 
continuing suitability, adequacy and effectiveness. The review shall include assessing opportunities for 
improvement and the need for changes to the quality management system, including the quality policy 
and quality objectives.
Records from management reviews shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
5.6.2	
Review input
The input to management review shall include, but is not limited to, information arising from:
a)	 feedback;
b)	 complaint handling;
c)	
reporting to regulatory authorities;
d)	 audits;
e)	 monitoring and measurement of processes;
f)	
monitoring and measurement of product;
g)	 corrective action;
h)	 preventive action;
﻿
10
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
i)	
follow-up actions from previous management reviews;
j)	
changes that could affect the quality management system;
k)	 recommendations for improvement;
l)	
applicable new or revised regulatory requirements.
5.6.3	
Review output
The output from management review shall be recorded (see 4.2.5) and include the input reviewed and 
any decisions and actions related to:
a)	 improvement needed to maintain the suitability, adequacy, and effectiveness of the quality 
management system and its processes;
b)	 improvement of product related to customer requirements;
c)	
changes needed to respond to applicable new or revised regulatory requirements;
d)	 resource needs.
6	 Resource management
6.1	 Provision of resources
The organization shall determine and provide the resources needed to:
a)	 implement the quality management system and to maintain its effectiveness;
b)	 meet applicable regulatory and customer requirements.
6.2	 Human resources
Personnel performing work affecting product quality shall be competent on the basis of appropriate 
education, training, skills and experience.
The organization shall document the process(es) for establishing competence, providing needed 
training, and ensuring awareness of personnel.
The organization shall:
a)	 determine the necessary competence for personnel performing work affecting product quality;
b)	 provide training or take other actions to achieve or maintain the necessary competence;
c)	
evaluate the effectiveness of the actions taken;
d)	 ensure that its personnel are aware of the relevance and importance of their activities and how 
they contribute to the achievement of the quality objectives;
e)	 maintain appropriate records of education, training, skills and experience (see 4.2.5).
NOTE	
The methodology used to check effectiveness is proportionate to the risk associated with the work for 
which the training or other action is being provided.
﻿
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
11
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
6.3	 Infrastructure
The organization shall document the requirements for the infrastructure needed to achieve 
conformity to product requirements, prevent product mix-up and ensure orderly handling of product. 
Infrastructure includes, as appropriate:
a)	 buildings, workspace and associated utilities;
b)	 process equipment (both hardware and software);
c)	
supporting services (such as transport, communication, or information systems).
The organization shall document requirements for the maintenance activities, including the interval 
of performing the maintenance activities, when such maintenance activities, or lack thereof, can affect 
product quality. As appropriate, the requirements shall apply to equipment used in production, the 
control of the work environment and monitoring and measurement.
Records of such maintenance shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
6.4	 Work environment and contamination control
6.4.1	
Work environment
The organization shall document the requirements for the work environment needed to achieve 
conformity to product requirements.
If the conditions for the work environment can have an adverse effect on product quality, the 
organization shall document the requirements for the work environment and the procedures to monitor 
and control the work environment.
The organization shall:
a)	 document requirements for health, cleanliness and clothing of personnel if contact between such 
personnel and the product or work environment could affect medical device safety or performance;
b)	 ensure that all personnel who are required to work temporarily under special environmental 
conditions within the work environment are competent or supervised by a competent person.
NOTE	
Further information can be found in ISO 14644 and ISO 14698.
6.4.2	
Contamination control
As appropriate, the organization shall plan and document arrangements for the control of contaminated 
or potentially contaminated product in order to prevent contamination of the work environment, 
personnel, or product.
For sterile medical devices, the organization shall document requirements for control of contamination 
with microorganisms or particulate matter and maintain the required cleanliness during assembly or 
packaging processes.
7	 Product realization
7.1	 Planning of product realization
The organization shall plan and develop the processes needed for product realization. Planning of 
product realization shall be consistent with the requirements of the other processes of the quality 
management system.
The organization shall document one or more processes for risk management in product realization. 
Records of risk management activities shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
﻿
12
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
