
ISO 13485:2016(E)
When the organization or its customer intends to perform verification at the supplier’s premises, 
the organization shall state the intended verification activities and method of product release in the 
purchasing information.
Records of the verification shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
7.5	 Production and service provision
7.5.1	
Control of production and service provision
Production and service provision shall be planned, carried out, monitored and controlled to ensure that 
product conforms to specification. As appropriate, production controls shall include but are not limited to:
a)	 documentation of procedures and methods for the control of production (see 4.2.4);
b)	 qualification of infrastructure;
c)	
implementation of monitoring and measurement of process parameters and product characteristics;
d)	 availability and use of monitoring and measuring equipment;
e)	 implementation of defined operations for labelling and packaging;
f)	
implementation of product release, delivery and post-delivery activities.
The organization shall establish and maintain a record (see 4.2.5) for each medical device or batch of 
medical devices that provides traceability to the extent specified in 7.5.9 and identifies the amount 
manufactured and amount approved for distribution. The record shall be verified and approved.
7.5.2	
Cleanliness of product
The organization shall document requirements for cleanliness of product or contamination control of 
product if:
a)	 product is cleaned by the organization prior to sterilization or its use;
b)	 product is supplied non-sterile and is to be subjected to a cleaning process prior to sterilization or 
its use;
c)	
product cannot be cleaned prior to sterilization or its use, and its cleanliness is of significance in use;
d)	 product is supplied to be used non-sterile, and its cleanliness is of significance in use;
e)	 process agents are to be removed from product during manufacture.
If product is cleaned in accordance with a) or b) above, the requirements contained in 6.4.1 do not apply 
prior to the cleaning process.
7.5.3	
Installation activities
The organization shall document requirements for medical device installation and acceptance criteria 
for verification of installation, as appropriate.
If the agreed customer requirements allow installation of the medical device to be performed by an 
external party other than the organization or its supplier, the organization shall provide documented 
requirements for medical device installation and verification of installation.
Records of medical device installation and verification of installation performed by the organization or 
its supplier shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
﻿
18
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
7.5.4	
Servicing activities
If servicing of the medical device is a specified requirement, the organization shall document servicing 
procedures, reference materials, and reference measurements, as necessary, for performing servicing 
activities and verifying that product requirements are met.
The organization shall analyse records of servicing activities carried out by the organization or its 
supplier:
a)	 to determine if the information is to be handled as a complaint;
b)	 as appropriate, for input to the improvement process.
Records of servicing activities carried out by the organization or its supplier shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.5).
7.5.5	
Particular requirements for sterile medical devices
The organization shall maintain records of the sterilization process parameters used for each 
sterilization batch (see 4.2.5). Sterilization records shall be traceable to each production batch of 
medical devices.
7.5.6	
Validation of processes for production and service provision
The organization shall validate any processes for production and service provision where the resulting 
output cannot be or is not verified by subsequent monitoring or measurement and, as a consequence, 
deficiencies become apparent only after the product is in use or the service has been delivered.
Validation shall demonstrate the ability of these processes to achieve planned results consistently.
The organization shall document procedures for validation of processes, including:
a)	 defined criteria for review and approval of the processes;
b)	 equipment qualification and qualification of personnel;
c)	
use of specific methods, procedures and acceptance criteria;
d)	 as appropriate, statistical techniques with rationale for sample sizes;
e)	 requirements for records (see 4.2.5);
f)	
revalidation, including criteria for revalidation;
g)	 approval of changes to the processes.
The organization shall document procedures for the validation of the application of computer software 
used in production and service provision. Such software applications shall be validated prior to initial 
use and, as appropriate, after changes to such software or its application. The specific approach and 
activities associated with software validation and revalidation shall be proportionate to the risk 
associated with the use of the software, including the effect on the ability of the product to conform to 
specifications.
Records of the results and conclusion of validation and necessary actions from the validation shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.4 and 4.2.5).
7.5.7	
Particular requirements for validation of processes for sterilization and sterile 
barrier systems
The organization shall document procedures (see 4.2.4) for the validation of processes for sterilization 
and sterile barrier systems.
﻿
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
19
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
Processes for sterilization and sterile barrier systems shall be validated prior to implementation and 
following product or process changes, as appropriate.
Records of the results and, conclusion of validation and necessary actions from the validation shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.4 and 4.2.5).
NOTE	
Further information can be found in ISO 11607-1 and ISO 11607-2.
7.5.8 
Identification
The organization shall document procedures for product identification and identify product by suitable 
means throughout product realization.
The organization shall identify product status with respect to monitoring and measurement 
requirements throughout product realization. Identification of product status shall be maintained 
throughout production, storage, installation and servicing of product to ensure that only product that 
has passed the required inspections and tests or released under an authorized concession is dispatched, 
used or installed.
If required by applicable regulatory requirements, the organization shall document a system to assign 
unique device identification to the medical device.
The organization shall document procedures to ensure that medical devices returned to the 
organization are identified and distinguished from conforming product.
7.5.9	
Traceability
7.5.9.1	
General
The organization shall document procedures for traceability. These procedures shall define the extent 
of traceability in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements and the records to be maintained 
(see 4.2.5).
7.5.9.2	
Particular requirements for implantable medical devices
The records required for traceability shall include records of components, materials, and conditions for 
the work environment used, if these could cause the medical device not to satisfy its specified safety 
and performance requirements.
The organization shall require that suppliers of distribution services or distributors maintain records 
of the distribution of medical devices to allow traceability and that these records are available for 
inspection.
Records of the name and address of the shipping package consignee shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
7.5.10	 Customer property
The organization shall identify, verify, protect, and safeguard customer property provided for use 
or incorporation into the product while it is under the organization’s control or being used by the 
organization. If any customer property is lost, damaged or otherwise found to be unsuitable for use, the 
organization shall report this to the customer and maintain records (see 4.2.5).
7.5.11	 Preservation of product
The organization shall document procedures for preserving the conformity of product to requirements 
during processing, storage, handling, and distribution. Preservation shall apply to the constituent parts 
of a medical device.
﻿
20
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
The organization shall protect product from alteration, contamination or damage when exposed to 
expected conditions and hazards during processing, storage, handling, and distribution by:
a)	 designing and constructing suitable packaging and shipping containers;
b)	 documenting requirements for special conditions needed if packaging alone cannot provide 
preservation.
If special conditions are required, they shall be controlled and recorded (see 4.2.5).
7.6	 Control of monitoring and measuring equipment
The organization shall determine the monitoring and measurement to be undertaken and the 
monitoring and measuring equipment needed to provide evidence of conformity of product to 
determined requirements.
The organization shall document procedures to ensure that monitoring and measurement can be 
carried out and are carried out in a manner that is consistent with the monitoring and measurement 
requirements.
As necessary to ensure valid results, measuring equipment shall:
a)	 be calibrated or verified, or both, at specified intervals, or prior to use, against measurement 
standards traceable to international or national measurement standards: when no such standards 
exist, the basis used for calibration or verification shall be recorded (see 4.2.5);
b)	 be adjusted or re-adjusted as necessary: such adjustments or re-adjustments shall be recorded 
(see 4.2.5);
c)	
have identification in order to determine its calibration status;
d)	 be safeguarded from adjustments that would invalidate the measurement result;
e)	 be protected from damage and deterioration during handling, maintenance and storage.
The organization shall perform calibration or verification in accordance with documented procedures.
In addition, the organization shall assess and record the validity of the previous measuring results 
when the equipment is found not to conform to requirements. The organization shall take appropriate 
action in regard to the equipment and any product affected.
Records of the results of calibration and verification shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
The organization shall document procedures for the validation of the application of computer software 
used for the monitoring and measurement of requirements. Such software applications shall be 
validated prior to initial use and, as appropriate, after changes to such software or its application. 
The specific approach and activities associated with software validation and revalidation shall be 
proportionate to the risk associated with the use of the software, including the effect on the ability of 
the product to conform to specifications.
Records of the results and conclusion of validation and necessary actions from the validation shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.4 and 4.2.5).
NOTE	
Further information can be found in ISO 10012.
﻿
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
21
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
8	 Measurement, analysis and improvement
8.1	 General
The organization shall plan and implement the monitoring, measurement, analysis and improvement 
processes needed to:
a)	 demonstrate conformity of product;
b)	 ensure conformity of the quality management system;
c)	
maintain the effectiveness of the quality management system.
This shall include determination of appropriate methods, including statistical techniques, and the 
extent of their use.
8.2	 Monitoring and measurement
8.2.1	
Feedback
As one of the measurements of the effectiveness of the quality management system, the organization 
shall gather and monitor information relating to whether the organization has met customer 
requirements. The methods for obtaining and using this information shall be documented.
The organization shall document procedures for the feedback process. This feedback process shall 
include provisions to gather data from production as well as post-production activities.
The information gathered in the feedback process shall serve as potential input into risk management 
for monitoring and maintaining the product requirements as well as the product realization or 
improvement processes.
If applicable regulatory requirements require the organization to gain specific experience from post-
production activities, the review of this experience shall form part of the feedback process.
8.2.2	
Complaint handling
The organization shall document procedures for timely complaint handling in accordance with 
applicable regulatory requirements.
These procedures shall include at a minimum requirements and responsibilities for:
a)	 receiving and recording information;
b)	 evaluating information to determine if the feedback constitutes a complaint;
c)	
investigating complaints;
d)	 determining the need to report the information to the appropriate regulatory authorities;
e)	 handling of complaint-related product;
f)	
determining the need to initiate corrections or corrective actions.
If any complaint is not investigated, justification shall be documented. Any correction or corrective 
action resulting from the complaint handling process shall be documented.
If an investigation determines activities outside the organization contributed to the complaint, relevant 
information shall be exchanged between the organization and the external party involved.
Complaint handling records shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
﻿
22
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
8.2.3	
Reporting to regulatory authorities
If applicable regulatory requirements require notification of complaints that meet specified reporting 
criteria of adverse events or issuance of advisory notices, the organization shall document procedures 
for providing notification to the appropriate regulatory authorities.
Records of reporting to regulatory authorities shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
8.2.4	
Internal audit
The organization shall conduct internal audits at planned intervals to determine whether the quality 
management system:
a)	 conforms to planned and documented arrangements, requirements of this International Standard, 
quality management system requirements established by the organization, and applicable 
regulatory requirements;
b)	 is effectively implemented and maintained.
The organization shall document a procedure to describe the responsibilities and requirements for 
planning and conducting audits and recording and reporting audit results.
An audit program shall be planned, taking into consideration the status and importance of the processes 
and area to be audited, as well as the results of previous audits. The audit criteria, scope, interval and 
methods shall be defined and recorded (see 4.2.5). The selection of auditors and conduct of audits shall 
ensure objectivity and impartiality of the audit process. Auditors shall not audit their own work.
Records of the audits and their results, including identification of the processes and areas audited and 
the conclusions, shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
The management responsible for the area being audited shall ensure that any necessary corrections 
and corrective actions are taken without undue delay to eliminate detected nonconformities and their 
causes. Follow-up activities shall include the verification of the actions taken and the reporting of 
verification results.
NOTE	
Further information can be found in ISO 19011.
8.2.5	
Monitoring and measurement of processes
The organization shall apply suitable methods for monitoring and, as appropriate, measurement of the 
quality management system processes. These methods shall demonstrate the ability of the processes to 
achieve planned results. When planned results are not achieved, correction and corrective action shall 
be taken, as appropriate.
8.2.6	
Monitoring and measurement of product
The organization shall monitor and measure the characteristics of the product to verify that product 
requirements have been met. This shall be carried out at applicable stages of the product realization 
process in accordance with the planned and documented arrangements and documented procedures.
Evidence of conformity to the acceptance criteria shall be maintained. The identity of the person 
authorizing release of product shall be recorded (see 4.2.5). As appropriate, records shall identify the 
test equipment used to perform measurement activities.
Product release and service delivery shall not proceed until the planned and documented arrangements 
have been satisfactorily completed.
For implantable medical devices, the organization shall record the identity of personnel performing any 
inspection or testing.
﻿
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
23
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
8.3	 Control of nonconforming product
8.3.1	
General
The organization shall ensure that product which does not conform to product requirements is 
identified and controlled to prevent its unintended use or delivery. The organization shall document 
a procedure to define the controls and related responsibilities and authorities for the identification, 
documentation, segregation, evaluation and disposition of nonconforming product.
The evaluation of nonconformity shall include a determination of the need for an investigation and 
notification of any external party responsible for the nonconformity.
Records of the nature of the nonconformities and any subsequent action taken, including the evaluation, 
any investigation and the rationale for decisions shall be maintained (see 4.2.5)
8.3.2	
Actions in response to nonconforming product detected before delivery
The organization shall deal with nonconforming product by one or more of the following ways:
a)	 taking action to eliminate the detected nonconformity;
b)	 taking action to preclude its original intended use or application;
c)	
authorizing its use, release or acceptance under concession.
The organization shall ensure that nonconforming product is accepted by concession only if the 
justification is provided, approval is obtained and applicable regulatory requirements are met. Records 
of the acceptance by concession and the identity of the person authorizing the concession shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.5).
8.3.3	
Actions in response to nonconforming product detected after delivery
When nonconforming product is detected after delivery or use has started, the organization shall take 
action appropriate to the effects, or potential effects, of the nonconformity. Records of actions taken 
shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
The organization shall document procedures for issuing advisory notices in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements. These procedures shall be capable of being put into effect at any time. Records 
of actions relating to the issuance of advisory notices shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
8.3.4	
Rework
The organization shall perform rework in accordance with documented procedures that takes into 
account the potential adverse effect of the rework on the product. These procedures shall undergo the 
same review and approval as the original procedure.
After the completion of rework, product shall be verified to ensure that it meets applicable acceptance 
criteria and regulatory requirements.
Records of rework shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
8.4	 Analysis of data
The organization shall document procedures to determine, collect and analyse appropriate data 
to demonstrate the suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of the quality management system. The 
procedures shall include determination of appropriate methods, including statistical techniques and 
the extent of their use.
﻿
24
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
The analysis of data shall include data generated as a result of monitoring and measurement and from 
other relevant sources and include, at a minimum, input from:
a)	 feedback;
b)	 conformity to product requirements;
c)	
characteristics and trends of processes and product, including opportunities for improvement;
d)	 suppliers;
e)	 audits;
f)	
service reports, as appropriate.
If the analysis of data shows that the quality management system is not suitable, adequate or effective, 
the organization shall use this analysis as input for improvement as required in 8.5.
Records of the results of analyses shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
8.5	 Improvement
8.5.1	
General
The organization shall identify and implement any changes necessary to ensure and maintain the 
continued suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of the quality management system as well as medical 
device safety and performance through the use of the quality policy, quality objectives, audit results, post-
market surveillance, analysis of data, corrective actions, preventive actions and management review.
8.5.2	
Corrective action
The organization shall take action to eliminate the cause of nonconformities in order to prevent 
recurrence. Any necessary corrective actions shall be taken without undue delay. Corrective actions 
shall be proportionate to the effects of the nonconformities encountered.
The organization shall document a procedure to define requirements for:
a)	 reviewing nonconformities (including complaints);
b)	 determining the causes of nonconformities;
c)	
evaluating the need for action to ensure that nonconformities do not recur;
d)	 planning and documenting action needed and implementing such action, including, as appropriate, 
updating documentation;
e)	 verifying that the corrective action does not adversely affect the ability to meet applicable 
regulatory requirements or the safety and performance of the medical device;
f)	
reviewing the effectiveness of corrective action taken.
Records of the results of any investigation and of action taken shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
8.5.3	
Preventive action
The organization shall determine action to eliminate the causes of potential nonconformities in order 
to prevent their occurrence. Preventive actions shall be proportionate to the effects of the potential 
problems.
The organization shall document a procedure to describe requirements for:
a)	 determining potential nonconformities and their causes;
﻿
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
25
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
b)	 evaluating the need for action to prevent occurrence of nonconformities;
c)	
planning and documenting action needed and implementing such action, including, as appropriate, 
updating documentation;
d)	 verifying that the action does not adversely affect the ability to meet applicable regulatory 
requirements or the safety and performance of the medical device;
e)	 reviewing the effectiveness of the preventive action taken, as appropriate.
Records of the results of any investigations and of action taken shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
﻿
26
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
