
ISO 13485:2016(E)
In planning product realization, the organization shall determine the following, as appropriate:
a)	 quality objectives and requirements for the product;
b)	 the need to establish processes and documents (see 4.2.4) and to provide resources specific to the 
product, including infrastructure and work environment;
c)	
required verification, validation, monitoring, measurement, inspection and test, handling, storage, 
distribution and traceability activities specific to the product together with the criteria for product 
acceptance;
d)	 records needed to provide evidence that the realization processes and resulting product meet 
requirements (see 4.2.5).
The output of this planning shall be documented in a form suitable for the organization’s method of 
operations.
NOTE	
Further information can be found in ISO 14971.
7.2	 Customer-related processes
7.2.1	
Determination of requirements related to product
The organization shall determine:
a)	 requirements specified by the customer, including the requirements for delivery and post-delivery 
activities;
b)	 requirements not stated by the customer but necessary for specified or intended use, as known;
c)	
applicable regulatory requirements related to the product;
d)	 any user training needed to ensure specified performance and safe use of the medical device;
e)	 any additional requirements determined by the organization.
7.2.2	
Review of requirements related to product
The organization shall review the requirements related to product. This review shall be conducted 
prior to the organization’s commitment to supply product to the customer (e.g. submission of tenders, 
acceptance of contracts or orders, acceptance of changes to contracts or orders) and shall ensure that:
a)	 product requirements are defined and documented;
b)	 contract or order requirements differing from those previously expressed are resolved;
c)	
applicable regulatory requirements are met;
d)	 any user training identified in accordance with 7.2.1 is available or planned to be available;
e)	 the organization has the ability to meet the defined requirements.
Records of the results of the review and actions arising from the review shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
When the customer provides no documented statement of requirement, the customer requirements 
shall be confirmed by the organization before acceptance.
When product requirements are changed, the organization shall ensure that relevant documents are 
amended and that relevant personnel are made aware of the changed requirements.
﻿
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
13
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
7.2.3	
Communication
The organization shall plan and document arrangements for communicating with customers in 
relation to:
a)	 product information;
b)	 enquiries, contracts or order handling, including amendments;
c)	
customer feedback, including complaints;
d)	 advisory notices.
The organization shall communicate with regulatory authorities in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements.
7.3	 Design and development
7.3.1	
General
The organization shall document procedures for design and development.
7.3.2	
Design and development planning
The organization shall plan and control the design and development of product. As appropriate, design 
and development planning documents shall be maintained and updated as the design and development 
progresses.
During design and development planning, the organization shall document:
a)	 the design and development stages;
b)	 the review(s) needed at each design and development stage;
c)	
the verification, validation, and design transfer activities that are appropriate at each design and 
development stage;
d)	 the responsibilities and authorities for design and development;
e)	 the methods to ensure traceability of design and development outputs to design and 
development inputs;
f)	
the resources needed, including necessary competence of personnel.
7.3.3	
Design and development inputs
Inputs relating to product requirements shall be determined and records maintained (see 4.2.5). These 
inputs shall include:
a)	 functional, performance, usability and safety requirements, according to the intended use;
b)	 applicable regulatory requirements and standards;
c)	
applicable output(s) of risk management;
d)	 as appropriate, information derived from previous similar designs;
e)	 other requirements essential for design and development of the product and processes.
These inputs shall be reviewed for adequacy and approved.
﻿
14
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
Requirements shall be complete, unambiguous, able to be verified or validated, and not in conflict with 
each other.
NOTE	
Further information can be found in IEC 62366–1.
7.3.4	
Design and development outputs
Design and development outputs shall:
a)	 meet the input requirements for design and development;
b)	 provide appropriate information for purchasing, production and service provision;
c)	
contain or reference product acceptance criteria;
d)	 specify the characteristics of the product that are essential for its safe and proper use.
The outputs of design and development shall be in a form suitable for verification against the design 
and development inputs and shall be approved prior to release.
Records of the design and development outputs shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
7.3.5	
Design and development review
At suitable stages, systematic reviews of design and development shall be performed in accordance 
with planned and documented arrangements to:
a)	 evaluate the ability of the results of design and development to meet requirements;
b)	 identify and propose necessary actions.
Participants in such reviews shall include representatives of functions concerned with the design and 
development stage being reviewed, as well as other specialist personnel.
Records of the results of the reviews and any necessary actions shall be maintained and include the 
identification of the design under review, the participants involved and the date of the review (see 4.2.5).
7.3.6 
Design and development verification
Design and development verification shall be performed in accordance with planned and documented 
arrangements to ensure that the design and development outputs have met the design and development 
input requirements.
The organization shall document verification plans that include methods, acceptance criteria and, as 
appropriate, statistical techniques with rationale for sample size.
If the intended use requires that the medical device be connected to, or have an interface with, other 
medical device(s), verification shall include confirmation that the design outputs meet design inputs 
when so connected or interfaced.
Records of the results and conclusions of the verification and necessary actions shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.4 and 4.2.5).
7.3.7	
Design and development validation
Design and development validation shall be performed in accordance with planned and documented 
arrangements to ensure that the resulting product is capable of meeting the requirements for the 
specified application or intended use.
The organization shall document validation plans that include methods, acceptance criteria and, as 
appropriate, statistical techniques with rationale for sample size.
﻿
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
15
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
Design validation shall be conducted on representative product. Representative product includes 
initial production units, batches or their equivalents. The rationale for the choice of product used for 
validation shall be recorded (see 4.2.5).
As part of design and development validation, the organization shall perform clinical evaluations or 
performance evaluations of the medical device in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements. 
A medical device used for clinical evaluation or performance evaluation is not considered to be released 
for use to the customer.
If the intended use requires that the medical device be connected to, or have an interface with, other 
medical device(s), validation shall include confirmation that the requirements for the specified 
application or intended use have been met when so connected or interfaced.
Validation shall be completed prior to release for use of the product to the customer.
Records of the results and conclusion of validation and necessary actions shall be maintained (see 4.2.4 
and 4.2.5).
7.3.8	
Design and development transfer
The organization shall document procedures for transfer of design and development outputs to 
manufacturing. These procedures shall ensure that design and development outputs are verified 
as suitable for manufacturing before becoming final production specifications and that production 
capability can meet product requirements.
Results and conclusions of the transfer shall be recorded (see 4.2.5).
7.3.9	
Control of design and development changes
The organization shall document procedures to control design and development changes. The 
organization shall determine the significance of the change to function, performance, usability, safety 
and applicable regulatory requirements for the medical device and its intended use.
Design and development changes shall be identified. Before implementation, the changes shall be:
a)	 reviewed;
b)	 verified;
c)	
validated, as appropriate;
d)	 approved.
The review of design and development changes shall include evaluation of the effect of the changes on 
constituent parts and product in process or already delivered, inputs or outputs of risk management 
and product realization processes.
Records of changes, their review and any necessary actions shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
7.3.10 Design and development files
The organization shall maintain a design and development file for each medical device type or medical 
device family. This file shall include or reference records generated to demonstrate conformity to the 
requirements for design and development and records for design and development changes.
﻿
16
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
﻿
ISO 13485:2016(E)
7.4	 Purchasing
7.4.1	
Purchasing process
The organization shall document procedures (see 4.2.4) to ensure that purchased product conforms to 
specified purchasing information.
The organization shall establish criteria for the evaluation and selection of suppliers. The criteria shall be:
a)	 based on the supplier’s ability to provide product that meets the organization’s requirements;
b)	 based on the performance of the supplier;
c)	
based on the effect of the purchased product on the quality of the medical device;
d)	 proportionate to the risk associated with the medical device.
The organization shall plan the monitoring and re-evaluation of suppliers. Supplier performance in 
meeting requirements for the purchased product shall be monitored. The results of the monitoring 
shall provide an input into the supplier re-evaluation process.
Non-fulfilment of purchasing requirements shall be addressed with the supplier proportionate to the 
risk associated with the purchased product and compliance with applicable regulatory requirements.
Records of the results of evaluation, selection, monitoring and re-evaluation of supplier capability or 
performance and any necessary actions arising from these activities shall be maintained (see 4.2.5).
7.4.2	
Purchasing information
Purchasing information shall describe or reference the product to be purchased, including as 
appropriate:
a)	 product specifications;
b)	 requirements for product acceptance, procedures, processes and equipment;
c)	
requirements for qualification of supplier personnel;
d)	 quality management system requirements.
The organization shall ensure the adequacy of specified purchasing requirements prior to their 
communication to the supplier.
Purchasing information shall include, as applicable, a written agreement that the supplier notify the 
organization of changes in the purchased product prior to implementation of any changes that affect 
the ability of the purchased product to meet specified purchase requirements.
To the extent required for traceability given in 7.5.9, the organization shall maintain relevant purchasing 
information in the form of documents (see 4.2.4) and records (see 4.2.5).
7.4.3 
Verification of purchased product
The organization shall establish and implement the inspection or other activities necessary for ensuring 
that purchased product meets specified purchasing requirements. The extent of verification activities 
shall be based on the supplier evaluation results and proportionate to the risks associated with the 
purchased product.
When the organization becomes aware of any changes to the purchased product, the organization shall 
determine whether these changes affect the product realization process or the medical device.
﻿
© ISO 2016 – All rights reserved
17
