--- PAGE 11 ---
7
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
isolator may transfer air directly to the surrounding environment through openings (commonly called 
“mouse holes”) that preclude the ingress of microbial contamination. All these environments provide 
appropriate conditions for the execution of MAP operations which are considered critical zones.
Biological Safety Cabinets (BSC) are designed to protect operators and the external environment 
from infected or dangerous materials inside the cabinet. All air to and from the BSC is HEPA filtered 
before entering the cabinet or exhausting to the external environment. Some BSC designs provide 
some measure of protection to the materials being handled. Since air flows into the BSC from the sur-
rounding environment, biosafety cabinets should be used only when worker safety from the material 
being handled is a meaningful concern. Worker safety must also be considered if the toxicity of the 
compound has not yet been determined.
The supporting clean environment outside the critical zone is typically ISO 7 when a UAFH or BSC 
is utilized for the manual process. The use of an isolator under appropriate risk-management proce-
dures may relax the requirements for the surrounding area; most new manufacturing installations 
employ an ISO 8 background environment in accordance with the 2004 FDA aseptic processing guid-
ance (1) or European GMP Annex 1 (2). 
Open isolators are typically installed in ISO 8 (Table 3.0-1) environments in order to maintain ISO 5 
conditions for material transfers and operations. The surrounding clean area is where the personnel 
performing the manual processes are located. Appropriate gowning facilities are required which are 
consistent with the background environment requirements. The execution of the MAP is ordinarily 
supported by various sterilization processes for the materials and equipment required, and these ster-
ilization processes may also be located in the support areas.
The overall flow of the MAP facility, personnel and equipment is consistent with large-scale environ-
ments utilized for equipment-based aseptic filling, whether in a cleanroom or an isolator, but on a 
much smaller scale. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 12 ---
8
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
People are the most critical operational variable and represent the highest source of contamination 
in manual aseptic processing. Operational personnel must be highly proficient at their assigned tasks. 
Therefore, personnel training and qualification become critical to success.
4.1	 Personnel Training and Qualification
The training requirements for operational personnel typically include the usual elements of cGMP:
• Microbiological principles
• Sterility assurance
• Sterilization
• Gowning practices
• Good aseptic practices
  
Theoretical knowledge of these disciplines alone is insufficient. Operators must be able to adapt the 
classroom learning to the real world manufacturing environment. Operators must excel in the ex-
ecution of those tasks that directly impact sterility assurance: aseptic gowning, aseptic assembly and 
aseptic technique. They must be able to consistently perform precision tasks without introducing 
contamination to the materials with which they are working.
4.2	 Gowning Qualification 
Assessment of the operators’ proficiency in their assigned tasks can be established through practical 
exercises in which their skills are challenged and evaluated. The most basic of these tasks, and one of 
the first at which the operator must succeed, is aseptic gowning. This involves repetitive gowning in 
full aseptic garb under the observation of a fully qualified individual followed by monitoring of gown 
surfaces. The number of monitored gown surfaces varies with the company, but typically includes: 
gloves, forearms, and chest area, i.e., the body locations closest to any manual aseptic manipulations 
the operator must perform (6). The operator must successfully demonstrate his/her ability to meet 
the defined monitoring levels after each gowning exercise. Gowning certifications should be con-
ducted on a periodic basis to confirm that the operators maintain consistent gowning practices. Once 
the operators have passed initial gowning certification he/she is granted access to the aseptic core for 
the continued instruction in aseptic processing. 
Note: The need for operator gowning qualification is based on the nature of the isolator process and 
should be evaluated by a risk assessment. 
Following a long term absence, adverse trend or out of limits in gowning results (and based on inves-
tigation) operators should be requalified for gowning.
4.3	 Risk Management
The approach of Quality Risk Management (see also PDA Technical Report No. 54 (11) and its annex 
documents with case studies) is highly recommended for manual aseptic processes. As stated in PDA 
Technical Report No. 44: 
Process failures that can result in elevated endotoxin levels and lack of  sterility assurance pose a significant 
risk to patient safety. The ability to detect a process failure is low given the current methods for sterility testing. 
The probability of  a process failure that could adversely affect the sterility of  the product in aseptic processing 
is higher and less predictable than in terminal sterilization, given the inherent exposure to environmental con-
taminants. Quality risk management can be an effective method of  identifying and reducing aseptic processing 
risk, thus improving the assurance of  sterility, endotoxin control, and subsequent patient safety (12).
4.0	 Operational Personnel Training and Qualification
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 13 ---
9
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Manual aseptic processing involves greater risks than automated aseptic processes. A risk-based qual-
ity management approach can be very helpful. It is therefore essential that there is a thorough and 
complete understanding of the process, including critical steps and risks, so that any risk assessment 
is appropriately informed.
4.4	 Aseptic Handling Challenges
The conventional means for establishing personnel proficiency in aseptic processing is through par-
ticipation in an APS, (also known as a media fill) (1, 6). The APS requires the operators to perform 
aseptic interventions during the normal course of the simulation that are typically conducted during 
manufacturing. Those charged with aseptic assembly will assemble the sterilized equipment prior to 
the media fill. These activities are important for several reasons:
• MAP is more susceptible to human contamination than automated aseptic processing
• Interventions on manual aseptic systems are frequent and may be complicated by suboptimal equipment design
Thus, an individual who has demonstrated proficiency at large-scale industrial aseptic processing 
must still demonstrate his/her proficiency in the more rigorous requirements of MAP. This is often 
accomplished by various challenge tests in which the operator must directly handle sterile equipment 
and materials (usually with media) to demonstrate his/her aseptic technique. These tasks should be 
representative of the actual process steps. The operators are required to demonstrate aseptic practice 
proficiency in these evaluations regardless of the technology utilized. 
 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 14 ---
10
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
The equipment, raw material components, containers, closures and other items required for MAP 
vary with the requirements of the process. These items are typically reduced in size or quantity, 
which allows so they can be supplied to the processing environment in a sealed package after depyro-
genation/sterilization. The preparation methods for such sealed packages prior to depyrogenation/
sterilization are similar to those associated with automated aseptic processing though on a smaller 
scale of operation. The depyrogenation/sterilization methods for all of these items are required to 
be validated. When sterile containers/closures are purchased from a commercial source, procedures 
should be in place and implemented to ensure the sterility of these items are maintained when intro-
duced into an aseptic environment and used in production. Where sterilization or depyrogenation 
of processes for non-product contact surfaces cannot be utilized, a validated sanitization process is 
required to be performed.
5.0	
Equipment, Components and Container/Closure
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 15 ---
11
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Personnel time limitations with MAP are usually more important than with automated aseptic pro-
cesses. In very short or nonrepetitive processes, such as an aseptic connection, time may be of little 
relevance (except as it may relate to material stability) and its impact lessened. Where operators must 
perform repetitive tasks such as container filling/stoppering, egg harvesting (as in vaccine manufac-
turing) or similar tasks, the effect of fatigue must be considered in both routine operation and process 
simulation. The operator’s aseptic technique may deteriorate with the passage of time. A “worst-
case” evaluation of fatigue would include a process simulation equal or greater in time duration 
to the longest period an operator might perform the task without interruption. Similarly, a process 
simulation conducted at the end of a normal day’s production can evaluate the effect of fatigue on the 
operator’s aseptic technique (1,5,6,13). 
Time limits for holding dirty/clean/sterile equipment and sterile/depyrogenated components shall 
also be validated. It is also necessary to validate the maximum time allowed between formulation 
(addition of the first ingredient, which includes water) to the point of sterilization (filtration consid-
ering filter grow-through) and the validation of holding sterile bulk through usage. These topics are 
discussed in PDA Technical Report No. 22 (6). 
Note: As part of the process risk assessment, personnel fatigue factors need to be considered, and 
where possible minimized/eliminated through improvement in ergonomics, an understanding of 
human factors, etc.
6.0	
Process Time Limitations
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 16 ---
12
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
Sterility assurance requires a holistic approach to the entire manufacturing process, and encompasses 
appropriate facility/equipment/process design, aseptic practice/validation and a well thought out 
risk assessment to mitigate contamination. Considering the importance of personnel practices in 
MAP, the process should be designed to minimize the impact of personnel. General process design 
principles that will reduce the risk of contamination are outlined below.
7.1	 Manual Aseptic Process Design Principles in Unidirectional 
Air Flow Hoods
The list below elaborates on design principles for manual aseptic processing.
• Adequate space to perform the work.
• All exposed product and product-contacting components should continuously remain in First Air, 
i.e., the work location first in the path of HEPA-filtered air.
• Aseptic manipulations should be made in First Air, not having passed over any other components 
or blocked by the operator’s hands.
• The operators should decontaminate or change their gloves on a frequent basis.
• The operators should work as a team. The primary operator(s) should perform all tasks inside the 
ISO 5 environment. The secondary operator(s) assists in the introduction/removal of items from 
the ISO 5 environment, and may assist the primary operator(s) with less critical tasks inside that 
environment. Additional support operator(s) may be necessary to support activities exclusively in 
the surrounding environment.
• The primary operator should wear sterile gloves and sleeves and never contact a non-sanitized or 
non-sterilized item. 
• The primary operator(s) performs the critical aseptic manipulations within the ISO 5 environment. 
The secondary operator(s) acts as a support person to minimize the potential of the primary operator 
touching non-sterile or non-disinfected surfaces. The hands of the primary operator should remain 
in the ISO 5 environment at all times. (There may be exceptions to this related to positron emission 
tomography products or radioactive products.) The secondary operator(s) should put on sterile 
gloves/sleeves prior to any activity inside the ISO 5 environment, or in transfers of items to/from 
the primary operator. Anytime the primary operator is required to leave the ISO 5 environment, 
gloves and sleeves (if appropriate) should either be changed or gloves should be re-sanitized prior 
to reentry to ISO 5.
• Sterilized items should be introduced to the ISO 5 area by aseptic removal of the final wrap around 
the item as it is being introduced. 
• Extra subassemblies and utensils should be sterilized and available for immediate use in the event a 
replacement is needed.
• Sterile tools and utensils should be employed wherever possible to handle sterile materials during their 
processing, rather than the direct contact with the operator gloves. There should be sterile supports 
or hangers for tools inside the ISO 5 environment in order to minimize contact between the tool 
and surfaces of the workspace.
• The process should be designed so that samples can be taken with minimal risk of contamination. 
When withdrawing samples from a sterile container, it is preferable to take all desired samples from 
a container in a single step, and then subdivide that sample as required. Alternatively, the residual 
left in the original container post-production can be used as the test sample. The use of technologies 
such as sterile septum or connectors should be considered to minimize the risk during sampling.
7.0	 Design of Manual Aseptic Processes
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 17 ---
13
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
• Wherever possible materials being introduced into the process should be pre-measured into a 
tightly sealed container prior to sterilization and addition.
• Electrical equipment and controls pose a contamination risk and should be located outside the 
processing environment, if possible. If that is not possible a second operator (not the primary 
operator) should adjust equipment settings as necessary. Pay special attention to equipment which 
exhausts air (e.g., mixers, blenders, etc.) that could contaminate the environment. 
• Liquid transfers should be made using peristaltic pumps located outside the aseptic environment, 
rather than through the use of automatic pipettes, due to concerns regarding exhausted air. In 
order to minimize equipment movement and the risk of contamination, containers can be pre-
marked to indicate the amount of material to transfer.
• Perform as much of the process inside the ISO 5 environment as possible in order to minimize the 
removal and reentry of in-process materials in suitable containers. This may require the placement 
of small equipment within the environment.
• When containers of in-process materials must be removed from, and later returned to, the ISO 5 
environment the containers should be aseptically wrapped in a pre-sterilized covering which should 
be properly removed and discarded prior to reentry. Alternatively, the exterior of the container(s) 
can be re-sanitized prior to reentry.
• Sanitize the operating environment when it is empty, and sanitize each nonsterilizable item/
equipment as it is first introduced and transferred into the next cleaner level of the aseptic processing 
environments. Do not introduce a large item into the environment in mid-process. Note: If sanitization 
of the operating environment/equipment is performed by the primary operator, sterile gloves/sleeves 
should be changed before aseptic manipulation of product is performed.
• Product contact surfaces shall be sterilized. Sterility should be maintained with protective layers 
which can be removed as materials are transitioned to cleaner environments.
• Significant aseptic assembly in the processing environment should be avoided through the use of 
sterilized pre-assembled items. This will reduce the extent of manual assembly required. 
• Process steps not required to be aseptic should be performed outside the ISO 5 environment by 
other operator(s). 
• Once the process design has been established, it should be rehearsed several times and documented 
in air flow studies using all of the required items and placebo materials to refine the steps, location 
of items, etc. This ensures the process design is practical and reduces risk of contamination to a 
minimum. The use of engineering runs to develop the process is strongly encouraged.
• The manufacturing process should be documented in sufficient detail to allow operators to 
understand and conform to the desired practices. The secondary or support operator(s) should 
complete the batch record.
• Environmental monitoring practices should be non-intrusive in order to avoid potential for 
contamination in the ISO 5 environment. Air sampling during processing may be performed with 
specially designed equipment that does not compromise the environment and may include settling 
plates. Surface monitoring should be performed using contact plates or swabs after processing has 
been completed. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 18 ---
14
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
7.2	 Manual Aseptic Process Design Principles in Isolators  
and RABS
The use of an isolator for manual aseptic processing requires some adaptation to the methods de-
scribed above. Isolator characteristics include the following: 
An isolator is sealed or is supplied with air through a microbially retentive filtration system (HEPA minimum) 
and may be reproducibly decontaminated. When closed it uses only decontaminated (where necessary) inter-
faces or Rapid Transfer Ports (RTPs) for materials transfer. When open it allows for the ingress and/or egress 
of  materials through defined openings (“mouse holes”) that have been designed and validated to preclude the 
transfer of  contamination. Isolators can be used for aseptic processing activities, containment of  potent com-
pounds, or simultaneously for both asepsis and containment (14). 
Restricted access barrier systems (RABS) vary with respect to their design. Where items are intro-
duced using a rapid transfer port (RTP) their use resembles that of isolators described below. RABS 
lacking these features may have greater resemblance to manned clean rooms and their design and 
operation is more like that described above for Unidirectional Air Flow Hoods. 
Regardless of the type of isolator or RABS system employed, it should be recognized that these are 
aseptic, not sterile, process enclosures. Therefore good aseptic technique must be used at all aseptic 
steps of the process. First air principles should be adhered to where unidirectional flow is provided. In 
the absence of unidirectional flow, aseptic technique must still be followed consistent with the design 
of the system (enclosure). 
• 
The enclosure should be decontaminated according to a validated procedure.
• 
The operators should wear fresh sterile gloves prior to entering the enclosure gloves.
• 
Sterile tools and utensils shall be employed rather than the direct contact with the enclosure 
gloves. There should be sterile supports for tools and gloves inside the enclosure in order to mini-
mize contact between the tool and horizontal surfaces of the workspace.
• 
All items and equipment should be introduced into the enclosure using validated decontamina-
tion/sterilization methods and/or RTPs.
• 
It is preferable to perform as much of the process as possible inside the enclosure to minimize 
the removal and subsequent reentry of sterile items to the enclosure. This may require the place-
ment of small equipment within the enclosure. When containers of in-process materials must 
be removed from, and later returned to the ISO 5 environment, the containers should be rein-
troduced using validated decontamination/sterilization methods and/or RTPs. Alternatively the 
container can be aseptically wrapped in a pre-sterilized covering (e.g., sealable containers or pack-
ages) which should be properly removed and discarded prior to reentry.
• 
All exposed product and product-contacting components should always remain in First Air (if 
present). Aseptic manipulations should be made in First Air from the HEPA filters, not having 
passed over any other components or blocked by the enclosure gloves. Good aseptic technique 
must still be adhered to at all times.
• 
Significant aseptic assembly in the ISO 5 environment should be avoided through the use of steril-
ized pre-assembled items. This will reduce the extent of manual assembly required.
• 
Extra subassemblies and utensils should be sterilized and available for immediate use in the event 
a replacement is needed.
• 
Electrical equipment and controls pose a contamination risk and should be located outside the 
processing enclosure if possible. If that is not possible a second operator (not the primary op-
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
