--- PAGE 5 ---
1
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The purpose of this technical report is to outline methods and approaches for control and evalua-
tion of aseptic processing operations for drug products/medicinal products which use all or partially 
manual procedures. The goal of aseptic processing is to prevent the contamination of sterile materials 
during their processing. The goal of evaluating any aseptic process is to demonstrate that aseptic pro-
cessing can be achieved and maintained successfully under the specified operational configuration, 
activities, and conditions. These goals are the same for manual or automated aseptic operations, and 
for small-scale or large-scale operations. 
Manual aseptic processing (MAP) operations differ from automated operations in several ways. These 
differences pose unique operational and evaluation challenges not generally encountered with auto-
mated operations. These challenges must be considered thoroughly when designing the evaluation 
procedure or protocol for the MAP operation. MAP involves a human operator performing, at a mini-
mum, the container and/or closure movements. Some semi-automated equipment may be used, but 
the process is not fully automated. For this reason MAP relies heavily on individual operator’s basic 
understanding of microbiology proficiency where personnel must be individually qualified. 
The greatest source of microbial contamination during MAP is generally recognized to be the op-
erational personnel and their activities. Aseptic processes that rely on manual operations are inher-
ently subject to performance or procedural drift over time. Furthermore, reproducible human perfor-
mance cannot be assumed, especially where there are significant time gaps between aseptic processing 
events. The likelihood of human performance deviations or failures is linked to:
• Complex aseptic processing tasks
• The continuous span of time during which an operator carries out repetitive aseptic activities
• The expected rate of activity 
• Change in personnel
This technical report has value for hospital and formulation pharmacies where manual aseptic pro-
cessing may occur. The guidance provided in this report may be applicable to various operations, 
including: vaccine preparation, cell culture, gene therapy, IND/IMP manufacturing, clinical and com-
mercial manufacturing, and pharmacy formulation and dispensing. When manual aseptic processing 
of sterile dosage forms is required, special consideration must be given to sterility and verification of 
processing accuracy, as the administration of these products into the vascular and nervous system of 
human subjects poses the greatest risk of harm. As applicable, the 2004 FDA guidance on aseptic pro-
cessing, EU GMP–Annex 1, Ph Eur 5. 1. 1, and USP Chapters <797> and <823> provide procedures 
and the requirements for (1-5):
• Training of personnel involved in sterile preparation processes
• Environmental control and monitoring requirements
• Specifications for sterile and non-sterile ingredients and components
• Release criteria for sterility and pyrogen testing
Compliance with these requirements is paramount to ensure the safety of human recipient.
Some of these processes require aseptic steps subsequent to sterilization but prior to filling, such as 
volume or pH adjustments, which present their own contamination risks. 
This report is not intended to address the brief, relatively infrequent, human interventions into an 
otherwise automated filling process. Examples include reach-ins to remove a toppled vial from the 
filling line or to obtain a container for a fill-weight check, aseptic connections made during set-up, cor-
rective activities during line stoppages, and so on. Operator activities and interventions of this nature 
1.0  Introduction
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 6 ---
2
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
should be integrated into the aseptic process simulation (APS) of the respective automated processes 
and they will not be addressed further in this report (6).
The guidance provided in this report builds upon, and is intended to supplement, published guidance 
which is generally more focused on automated large-scale operations. The list of references at the end 
of this report includes sources upon which this report is based. 
In conclusion, for adequate evaluation of the manual aseptic process it is important that human fac-
tors, such as those described above, are fully accounted for in both the design of an MAP and also in 
the design of the APS program. The sections that follow include points to consider in that evaluation.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 7 ---
3
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Aerobic Microorganism
A microorganism that utilizes oxygen as the final 
electron acceptor during metabolism; a micro-
organism that will grow primarily in the pres-
ence of oxygen. For the purpose of this report, 
this definition encompasses facultative anaer-
obes (6).
Anaerobic Microorganism
A microorganism that does not utilize oxygen as 
the final electron acceptor during metabolism; 
microorganism that will grow only in the ab-
sence of oxygen (6).
Aseptic Filling
The part of aseptic processing where a pre- ster-
ilized product is filled and/or packaged into ster-
ile containers and closed (6).
Aseptic Processing
Handling sterile materials in a controlled envi-
ronment, in which the air supply, facility, mate-
rials, equipment and personnel are regulated to 
control microbial and particulate contamination 
to acceptable levels (6).
Aseptic Processing Area (APA)
Controlled environment, consisting of several 
zones, in which the air supply, facility, materials, 
equipment and personnel are regulated to con-
trol microbial and particulate contamination to 
acceptable levels (6).
Aseptic Processing Simulation (APS)
A means for establishing the capability of an 
aseptic process as performed using a growth 
medium. Note: Aseptic processing simulations 
are understood to be synonymous with media 
fills, simulated product fills, broth trials, broth 
fills, etc (6).
Barrier System
A system of physical partitions that affords ISO 
5 protection by partially separating its interior 
from the surrounding environment utilizing air-
flow (6).
Bioburden
Total number of viable microorganisms on or 
in a health care product prior to sterilization (6).
Biological Safety Cabinet (BSC)
An enclosed, ventilated workspace with engi-
neering controls designed to remove or minimize 
exposure to hazardous biological materials. A 
BSC is a principle device to provide containment 
of infectious splashes or aerosols generated by 
many microbiological procedures. BSCs are de-
signed to provide personnel, environmental and 
product protection when appropriate practices 
and procedures are followed. A cabinet that is 
designed to protect the operator and the envi-
ronment from the hazards of handling infected 
material and other dangerous biological (7). 
Campaign
A series of consecutive production batches man-
ufactured without intervening cleaning and ster-
ilization (6).
Colony Forming Unit (CFU)
One or more microorganisms that produce a 
visible, discrete growth entity on a semi-solid, 
agar-based microbiological medium (6).
Compounding
A process wherein bulk drug substance is com-
bined with one or more excipients and/or an-
other bulk drug substance to produce a drug 
product (6).
Critical Area
An area designed to maintain sterility of sterile ma-
terials. Sterilized product, containers, closures, and 
equipment may be exposed in critical areas (6).
Environmental Monitoring Program
Defined documented program that describes 
the routine particulate and microbiological 
monitoring of processing and manufacturing ar-
eas. Note: The program should reference a cor-
rective action plan in cases where action levels 
are exceeded (6).
First Air (First Work Location)
The work location first in the path of HEPA fil-
tered air (8).
HEPA filter
High efficiency particulate air filter with mini-
mum 0.3 μm particle retaining efficiency of 
99.97 percent (1).
2.0  Glossary of Terms
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 8 ---
4
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
Human Factors
A science discipline that examines human psy-
chological, social, physical, and biological char-
acteristics to evaluate the design, operation, or 
use of products or systems for optimizing hu-
man performance, health, safety, and/or habit-
ability (9). [Synonym: Ergonomics]
Intervention
An aseptic manipulation or activity that occurs 
within the critical area. This technical report re-
gards interventions as either corrective or inher-
ent (6).
Intervention, Corrective
An intervention that is performed to correct or 
adjust an aseptic process during its execution. 
Examples include such activities as: clearing 
component misfeed, adjusting sensors, and re-
placing equipment components (6).
Intervention, Inherent
An intervention that is an integral part of the 
aseptic process and is required for set-up or rou-
tine operation and/or monitoring, e.g., aseptic 
assembly, container replenishment, environ-
mental sampling, etc. Inherent interventions are 
required by batch record, procedure, or work 
instruction for the proper conduct of the aseptic 
process (6).
ISO 5
Environmental operating conditions defined in 
ISO 14644-1, “Cleanrooms and associated con-
trolled environments.” Note: For total particu-
lates, ISO 5 approximates the Class 100 descrip-
tion from the now obsolete U.S. Federal Standard 
209, and is roughly comparable to Grade A as 
defined in European GMP Annex 1–“Manufac-
ture of Sterile Medicinal Products” (6).
ISO 7
Environmental operating conditions defined in 
ISO 14644-1, “Cleanrooms and associated con-
trolled environments.” Note: For total particu-
lates, ISO 7 approximates Class 10,000 from the 
now obsolete Federal Standard 209.
ISO 8
Environmental operating conditions defined in 
ISO 14644-1, “Cleanrooms and associated con-
trolled environments.” Note: For total particulates, 
ISO 8 approximates Class 100,000 from the now 
obsolete Federal Standard 209.
Isolator, Closed
A decontaminated unit meeting ISO 5 condi-
tions that provides uncompromised, continuous, 
isolation of its interior from the surrounding 
environment. Any air exchange with the sur-
rounding environment takes place only through 
microbially retentive filters (6).
Isolator, Open
A decontaminated unit meeting ISO 5 condi-
tions that provides uncompromised, continu-
ous isolation of its interior from the surround-
ing environment. It may transfer air directly to 
the surrounding environment through openings 
(e.g., “mouseholes”) that preclude the ingress of 
microbial contamination (6).
Positive Unit
Unit filled in an aseptic processing simulation 
that exhibits detectable microbial growth after 
incubation (6).
Restricted Access Barrier System (RABS)
RABS are aseptic processing systems (ISO 5) intend-
ed to substantially reduce human borne contamina-
tion within the aseptic environment where sterile 
product, containers, closures and equipment are ex-
posed by the use of separative devices and defined 
mechanical features and operating procedures (6).
Shift
Scheduled periods of work or production, usu-
ally less than 12 hours in length, staffed by alter-
nating groups of workers (6).
Sterile
Absence of life; usually refers to absence of viable 
microorganisms. Note: In practice, no such abso-
lute statement regarding the absence of microor-
ganisms can be proven (see “Sterilization”) (6).
Sterility Test
Test performed to determine if viable microor-
ganisms are present (6).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 9 ---
5
Technical Report No. 62
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Sterilization
Validated process used to render a product free 
of viable microorganisms.
Note: In a sterilization process, the nature of mi-
crobiological death or reduction is described by 
an exponential function. Therefore, the number 
of microorganisms which survive a sterilization 
process can be expressed in terms of probability. 
While the probability may be reduced to a very 
low number, it can never be reduced to zero (6).
Validation
Establishing documented evidence that provides 
a high degree of assurance that a specific process 
will consistently produce a product meeting its pre-
determined specifications and quality attributes. 
Note: There has been wide-spread evolution in 
the concept and definition of validation in re-
cent years. Readers should refer to definitions 
established recently by the U.S. FDA,  European 
regulators and other bodies in guidances and 
regualtions (6).
Unidirectional Air Flow Hood (UAFH)
A cabinet designed to protect materials from op-
erator and environmental contamination. Also 
referred to as laminar air flow hood.
Worst Case
A set of conditions encompassing upper and 
lower processing limits and circumstances, in-
cluding those within standard operating proce-
dures, that pose the greatest chance of process 
or product failure (when compared to ideal con-
ditions). Such conditions do not necessarily in-
duce product or process failure (6).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 10 ---
6
© 2013 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 62
The selection of an appropriate clean environment in which to perform the required manufacturing 
activities is critical to MAP operations. In general, the minimum requirement is an ISO 5 environment 
in which unidirectional air flow protection is provided to critical materials during the manufacturing 
procedures. A listing of selected air quality classification standards is shown in Table 3.0-1. In prac-
tice, many different locations and equipment for MAP operations are possible, including: 
• A portion of a larger environment of the same class
• A localized unidirectional air flow hood (also known as a laminar flow hood or LAFH) protecting a specific 
portion/area within a lower classified environment
• A table mounted unidirectional air flow hood (with either horizontal or vertical air flow)
• An isolator (open or closed)
Table 3.0-1	 	
Cleanroom Standards Airborne Particulate Limits (particles/m3) (10)
ISO 14644
US FDA
(Aseptic 
Processing 
Guidance)
USP <1116>
EU Annex 1
and WHO
Japan
(Aseptic 
Processing 
Guidance)
JP XVI
ISO 5
≥0.5 µm 3520 
≥5 µm 29
ISO 5 /Class 1001
35202 
not specified
ISO 5/Class 100
3520 
not specified
Grade A
Grade B (at rest)
3520 
203
Grade A
Grade B (at rest)
3520 
203
Grade A
Grade B (at rest)
3520 
not specified
ISO 7
≥0.5 µm 352,000 
≥5µm 2,900
ISO 7/Class 10,000
352,000 not 
specified
Class 10,000
352,000 not 
specified
Grade B 
(operation)
Grade C (at rest)
352,000 
2,900
Grade B 
(operation)
Grade C (at rest)
352,000 
2,900
Grade B 
(operation)
Grade C (at rest)
352,000 
not specified
ISO 8
≥0.5 µm 
3,520,000
≥5µm 29,000
Class 100,000
3,520,000  
not specified
Class 100,000
3,520,000 not 
specified
Grade C 
(operation)
Grade D (at rest)4
3,520,000 
29,000
Grade C 
(operation)
Grade D (at rest)4
3,520,000 
29,000
Grade C 
(operation)
Grade D (at rest)4
3,520,000 
not specified
1.	
Class 100 and Grade A are defined as requiring unidirectional flow by all applicable guidelines
2.	
Class titles for US FDA and USP indicate equivalent particle counts per ft3
3.	
ISO 4.8 based upon reduced limit for particles ≥5 µm 
4.	
Grade D operational particulate counts are dependent upon the operation and are not defined by any 
guideline
Each of the above is in current use in the industry for the conduct of MAP operations. In general, as 
MAP operations become more complex, a more sophisticated and complex operating environment 
will be required. The manual processes considered in this report are commonly carried out in either 
a unidirectional air flow hood or an isolator. A unidirectional air flow hood (UAFH) is a cabinet de-
signed to protect materials from operator and environmental contamination. All air supplied to the 
UAFH is High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filtered. In operation, all air flows from the UAFH, 
through the critical manufacturing areas, and exits to the surrounding environment. 
An isolator is a decontaminated system, meeting ISO 5 conditions, which provides uncompromised 
and continuous isolation of its interior from the surrounding environment. A closed isolator only al-
lows air exchanges with the surrounding environment through microbially retentive filters. An open 
3.0	
Buildings And Facilities
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
