

=== PAGE 5 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Introduction
The manufacturing of drugs has historically been fixed in the building in which it is processed and therefore,
manufacturing was conceptualized as fixed in nature. Specifically, the conventional construction of such
manufacturing facilities has been executed on the site and viewed as immobile. Such construction has often
been termed stick-built or been called brick-and-mortar facilities. This type of construction has been the
dominant method in our industry throughout the past. However, the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the
need for new thinking and a more flexible, modern, and scientifically sound approach to the platform design
of the manufacturing process, thereby ensuring the essential manufacture, distribution, and availability of
medicinal products. While some concepts like modular facility construction have been implemented, only
recently has a significant advancement in technologies allowed alternative methods, such as mobile
manufacturing facilities, to be used in its place. Mobile manufacturing is the ability to relocate
manufacturing while maintaining an environment suitable for good manufacturing practice (GMP)
production. This paper focuses exclusively on biotech and pharmaceutical manufacturing. The environment
under consideration is inclusive of the process equipment and cleanrooms enveloping the process that
provide the right conditions to manufacture good-quality medicinal products. The extension or boundary
limits of this environment will be further considered in the scope of this analysis.
The use of self-contained, mobile manufacturing units enables the relocation or replication of a
manufacturing facility between different geographic locations, which allows manufacturers to rapidly
supply and scale up product manufacturing. Examples of manufacturing strategic improvements over time
abound in the pharmaceutical industry, including the adoption of cleanrooms (first introduced in 1962),
which are now a requirement for GMP manufacturing. Prior to that time, it was difficult to control the
manufacturing environment, and risks from particulates and adventitious agents were common. Since then,
cleanrooms have become the status quo and are a requirement for GMP manufacturing. As each change in
pharmaceutical manufacturing occurs, details for expectations have evolved. For cleanrooms, various types
of materials have been utilized, with gypsum boards painted with epoxy being one of the most common
early options due to gypsum board being so common in the construction industry.
The development of other technologies which evolved from the adoption of cleanrooms presaged mobile
manufacturing, such as the introduction of prefabricated elements. The preassembled, prefabricated
solutions which altered how manufacturing facilities were built on-site also seeded the concept of
manufacturing mobility as it became common to ship these semi-completed facilities across the world. At
first, mobile or a commissioned facility was not a consideration as the initial prefabricated technologies
became fixed in nature. But within the past 20 years, prefabricated technologies have been introduced that
can be easily prequalified, disassembled, and relocated elsewhere. These are the technologies that will be
further evaluated within this document to assess the requirements, risks, and advantages within the scope of
mobile manufacturing.
Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 1

=== PAGE 6 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
The process equipment used to manufacture pharmaceuticals is prefabricated and prequalified (via factory
acceptance testing) off-site prior to delivery at the facility, which lends support to the overall concept of
mobile manufacturing. Another major advancement in the evolution of mobile manufacturing feasibility
was the introduction in the 1970s of single-use components, which have matured dramatically since that
time and provided greater flexibility in facility design. Accompanying the advances in technology, the size
of manufacturing facilities and equipment has decreased over time, driven both by process intensification
and personalized medicines that target smaller patient populations.
Geopolitical concerns have also been a driver of distributed manufacturing, as many countries look for in-
country manufacturing. Similarly, pharmaceutical and biotechnical companies want to mitigate the risk to
their assets by having the ability to move their production capabilities in the event of wars, natural disasters,
or other crises. Lastly, regulatory barriers within the drug production landscape have also lessened over time
to accommodate the concept of manufacturing mobility.
Scope
This document aims to assess the feasibility and requirements for designing and qualifying a self-contained
manufacturing process that, once validated, can be relocated and operated in a different location for the
same process, without the requirement for regulatory preapproval or revalidation.
The scope includes exploring the technology supporting mobile manufacturing in greater detail and the
regulatory requirements and risks associated with moving a manufacturing process from one location to
another. While mobile manufacturing can be considered an enabling technology for distributed
manufacturing or point-of-care manufacturing, the scope of this paper excludes identifying or elaborating on
those requirements.
2 Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 7 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Glossary
Definitions have been provided to help clarify Initially qualified site
the concepts discussed in this document. While The first site where a mobile unit is qualified for
some definitions used vary among companies, producing a specific pharmaceutical product or
geographic location, etc., the definitions set of products prior to deployment to other
described below are consistently used within this locations (usually a fixed facility of the pharma
Points to Consider document. Where a definition company that developed the product to be
is based on another published source, the source manufactured by the mobile units).
is cited.
Mobile Manufacturing
The manufacturing of pharmaceutical products
Distributed Manufacturing (DM) at off-site locations via qualified manufacturing
A decentralized manufacturing strategy units.
consisting of a manufacturing platform
Mobile Manufacturing Unit (MMU)
comprising manufacturing units deployed to
A deployable manufacturing unit that has been
multiple locations. Possible use scenarios
qualified to make a specific set of
include:
pharmaceutical products, regardless of location.
• Units located within manufacturing It is designed so that it can be easily
facilities operating within the host’s disassembled and reassembled into its functional
pharmaceutical quality system (PQS).
state without incorporating any major rework.
• Units manufactured and installed to the
same specifications at multiple MMU vendor
manufacturing facilities, networked and The company that assembles the mobile
operated by a central remote PQS. manufacturing units and provides them to the
• Units as independent manufacturing initially qualified site. These are usually
facilities, each with its own PQS (2).
enabling companies that provide units, modules,
and associated services to end-user
Family approach
pharmaceutical companies and perform the
A concept applied to equipment qualification
initial qualification of major facility systems like
where a set of identical or very similar pieces of
water and air, but not product- or process-
equipment (i.e., those deemed functionally
specific aspects of validation.
equivalent) are subjected to reduced
qualification after an initial member of the set is Off-site
fully qualified. The site where the MMU is deployed for
product manufacture.
Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 3

=== PAGE 8 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
On-site
The site where the MMU is fully qualified
(initially qualified site) for manufacture of a
pharmaceutical product or set of products.
Note: This is usually a fixed site at a pharma
company.
Abbreviations
FEI FDA Establishment Identification MMU Mobile Manufacturing Unit
4 Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 9 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Topic 1. Technology Considerations
Q 1.1. What are the available options to build a facility?
The means to fabricate or build a good manufacturing practices (GMP)-compliant facility can be
categorized into two main groups: on-site construction and prefabricated solutions.
One method for on-site construction involves conventional stick-built or brick-and-mortar facilities. This
involves various trades (e.g., carpenters, electricians, masons, etc.) being on-site and using stock materials
that are cut or manipulated on-site based on the build plans for the facility. Another approach to on-site
construction is the use of modular components, where the materials are built off-site but assembled on-site
based on design plans. Both options provide a fixed facility which cannot be moved to an alternate location
if needed.
Prefabricated solutions allow for the build-out of completed components assembled off-site. Being built off-
site entails certain aspects of mobility, and the level of completeness or percentage of work done off-site
typically lends itself to the ability to redeploy the facility elsewhere. However, there are certain
prefabricated solutions that, once installed, become fixed in place or not easily relocated. To be considered a
mobile manufacturing platform, the ease of redeployment becomes a prerequisite. To distinguish, the two
prefabricated units, which are inherently mobile, will be referred to as mobile manufacturing units (MMUs).
Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 5