

=== PAGE 10 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 1.2. What are the advantages and challenges associated with building a mobile
manufacturing unit?
There are several potential advantages of MMUs that include:
• Drug supply robustness: Enables a rapid-response and mobile or localized production capability
and availability of drugs could fill critical supply-chain gaps.
• Rapid response capabilities: A platform approach that enables deployment of new formulations,
raw materials, and processes to the MMU which could enable a more agile response to man-made
and natural disasters, as well as alleviate last-mile distribution challenges.
• Customization and personalized medicine: This type of manufacturing technology also has the
potential to benefit patients though smaller-batch, customized formulations that employ emerging
technologies in precision medicines by leveraging pharmacogenomics and artificial-intelligence
platforms.
• Agile manufacturing networks: Allows a company to flex their manufacturing capacity in
capacity or geographically without the overhead costs of traditional facilities.
• Creation of new business models: From a business perspective, mobile manufacturing supports
innovation and provides a pathway for new technologies and the emergence of new business
models that align with patient outcomes.
Challenges of MMUs could be associated with the following:
• Scale: As MMUs need to be prefabricated and transported, very large operations would be
prohibitive. For example, installations involving large 10,000 L stainless-steel bioreactors would
not be feasible.
• Weight: Depending on the floor structure, it would be challenging to move the unit with extremely
high-point loading equipment installed.
• Structural requirements: Different countries have different structural requirements depending on
seismic activity or potential weather events (e.g., hurricanes). If the correct design space was not
considered in advance, moving to a new location may not be possible.
• Utility requirements: Movement to a new country may encounter local code constraints. Utility
requirements, such as portable power supply and water generation, need to be considered in
advance to simplify the approach or enable retrofitting based on the new location.
• Handling of process equipment: Determination of how the shipment of process equipment will be
managed in the event of redeployment (e.g., shipped inside MMU versus re-crated and shipped
separately).
6 Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 11 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 1.3. How does one implement and validate a mobile manufacturing unit?
At the core of an MMU is the process technology, that is, the equipment being used to produce either the
drug substance and/or drug product. Working backwards from there is the design space of the MMU, which
includes the cleanrooms, building automation system/building management system, qualified building
automation system/qualified building management system/environmental monitoring system, process
automation system, and mechanical electrical piping to operate said area. It is important that all these
elements reside within the MMU, so that when it is redeployed, those elements stay with the system. Such
MMUs could potentially be placed outdoors or within a host facility that would provide basic inputs or
utilities.
Establishing a proper design space for the MMU while simultaneously maintaining the ease of mobility for
all aspects of the unit is critical. Typically, multiple vendors (e.g., process equipment, cleanroom, utility
suppliers) contribute to what becomes the final MMU, and all parties working together from the start is
critical to success since the solutions are built off-site at different locations.
Additionally, establishing clear user requirements for MMU mobility is critical to redeployment. For
example, if the overall design space of the MMU needs to account for various locations in a country or
around the world for redeployment, the MMU design space needs to consider a worst-case scenario or
incorporate features that allow the MMU be retrofittable to a different location in the future.
Other geographical considerations include local code requirements where the unit could be redeployed. If
considering multiple countries for relocation, due diligence must be undertaken for electrical systems, or
example, since the voltages available may vary across countries and regions. Structural considerations also
need to be considered as different countries have varied regulations and different seismic activity or
potential weather events (e.g., hurricanes).
MMU requirements depend on the process and utilities needed to support the MMU infrastructure.
Consideration of host facilities or locations within the manufacturing network that could house said MMU
should be conducted during a preliminary evaluation phase. Based on required utilities of the MMU and the
availability of those utilities within the network, a design space needs to be defined which includes utility
generation within the scope of the MMU, if deemed necessary. If required utilities are available at all or
most locations where the MMU may be deployed, this would negate the need to include that component
within the MMU design space.
Certain aspects of commissioning, qualification, and validation (CQV) can take place at the vendor’s site,
typically known as factory acceptance tests (FAT), with additional testing, referred to as site acceptance
tests (SAT), taking place at the final location. Leveraging the FAT/SAT into the CQV or master validation
strategy will help mitigate redundant testing during qualification.
Elements to consider for validation of an MMU:
• Identify the need for an MMU
• Identify the initially qualified site
• Determine what unit operations will be performed at the MMU
Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 7

=== PAGE 12 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• List the systems that need qualification and validation, which include but are not limited to:
̶ Utilities
̶ Manufacturing systems
̶ Computer systems
̶ Servers
̶ Access control
̶ Unit operation validation
̶ Method validation
̶ Cleaning validation
̶ Shipping validation
• Describe procurement strategy
• Identify training requirements
• Define quality oversight
8 Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 13 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 1.4. How can mobile manufacturing facilitate technology transfer?
Mobile manufacturing has the potential to facilitate transfer of manufacturing and/or analytics
geographically, once an MMU is established. The likely order of establishment of capabilities would first be
the development and qualification of manufacturing or analytics at an initially qualified site. The initially
qualified site could be fixed in nature or an MMU. Next, once the specific capabilities are established, they
can then be tech-transferred to the subsequent MMU, and qualification activity for the specific capabilities
would take place on the MMUs as necessary. The capabilities can be tech-transferred and qualified in more
than one MMU, and the process can be streamlined for subsequent units from the initial transfer to the first
unit.
Question 1.3 addressed how to establish the design space of the MMU in conjunction with the expectations
of the host facility. Manufacturing and analytics, raw materials, reagents, and disposables may need to be
qualified, probably at the initially qualified site, before being loaded onto the MMU(s) and the MMUs being
deployed.
Implementation of a network of MMUs that are equivalent in design and operation could potentially reduce
post-marketing regulatory submissions associated with tech-transfer. An intended use of some types of
mobile-manufacturing technologies may be rapid scale-out and/or deployment to locations in close
proximity to patients. These types of intended uses (e.g., leveraging tech-transfer among a network of
MMUs) could potentially be validated during product development such that data to support these activities
could be provided in the original marketing application. Tech-transfer criteria could then be established that
ensure process performance consistency and comparable product quality that, if met, could reduce post-
marketing regulatory submissions.
Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 9

=== PAGE 14 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Topic 2. Regulatory Considerations
Q 2.1. How do current regulations impact the adoption of mobile manufacturing?
Current regulatory expectations with respect to facilities used in the manufacturing of drugs and biologics is
that they are required to be designed in compliance with cGMPs. At a high level, processing should permit a
smooth flow of materials through the facility. Space must be provided for receiving, quarantine, sampling,
and storage of all manufacturing materials, including intermediate and finished bulk drug substance.
More specifically, facility builds or modifications need to ensure compliance with a host of regulations, such
as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Title 21, Code of Federal Regulations, the European
Medicines Agency (EMA) Commission Decision 2021/1240 of 13 July 2021, and the equivalent
requirements of other global regulators. Appendix A provides examples of applicable compliance
expectations.
As a requirement of licensure, marketing authorization holders (MAHs) must provide information on the
manufacturing locations, such as the address (and potentially global positioning system (GPS) coordinates),
that will allow the relevant regulatory agencies to identify the manufacturing location. The location needs to
hold a manufacturing license and a GMP certificate. In some jurisdictions, the facility locations and specific
GMP activities (e.g., analytical testing, storage, manufacturing) must be registered and assigned specific
identification and status by the regulators. For example, the FDA assigns a Firm Establishment Identifier
(FEI) number to all facilities, and the identification of the facility or site is linked to an address and specific
business entity (e.g., DUN & Bradstreet number). If multiple locations are listed in the dossier (i.e., the
application), then this is required for each location. The requirements to file and register facility-specific
information, including addresses and site contacts, are in large part linked to the regulators, enabling them to
triage inspections.
In an ideal case of mobile manufacturing, the MMU could move from one physical location to another, and
the license and certificate would only be required once. However, there are no provisions in current
regulations for such a scenario. Moreover, in the United States, many state boards of pharmacy require
registration for in-state drug manufacturers, presenting additional complexity of rapidly moving across state
lines. In addition, the movement of the MMU could create logistical challenges for regulators when making
decisions about where and when they would need to deploy resources to conduct GMP inspections. Also,
the full manufacturing process may be segmented in different locations (e.g., warehousing and the quality
control of raw materials may be centrally located for stocking of one or a set of MMUs).
Finally, some countries have multiple agencies that would first need to agree to accept the license and
certificate from another agency within their country. Typically, countries will not have provisions to accept
such licenses from other agencies. The situation becomes even more convoluted and complicated if the
MMU is expected to cross country borders (1).
10 Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 15 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 2.2. What actions can global regulators take to help facilitate the implementation of
mobile manufacturing?
Regulators can facilitate mobile manufacturing both by adjusting regulatory/administrative procedures and
modifying validation and qualification expectations.
A prime example of where regulatory requirements could be revisited is the FDA approach to the FEI
number. It would not be practical to give each MMU an FEI number: there would be too many units in
circulation and the MMU manufacturer would need to reapply for a new one each time an MMU relocated,
potentially every month. Not only would it be burdensome for the manufacturer but for FDA, with little
public health benefit. Alternatively, an approach could be to have an FEI number for the site where the
MMUs are produced and then have that site’s Quality Unit track the unit numbers from there. This would
ensure the traceability expected by regulators, and regulators could revisit the concept of 100% "facility”
inspection. If the MMU was viewed as analogous with a “facility,” as set forth in 21 CFR 201.1, for
example, it would be impractical. A strict interpretation of this regulation may require that each and every
mobile unit be inspected after they are produced (2).
Novel validation and qualification approaches would also ease otherwise insurmountable regulatory
burdens. For example, implementing a “family approach" towards validation and qualification of MMUs
would streamline mobile unit qualification, without lowering quality standards. In this approach, once one
unit is qualified and validated, identical follow-on units would be subject to reduced testing. As another
streamlining concept, the bulk release of raw materials or water could take place at one mobile
manufacturing site, with portions of the pre-released material distributed to each unit. This would avoid
unit-specific testing each time an MMU is made and stocked with material.
Recent draft guidances issued by the FDA on the Platform Technology Designation Program and the
Advanced Manufacturing Technologies Designation Program potentially offer a new opportunity for
MMUs (3, 4). Specifically, these draft guidances propose that once a platform technology has been
designated as such, it may be leveraged for other new or future products from the same sponsor or if a full
right of reference for the same platform technology is provided to a third party. As currently written, these
draft guidances are limited to technology incorporated into a drug or biological product which is essential to
its structure or function. Expansion of the guidances, or additional guidance to include the methods of
manufacturing and the production platforms themselves, could prove useful to accelerate this paradigm. The
designation of a platform manufacturing technology should be considered early in development during the
clinical phase of drug development. Other regulators, including Health Canada and the Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), are creating frameworks for advanced therapeutic
products that take into account the scientific and technological advances that are leading to distributed and
point-of-care manufacturing, both of which could take advantage of mobile manufacturing facilities (5).
Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 11

=== PAGE 16 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Topic 3. Implementation
Q 3.1. How would one validate a mobile manufacturing unit at a new location?
Assuming the initial validation was fully conducted at the initially qualified site, validation of an MMU
should be done in stages, with as many elements completed at the initially qualified site as possible (see
Question 1.3). The initial stage occurs at the manufacturing site of the MMU (vendor), where critical
systems like water and air are qualified via installation qualification/operational qualification (IQ/OQ).
Mobility over various terrains would be part of this exercise as well. Some systems could be tested at the
initially qualified site of the receiving company (i.e., the drug manufacturer). For example, testing and
qualification of raw materials should occur at the receiving company’s fixed site, as could the initial process
validation. These systems would need to be further qualified in field testing, through performance
qualification (PQ) or confirmatory runs and, potentially, process validation. This is analogous to “static” and
“dynamic” testing of air systems where use in the field would be analogous to “dynamic” testing. In the case
of process validation (PV), if the MMU is intended for multiproduct use, it may be challenging to perform
PV for every potential product. The choice of the model process for PV should consider its complexity and
robustness in order to cover a range of product types.
12 Points to Consider No. 15 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.