31
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.0 Additional Reading
5.1 	 Selected Global Laws and Regulations
Annex 5, Good Distribution Practices (GDP) for Pharmaceutical Products, World Health 
1.	
Organization, 2005.
Guidelines for Temperature Control of Drug Products during Storage and Transportation 
2.	
(GUIDE-0069), Health Canada, 2005.
Guide to Control and Monitoring of Storage and Transportation Temperature Conditions for 
3.	
Medicinal Products and Active Substances, Irish Medicines Board, 2006.
Guidelines on Good Distribution Practice of Medicinal Products for Human Use (94/C 63/03), 
4.	
European Union, 1994.
Quality Guideline Q8: 
5.	
Pharmaceutical Development; International Conference on Harmonisation: 
2006.
Quality Guideline Q9: 
6.	
Quality Risk Management; International Conference on Harmonisation: 
2006.
Quality Guideline Q10: 
7.	
Pharmaceutical Quality System; International Conference on 
Harmonisation: 2007.
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. Chapter V: Drug and Devices, Subchapter A, Sec 501 
8.	
(a)(2)(B).
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. Chapter III: Prohibitive Acts and Penalties, Subchapter A, 
9.	
Sec 301 (a)(b)(c).
Food and Drugs. 
10.	
Code of  Federal Regulations, Part 211.
Perishable Cargo Regulation. International Air Transport Association (IATA), 2009
11.	
5.2	 Selected Publications
Seevers, Robert H. et al. The Use of Mean Kinetic Temperature (MKT) in the Handling, 
1.	
Storage, and Distribution of Temperature Sensitive Pharmaceuticals. Pharmaceutical Outsourcing. 
2009, May/June, 30-35.
2.	 Technical Report No 39 (Revised 2007): Guidance for Temperature Controlled Medicinal Products: 
Maintaining the Quality of  Temperature Sensitive Medicinal Products through the Transportation 
Environment; Parenteral Drug Association: Bethesda, MD, 2007.
3.	 Technical Report No. 46: Last Mile: Guidance for Good Distribution Practices for Pharmaceutical 
Products to the End User; Parenteral Drug Association: Bethesda, MD: 2009.
4.	 Technical Report No. 53: Guidance for Industry: Stability Testing to Support Distribution of New Drug 
Products; Parenteral Drug Association: Bethesda, MD, 2011.
5.3	 Selected Regulatory Authority Websites
The International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration 
1.	
of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) www.who.int/en
The World Health Organization (WHO) www.who.int/en
2.	
The European Medicines Agency (EMA) www.ema.europa.eu
3.	
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) www.fda.gov
4.	
Health Canada www.hc-sc.gc.ca
5.	
U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency www.justice.gov/dea
6.	
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
32
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
Terms of Usage
An Authorized User of the electronic PDA Technical Report is a PDA Member in good standing or the purchaser of the Technical 
Report. 
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
Search and view the content of the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Download the PDA Technical Report for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• 
Print the PDA Technical Report for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• 
Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Technical Report for the individual use of an Authorized User 
• 
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Technical Report available to anyone other than an Authorized User 
• 
Post articles from the PDA Technical Report on Web sites, either available on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online 
• 
publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Technical Report or its content 
• 
Use or copy the PDA Technical Report for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or distribution of materials 
• 
in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose 
Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Technical Report 
• 
Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Technical Report including any text or graphics 
• 
Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information or notice contained 
• 
in the PDA Technical Report 
Combine any portion of the PDA Technical Report with any other material 
• 
To License or purchase Reprints or Hardcopies
Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Technical Reports can be obtained for a fee. To learn more about licensing 
options and rates, please contact: Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133. Written correspondence can be 
sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
Reprints: Reprints of PDA Technical Reports can be purchased for a fee. To order reprints, please contact: Janny Chua, Publications 
Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133. Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, 
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
Hardcopies: Hardcopies of PDA Technical Reports are available on demand for a fee. The PDA membership benefits include 
discounted pricing for printed copies of PDA Technical Reports. Go to www.pda.org/bookstore to order a hardcopy. PDA members 
will need their PDA identification number and password to receive the discount.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
