5
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
For products that are monitored during transportation, if temperature excursions occur outside of 
the labeled storage conditions or established shipping ranges, an investigation must take place to 
determine:
the root cause of the temperature excursion
• 
any necessary corrective actions (if warranted)
• 
any potential product impact (must be documented)
• 
Product impact should be addressed and documented for any temperature excursion and cumulative 
excursion impact during storage and distribution. Unplanned temperature excursions and planned 
system deviations should be properly documented and approved by the quality function.
3.1.3	 Stability Testing to Support Distribution
Packaging should ensure protection against mechanical impact (damage) on product during handling 
and transport. The transportation modes and destination should be considered in determining the 
necessary packaging materials. 
When specific temperature conditions are required, packaging used to control temperature 
should maintain the appropriate temperature range during handling, storage, transportation and 
distribution, and must be qualified. The methods used for qualifying packaging systems should be 
based on risk and the product’s sensitivity to temperature change and must be documented (e.g., 
validation master plan). The result of the risk assessment will provide the rationale for the extent of 
testing and the need for ongoing temperature monitoring. 
Each packaging/pack-out operation throughout distribution should be conducted under monitored 
conditions that are supported by stability data. Timelines for situations like Time Out of 
Refrigeration (TOR) should be defined, controlled and justified through appropriate stability data 
and in accordance with appropriate Service Level or Quality Agreements. Data must be available to 
support timeframes outside of labeled temperature and/or humidity.
3.2	 Distribution Control Management
Distribution control management encompasses the processes and controls necessary to ensure 
product integrity and traceability are maintained from the point of receipt through product 
distribution.
3.2.1	 Qualification and Training of Personnel
Procedures and conditions of employment, including background checks, should be designed and 
implemented to minimize the possibility of product diversion. SOPs should be in place for all job 
functions. An adequate number of warehouse and shipping personnel should be trained in the 
procedures for proper storage and distribution of each product type (hazardous, narcotic, etc.), and 
in the safe handling of product spills and other emergency procedures. A training program that 
includes both initial and ongoing training should be developed for each job function. The completion 
of training should be documented and training records should be maintained for each associate. 
3.2.2	 Premises and Equipment
Premises and equipment should be qualified as adequate to ensure proper management and 
distribution of products. A warehouse should be:
Secure with controlled access and features to protect against invasion, adulteration and theft
• 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
6
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
Structurally sound, including hardened and sealed floors and no signs of leaks
• 
Sufficiently lit to allow accurate and safe operations
• 
Designed so that washrooms and eating areas are sufficiently separated from operational areas
• 
Clean and sufficiently maintained
• 
Constructed to protect against floods 
• 
Free of agents that could cause infestation (includes the warehouse surroundings)
• 
In compliance with all local and federal/national regulatory requirements
• 
Environmentally controlled (temperature, humidity), where appropriate
• 
3.2.3	 Material Handling
Procedures for the delivery, receipt, storage and shipment of products are collectively referred to as 
material handling
3.2.3.1	Receiving and Storage
Receiving and shipping areas should: 
Protect deliveries from weather conditions or other elements that may have an adverse effect 
• 
on materials/products during loading and unloading 
Be separate from storage areas
• 
Deliveries should be examined at receipt in order to ensure:
Materials/products are in good condition and not damaged 
• 
Materials have been received from approved suppliers and within expiry.
• 
Product is in its original container, seals are intact and product is not suspected of being 
• 
adulterated
The identity and quantity of materials received correspond to the materials ordered
• 
Products subject to special storage conditions should be: 
Identified with required storage conditions on the documentation (e.g., airway bill) and 
• 
outside packaging
Stored in accordance with specified instructions.
• 
3.2.3.2	Product Status
Typically, commercial products should be approved and released for sale prior to being received in. It 
is acceptable to receive and/or to dispatch products in quarantine under the following conditions:
Transfer of product is made between sites and/or manufacturer’s third party warehouses 
• 
where appropriate controls are in place to ensure that quarantined products will not be 
dispatched to customers prior to final release
There is documented approval for quarantine shipments from the responsible quality function 
• 
from both the receiving and shipping locations (e.g., quality agreement)
There is a warehouse management system that ensures:
• 
A shipment will have an identification such as “quarantined product”
––
The status of a product is accurately assigned
––
The authority and access to perform the status change will be defined by the system tools, 
––
procedures and training.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
7
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
3.2.3.3	Controlled Drugs
Local regulatory requirements should be followed for the activities and documentation involving 
controlled drugs (e.g., importing, warehousing, transport, handling, records and official reports, as 
applicable). 
For importing or exporting activities, both the distribution center and receiving country are respon-
sible to communicate and implement the requirements.
3.2.3.4	Counterfeit Products
Counterfeit products found in the distribution network should be kept apart from other saleable 
products in a restricted and controlled area to avoid any confusion. They should be clearly labeled 
as not for sale. Competent authorities and the holder of the marketing authorization of the original 
product should be informed immediately. Counterfeit products should be dealt with in accordance 
with federal/national or local regulations.
3.2.3.5	Records
Records should be generated at the time each operation is completed and in such a way that all 
significant activities or events are traceable. Records should be understandable and readily available. 
Records retention schedules or equivalent documents should be established and maintained 
according to applicable record retention regulations. 
3.2.4	 Storage and Inventory Control
Computerized systems and/or written procedures should be implemented to record and track 
product information that is critical to protect products and customers. This information includes 
lot numbers, expiration dates, storage locations, product status and any other information required 
to track the product from receipt through distribution and to ensure that customers receive quality 
product. Systems/procedures should address the following:
3.2.4.1	Inventory
There should be a documented system for the recording and traceability of lot numbers and expiration 
dates. Inventory should be periodically reviewed to assure the control of identity, quantity, location 
and status of each inventory item.
Computerized systems should be appropriately qualified and validated. 
Inventory accuracy must be maintained and verified. Periodic cycle counts or annual inventory 
reviews should be performed and documented in order to detect and investigate discrepancies 
and identify corrective actions, and should be used as tools for improvements to inventory 
management.
3.2.4.2	Product Status Control
There should be a validated system to control and maintain product status (e.g., on test, approved, 
quarantined, restricted). The system should:
Be under appropriate change control
• 
Allow changes to product status to be made only by appropriate quality personnel.
• 
Computerized systems should be appropriately qualified and validated.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
8
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
3.2.4.3	In-Transit Storage
In-transit storage facilities (e.g., cross-docking center, airplane, airport, distribution hub and other 
facilities which are used to move product from one vehicle to another vehicle) may be used. All in-
transit storage facilities should have adequate security and environmental control, and must be in 
compliance with all applicable laws and regulations prior to use.
3.2.5	 Transportation
Products should be transported in such a way that product:
Maintains its identification
• 
Does not contaminate and is not contaminated by other products or materials
• 
Is secure (i.e., protected against spillage, breakage or theft)
• 
Is not subjected to unacceptable changes in heat, cold, light, moisture or other adverse 
• 
influences
Is not subjected to attack by pests.
• 
Products requiring controlled temperature storage should be transported with appropriate controls 
and monitored. Shipment time should not exceed the timeframe established through validation 
studies. Excursions may be justified through continuous temperature monitoring and appropriate 
stability studies.
Freezers used for storage of coolants such as chilled or frozen gel packs and the process for control 
of those coolants should be qualified. Vehicles containers and/or packaging should be appropriately 
matched to avoid negative effects on the integrity and quality of pharmaceutical products.
Products that are temperature controlled that ship internationally should be labeled per IATA 
Perishable Cargo Regulations.
Vehicles used to distribute, store or handle pharmaceutical products should be suitable for their use 
and appropriately equipped to prevent exposure of the products to environmental conditions that 
could affect their stability and packaging integrity, and prevent contamination of any kind. Carrier 
studies may be used to support adequacy and qualification of equipment in combination with active 
load performance qualification studies. Monitoring should take place in at least the front and back of 
vehicle and should support duration of shipment. 
Vehicles should be inspected for cleanliness and temperature setting, if applicable, prior to loading 
and transporting product. This inspection should be documented.
3.2.6	 Product Disposition and Distribution
Product can only be distributed to authorized parties or to persons authorized to supply and/or 
receive products. Products due to expire first should be distributed first (FEFO). Adequate controls 
should be in place to prevent the distribution of expired products throughout the supply chain. 
For pharmaceutical products supplied to a person authorized or entitled to supply products to the 
public, a document should be enclosed that makes it possible to ascertain the date, the name and 
pharmaceutical form of the product, the quantity supplied, and the name and address of the supplier 
(e.g., bill of lading, purchase order or invoice). Documents should also contain quantity shipped and 
lot number of material.
It is critical to coordinate shipments throughout the supply chain to ensure proper timing for products 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
9
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
to be transported and received with regard to holidays, weekends or other forms of interruption, 
such as weather-related delivery delays or customer receipt schedules. Any potential customs-related 
delays, including those by the U.S. FDA, U.S. Department of Agriculture, health ministries in other 
countries, or any other governmental agency resulting from international shipments, must also be 
considered. 
3.2.7	 Product Protection
Fundamental to the outcomes of a Quality System surrounding GDP is the need to ensure that 
products are handled, stored, transferred and transported in a manner that does not negatively 
impact or degrade the product. Thus, GDPs should protect the product from external environmental 
conditions that might cause undue deterioration. These include chemicals, light, moisture, 
temperature, pest infestation, or other adverse influences that could cause microbial and/or chemical 
contamination. If a pesticide program is in place the pesticide should be registered as required by 
local regulations.
Paths to degradation of product should be established through stability testing, and required 
shipping conditions defined and communicated to the parties of the supply chain so as to enact or 
implement appropriate means of environmental control. Data, such as filed stability test results, 
forced degradation studies and temperature cycling studies, may be used to support supply chain 
temperature excursions.
The storage facilities and vehicles or containers used to transport product should be clean and free 
from litter, dust and pests. Adequate precautions should be taken against spillage or breakage that 
attracts microorganisms, causes cross-contamination, or could create a health or safety risk to 
personnel. There should be adequate space for the orderly placement of materials to prevent mix-
ups between drug products to prevent contamination.
Products with broken seals or damaged packaging or suspected of possible contamination should 
be withdrawn from saleable stock, and if not immediately destroyed, they should be kept separate, 
secure and quarantined so that they cannot be sold in error or contaminate other goods.
Sufficient security should be provided to prevent theft and product diversion. 
3.2.8	 Returns Management
Any shipped product presented to a storage facility for return must be evaluated in accordance with 
return procedures to determine if the material must be destroyed or if it is eligible for restocking. 
Returns should be examined upon receipt, as described in Section 3.7. Returned products should 
only be evaluated for restocking eligibility if:
They are in original, unopened containers, in good condition, not damaged, and it is known 
• 
and documented that they have been stored and handled under proper conditions
They have been evaluated by an authorized person
• 
There is documentation that required temperatures were maintained and that security of the 
• 
materials was never compromised 
Documentation indicates the reason for return and that the product was not received into 
• 
stock by the customer so that chain of custody is maintained. Note: many companies do not 
receive cold chain back into stock due in part to inconsistencies in controls for the return 
shipment.
Returns for destruction should be processed by an authorized pharmaceutical destruction company 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
10
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 52
unless the manufacturer has the means to destroy the goods.
3.2.9	 Exception Management 
Any excursion from the defined process, as identified by the manufacturer, constitutes an exception. 
An exception management system should be put in place to track all non-conformances and the 
investigation of the non-conformances so that product and quality problems may be routinely 
analyzed. The investigation into a quality problem or nonconforming product should be conducted 
to a level commensurate with the significance or risk of the problem. 
The exception management system should be documented. The documentation should identify the 
activities that should be treated as non-conformances and a description of the steps and documentation 
that is required to complete the investigation, including product impact. A targeted timeframe for 
closure should be defined along with a schedule for review with management. 
3.2.9.1	Corrective Action and Preventative Action (CAPA) System
A system with documented procedures should be developed including the following elements:
Description of the investigation that took place
• 
Root cause, if one exists
• 
Description of how root cause was identified
• 
Corrective actions and preventative actions
• 
Owners and target due dates for corrective actions and preventative actions.
• 
Verification that the corrective and/or preventative action(s) were implemented and found 
• 
effective.
Evidence of management review
• 
The system should define a targeted timeframe for the identification of root cause and the closure of 
the associated action plans. Additionally, CAPAs should be included in management reviews. 
3.2.9.2	Complaints 
Procedures for receiving, reviewing, evaluating and investigating complaints should be established, 
documented and maintained. The complaints should be processed in a uniform and timely manner. 
History of product complaints should be maintained to track and trend complaints and responses 
and any resulting CAPAs. 
3.2.9.3	Quality Holds 
A system, including documented procedures, should be in place to implement holds on products, 
as necessary, to prevent them from being distributed to customers. The responsibility and ability of 
affecting the quality release status of a product should be restricted to personnel who are properly 
trained and authorized by the quality function. 
3.2.9.4	Product Action 
A system, including documented procedures, should be in place to respond to all product actions, 
including recalls, withdrawals and corrections. The system should include a requirement to segregate 
and secure product requiring action to prevent distribution to customers.
3.3	 Performance Management
Methods and procedures should be established to review the performance of the quality system 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
11
Technical Report No. 52
© 2011 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
on a regularly scheduled basis and to identify opportunities for continuous improvement. These 
methods and procedures should include Performance Measurement and Reporting, Self-Inspection 
(Internal Audit), and Management Review Meetings.
3.3.1	 Performance Measurement and Reporting
Performance of the components of the quality system should be measured against pre-defined goals 
to gauge performance and to identify opportunities for improvement. Reports should be generated 
and reviewed on a regularly scheduled basis to track performance, monitor trends, and identify 
areas for improvement. 
3.3.2	 Self-Inspection (Internal Audit)
The quality assurance program should require self-inspections, which should include the quality 
systems of internal supply chain partners. These self-inspections should be conducted in order to 
monitor the implementation of GDP and compliance with GDP principles, as well as to trigger 
necessary CAPA measures and monitor CAPA effectiveness to achieve continuous improvement. 
This is termed a ‘closed loop supply chain,’ in which the manufacturer is aware of their supply chain 
partners and operations. 
3.3.3	 Management Review Meetings
Quality management system reviews should take place on a regularly scheduled basis and should 
cover:
Audit results 
• 
Performance metrics (actual vs. goals)
• 
Status of non-conformances, corrective actions and preventative actions
• 
Customer feedback (returns, complaints, etc.)
• 
Product status (recalls, non-availability)
• 
Changes that may impact the quality systems.
• 
Opportunities and recommendations for improvement
• 
3.4	 Supply Chain Partner Management
The quality of supply chain partners is critical to product safety. Methods and procedures should be 
implemented to provide a consistent and repeatable process for selecting, maintaining and evaluating 
the performance of supply chain partners. These procedures should address the following: 
3.4.1	 Partner Selection
There should be a process in place to evaluate and select service providers that will be able to support 
GDP compliance. The process for selection of a service provider should include satisfactory findings 
in areas that are critical to the portion of the distribution system that their service applies (see Good 
Storage and Shipping Practices Checklist). These include but are not limited to:
Transportation provider’s safety records
• 
Regulatory certifications (e.g. verified-accredited wholesale distributors [VAWD], ISO, etc)
• 
Operational Policies and Procedures
• 
Vehicle and Equipment (to include refrigerated trucks, sea containers, aircrafts, etc)
• 
Security
• 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
