6
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73-2
Moreover, the device part of this single integral (DDC) product (e.g., final prefilled staked needle 
syringe) must comply with the relevant GSPRs established in MDR Annex I.
In order to evaluate whether GSPR compliance can be self-assessed or if it requires a Notified Body Opin-
ion (NBOp), the device part of the PFS must be classified as a “virtual device.” MDR Annex VIII lays out 
the classification rules that determine the level of information and the involvement of a NB that would 
be required. Annex VIII, Rule 6 refers to surgically invasive devices intended for transient use. Because 
the device part of a prefilled syringe falls under this description, it is classified as Class IIa or higher, thus 
requiring a NB to be involved, as stated in MDR Article 117. That Article amends Directive 2001/83/EC 
Annex I, Section 3.2, point 12 to state that, if the application dossier to the competent authorities does not 
already include the results of the conformity assessment of the device, a NBOp must be provided. 
The generation of the required data is a joint effort between the manufacturers of the components, 
device part, and device and the pharmaceutical company. As the pharmaceutical company (the ap-
plicant) is filing both for the NBOp and the marketing authorization, it is ultimately responsible for 
ensuring that all content and data are “attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original and accurate 
(ALCOA)” (15). The European Medicines Agency (EMA) provides a comprehensive website, updated 
regularly, with questions and answers on good manufacturing practices (GMP) and data integrity (8). 
In summary, applicants who want to place staked needle PFS on the EU market must involve a NB in 
the assessment of compliance with MDR Annex I GSPRs. The NBOp obtained must be included in 
the application dossier to the national competent authorities or the EMA.
4.0 
Content of Submission File to Notified Bodies
To complete the submission file for the NBs, following MDR Annex II is recommended. It is structured into 
five sections: “Device description and specification,” “Design and Manufacturing Information,” “General 
Safety and Performance Requirements,” “Benefit-Risk Analysis and Risk Management,” and “Product Verifi-
cation and Validation.” Individual sections of the submission file can be more or less detailed, at the discretion 
of the submitting pharmaceutical company. Guidance can also be found in the Team-NB position papers 
on documentation requirements and on best practices for the submission of technical documentation (2,3). 
Likewise, TR-73-2 follows the same structure as the submission file. The first paragraph of each section of this 
report describes the proposed content of the corresponding section of the submission file.
To facilitate the review, summaries of each chapter can be provided. Additionally, an overview of design devel-
opment might be helpful to navigate the GSPR checklist and attached reports. The summaries should clearly 
reference all relevant test reports that support the conclusions of the summaries. The relevant raw data should 
also be submitted in order for the NB to verify the conclusions in the summaries and compliance to the GSPRs.
The GSPR guidance Table 5.1-1 provided in this document for the syringe components, syringe 
subassembly ready for filling and the device part systematically suggests the amount and depth of 
information needed for each relevant GSPR to support pharmaceutical companies in assembling the 
submission file to the NBs. These documents can be added to the relevant chapters in the submission 
file. Additional inspiration can be found in two reflection papers by the European Biopharmaceutical 
Enterprises and European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (16,17). 
This document represents the current state of knowledge. As this is a new process based on a new regula-
tory requirement, expectations of the NBs and competent authorities may diverge as the process evolves. 
Ultimately, the responsibility for the entire content of the submission file lies with the applicant. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
