1
Technical Report No. 73-2
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
1.0  Introduction
The European Union regulation (EU) 2017/745 on medical devices, referred to as MDR, introduces 
new requirements for manufacturers of medical devices. These new requirements, according to MDR 
Articles 1(8) and 1(9), subparagraphs 2, also apply to pharmaceutical companies developing and 
manufacturing combinations of medicinal products and medical devices, including prefilled syringes 
(PFS),  both integral and single integral products. The device part of these PFS must comply with the 
rules outlined in MDR Annex I: General Safety and Performance Requirements (GSPRs). Evidence of 
compliance, as described in Article 117, must be provided by requesting an opinion from a Notified 
Body (NB) appropriately accredited for the issuance of such an opinion (1) (See Section 3.0).
PDA Technical Report No. 73-2: Application of Medical Device Regulation Annex I Requirements for 
Staked Needle Syringes represents the current state of knowledge as to its application. As this is a new 
process based on a new regulatory requirement, expectations of the NBs and competent authorities 
may diverge as the process evolves. Ultimately, the responsibility for the entire content of the submis-
sion file that is reviewed by the NB lies with the applicant. Accordingly, the intended users of TR-73-2 
are applicants, i.e., pharmaceutical companies, their suppliers, and other interested parties. 
1.1	
Purpose
As an addendum to PDA Technical Report No. 73: Prefilled Syringe User Requirements for Biotechnology 
Applications, this technical report provides recommendations on preparing the required documenta-
tion of the device part of the PFS to facilitate obtaining an NB opinion. 
Table 5.1-1 in Section 5.0 provides GSPR guidance on the syringe components, syringe subassembly 
ready for filling, and the device part (see Figure 4.2-1). It systematically recommends the amount and 
depth of information needed for each relevant GSPR to support pharmaceutical companies in assem-
bling the submission file to the NBs. 
Section 4.0 provides information on documents that provide guidance on completing the NB submis-
sion file. Following MDR Annex II: Technical Documentation to complete the submission file for the 
NBs is recommended; individual sections can be written in more or less detail, at the discretion of the 
submitting applicant (2). Additional guidance can be found in the Team-NB position papers on docu-
mentation requirements and on best practices for the submission of technical documentation (2,3). 
TR-73-2 also follows the same structure as the submission file.
1.2	
Scope
While the scope of PDA TR-73 applies only to 1 ml long glass PFS for biotechnology application, 
TR-73-2 applies to PFS of glass and polymer of different volumes within the definition of MDR 
Article 1(9), subparagraph 2. The scope of TR-73-2 is not exclusive for biotechnology applications. 
The device part, including its corresponding components and materials, are in scope as they will be 
evaluated by the NBs, but the medicinal product (drug) is not. 
Figure 4.2-1 provides a schematic overview of the drug and the device parts of a PFS and its compo-
nents; a backstop can be added if needed.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73-2
Table 1.2-1 delineates the items considered in and out of scope of TR-73-2.
Table 1.2-1		
Items In and Out of Scope of TR-73-2, by Category
Category
In Scope 
Out of Scope
Syringe Type
Staked needle
Luer lock, luer cone, dual chamber1
Dosing
Fixed dose
Variable dose (with or without measuring function)
Material of Construction
Glass
Polymer
Additional Components/Features
Backstop or finger-flange extension
(Rigid) needle shield
Plunger rod2
Autoinjectors 
Sharps injury-protection system (needle safety system)
Immediate syringe label
Packaging
Packaging, such as blister, folding box or carton labels, 
paper tray, leaflets, or sterile barrier 
Regulatory Requirements
GSPRs in Annex I of Regulation (EU) 
2017/45
Non-EU regulatory frameworks
Application
Injectable medicinal products, as defined 
in Article 1(2), intended for intramuscular, 
intravenous, or subcutaneous injection3
Veterinary products4
ATMPs as defined under Article 2(1)(d) of Regulation 
(EC) No 1394/20074,5
Intravitreal6
1	 Dual-chamber PFS are out of scope because they are not typically produced in a staked needle configuration. 
2	 Additional components and features are described in Section 5.3.
3	 Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community Code Relating to Medicinal 
Products for Human Use (MPD) (4). 
4	 Veterinary medicines and advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMP) are out of scope because they are out of the scope of the MDR. 
5	 Regulation (EC) No 1394/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 2007 on advanced therapy medicinal 
products 
6	 Intravitreal PFS are out of scope because they are not typically produced in a staked needle configuration.
The components listed in Table 1.2-1 under the category of “Packaging” are out of scope of TR-73-2 
because the requirements are covered by Directive 2001/83/EC, which is the leading legal framework. 
However, in terms of the individual product-specific setup, related evidence (e.g., shipping studies, 
risk- and/or user-related labeling, if it affects the device part) should be considered as part of the MDR 
Annex I evidence submitted to the NB. (See Section 5.5.) 
Further design variants similar to the components described in this document are technically out of 
scope; nonetheless, this technical report can be used as a guidance to address them.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
3
Technical Report No. 73-2
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
2.0  Glossary and Abbreviations
2.1	
Glossary
Definitions have been provided to help clarify the concepts discussed in this technical report. While some 
of the definitions vary among companies, the definitions described below are consistent for use within this 
technical report. Where a definition is based on another published source, the source is cited. Only defini-
tions that are either not mentioned in TR-73 or not taken from the TR-73 glossary are mentioned here.
As there is no agreed-upon EU-wide term for a product combining a medicinal product and a medical 
device part, such as “prefillable syringes ready for filling,” this document uses the term “drug-device 
combination (DDC)” to refer to the final PFS system. 
Applicant
The commercial entity responsible for the 
marketing authorisation application or post-
approval application in the EU (5).
Competent Authorities (National) 
A medicines regulatory authority in a European 
Union Member State (6).
Container Closure Integrity
Container closure integrity (CCI) is the ability 
of a container closure system to maintain the 
sterility and product quality of sterile final phar-
maceutical, biological, and vaccine products 
throughout their shelf life.
Device Part 
A device that fulfills the definition of a medi-
cal device, as defined in the relevant EU legal 
framework, and is intended to be placed on 
the EU market or made available on the EU 
market. This also applies to part of a device that 
fulfills the definition of Article 2(1). 
In the context of this document, the device part 
comprises the syringe subassembly ready for 
filling plus the plunger rod, needle shield, and 
finger flange extension. 
Direct Contact
Medical device or medical device component that 
comes into physical contact with body tissue (7).
Drug-Device Combination (DDC) Product
Medicinal products where the medical device 
and/or device part and the medicinal product 
form an integral product that is not reusable 
(hereafter called integral) and where the action 
of the medicinal product is principal (1). 
There are two types of DDCs according to 
MDR Articles 1(8) and 1(9):
•	
Any device which, when placed on the market 
or put into service, incorporates, as an integral 
part, a substance which, if used separately, 
would be considered to be a medicinal prod-
uct… [and] if the action of that substance 
is principal and not ancillary to that of the 
device, the integral product will be regulated 
as a medicinal product (Article 1(8)). 
•	
If the [medical] device intended to admin-
ister a medicinal product and the medicinal 
product is placed on the market in such a 
way that they form a single integral prod-
uct which is intended exclusively for use 
in the given combination and which is not 
reusable, that single integral product shall 
be governed by Directive 2001/83/EC or 
Regulation (EC) No 726/2004, as appli-
cable (Article 1(9), subparagraph 2) (8).
Indirect Contact 
Medical device or medical device component 
through which a fluid or gas passes, prior to the 
fluid or gas coming into physical contact with 
body tissue (in this case the medical device or 
medical device component itself does not physi-
cally contact body tissue) (7).
Market Authorization Holder
The company or other legal entity that has the 
authorization or aims to receive it, to market a 
medicine in one, several, or all European Union 
Member States (adapted from EMA Glossary of 
Regulatory Terms) (6).
Nanomaterial 
A natural, incidental or manufactured material 
containing particles in an unbound state or as 
an aggregate or as an agglomerate and where, 
for 50 % or more of the particles in the number 
size distribution, one or more external dimen-
sions is in the size range 1-100 nm; Fullerenes, 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 73-2
graphene flakes and single-wall carbon nano-
tubes with one or more external dimensions 
below 1 nm shall also be deemed to be nanoma-
terials (Article 2(18)) (1).
Needle Safety Device
A safety feature or mechanism that effectively reduc-
es the risk of an exposure incident (e.g., accidental 
needlestick) (9); sharps injuries protection system.
Needle Shield, Rigid Needle Shield
Elastomeric syringe closure, which seals the 
front end of staked needle syringe, designed to 
protect the needle tip/bevel from damage and 
allows sterilization of the syringe. The elasto-
meric syringe closure covered by a rigid housing 
is called rigid needle shield (10). 
Notified Body
Conformity assessment body designated in 
accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/745 
(Article 2(42)) (1).
Processing Aids
A substance (or mixture of substances) that is used 
to facilitate manufacturability, processing, trans-
port, or storage of a material or component. It may 
assist in, for example, reducing energy/time/re-
sources required to aid the process, increasing pro-
duction, and cleaning efficiency and machinability. 
Processing aids do not contribute to the intended 
attributes of the finished component and do not 
belong to the intentionally added ingredients of 
the formulation (e.g., silicone oil, mold release, and 
anti-tack agents). Processing aids may be removed 
during the manufacturing process or, depending on 
the process clearance capability, may remain as low-
level residuals in the finished component.
Processing Residues 
Residues of processing aids in or on the final 
drug-device combination.
Quality Certificate
Certificate of Analysis, Certificate of Compli-
ance, or equivalent document providing evi-
dence of compliance with product specifications.
Risk Evaluation 
Process of comparing the estimated risk against 
given risk criteria to determine the acceptability 
of the risk (11).
Risk Management
Systematic application of management policies, 
procedures and practices to the tasks of analyzing, 
evaluating, controlling and monitoring risks (11).
Single-Dose Container
A container that holds a quantity of the prepa-
ration intended for total or partial use on one 
occasion only (Ph. Eur. 3.2) (12).
Staked Needle Syringe
Syringe with a needle integrated into the barrel; 
the fixation can be done by insert molding, glu-
ing or other bonding methods (13).
State of the Art (SOTA), Generally 
Acknowledged (GA)
Developed stage of current technical capability 
and/or accepted clinical practice in regard to 
products, processes and patient management, 
based on the relevant consolidated findings of 
science, technology and experience (14).
Surgically Invasive 
Surgically invasive device means (a) an invasive 
device which penetrates inside the body through 
the surface of the body, including through mucous 
membranes of body orifices with the aid or in the 
context of a surgical operation; and (b) a device 
which produces penetration other than through a 
body orifice (Annex VIII, Chapt. 1, 2.2) (1).
Syringe Barrel
Cylindrical glass or polymer body with front 
end and finger flange (10, 13).
Syringe Components
Can be a glass or polymer syringe barrel with or 
without lubrication, a needle with lubrication and 
a needle shield (soft or rigid), plunger (also plunger 
stopper) with lubrication, coating and/or lamina-
tion, plunger rod and, if needed, a backstop.
Syringe Subassembly Ready for Filling 
(also Prefillable Subassembled Syringe)
Subassembly consisting of a glass or polymer 
syringe barrel, a needle and a needle shield (soft 
or rigid) that has been washed and sterilized; 
considered as starting material for the filling and 
assembling process of a prefilled syringe (10).
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5
Technical Report No. 73-2
© 2024 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
2.2	
Abbreviations
ASTM
American Society for Testing and Materials
ATMP
Advanced Therapy Medicinal Product
CCI
Container Closure Integrity
CMR
Carcinogenic, Mutagenic, or Toxic to Repro-
duction
DDC
Drug-Device Combination Product
ED
Endocrine-Disrupting 
EMA
European Medicines Agency
GSPR
General Safety and Performance Requirement
MAA
Marketing Authorization Application
MDR
Medical Device Regulation
NB
Notified body
NBOp
Notified Body Opinion 
NS
Needle Shield
PFS
Prefilled Syringe 
RM
Risk Management
RMS
Risk Management System
RNS
Rigid Needle Shield
SmPC
Summary of Product Characteristics
TSE/BSE 
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies/
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
3.0 
Regulatory Background
The European Union Regulation (EU) 2017/745 (MDR) came into force on 26 May 2021, replacing 
Council Directive 93/42/EEC concerning medical devices. Regulatory changes and updates affect re-
quirements for staked needle PFS that significantly impact global marketing authorization applicants 
and holders who have, or want to place, products on the EU market. 
According to MDR Article 1(9), subparagraph 1, a device that is intended to administer a medicinal 
product is governed by the MDR, as opposed to Directive 2001/83/EC relating to medicinal prod-
ucts. MDR Article 1(9), subparagraph 2 states: 
However, if a device intended to administer a medicinal product and the medicinal 
product are placed on the market in such a way that they form a single integral prod-
uct which is intended exclusively for use in the given combination and which is not 
reusable, that single integral product shall be governed by Directive 2001/83/EC or 
Regulation (EC) No 726/2004, as applicable (1). 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
