[PAGE 69]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 67
Process Gases
Systems are usually pressure tested before cleaning, as any repairs for leaks may create particulate.
National and local regulations should be followed. With a large system the stored energy within the system should be
considered and appropriate safety precautions taken during testing.
A system may be pressurized using compressed air then “topped up” with nitrogen to reduce costs. The system
should be allowed to equilibrate to match ambient air temperature, which should be recorded. The test should be
one hour as a minimum. The time allowed should be sufficient to inspect each joint. Testing may use soapy water,
gas detector to check for leaks, or monitoring the system to ensure that there is no pressure drop (temperature
compensation may be used where necessary).
A typical test pressure should be 1.5 times the maximum working pressure. If parts of the system usually operate at a
reduced pressure (e.g., through a Pressure Reducing Valve (PRV)) users may prefer to test the entire system at the
potential maximum operating pressure. Any instruments or in line equipment that cannot withstand the test pressure
should be removed for testing and replaced. After replacing equipment and re-pressurizing the line, the locations at
which equipment was replaced should be checked for leaks.
After successful completion of the test, a system may be purged with the designated compressed gas for which the
system is to be used.
If wet cleaning is specified, the system should be installed with falls and adequate low level drain points. In addition,
pipe work and supports should be designed to support the additional weight of the cleaning fluid.
Following construction finalization, (i.e., walk down and punch listing, with no major punch list items outstanding) the
distribution system should be assured as free of particulate matter before system hand over.
A system may be flushed or blown out using filtered compressed air to remove any residual particulates. This is
usually done in sections using a timed discharge through clean filter paper to demonstrate the system cleanliness.
For systems with a high specification, the initial “coarse” clean test may be followed up by tests using a particle
counter on the supply and the outlet at the “index” (or longest) pipe run, to demonstrate that the distribution system is
not a source of contamination for a process gas.
Where take offs are from the top of line, provision should be made for initial flushing and purging after construction.
Safety measures should be applied during venting of any hazardous compressed gasses, e.g., oxygen or nitrogen;
this is a particular concern in confined spaces where compressed gas concentrations may increase rapidly. Provision
to vent to the outside environment or a well ventilated area should be considered, as required.
When purging a system, the sequence should involve purging the shortest pipe run first, gradually moving towards
the outlet furthest away from the gas source.
Duration and/or volumes to be used for the flushing and purging should consider, e.g.:
•
system size
•
system lay-out
•
type of material used
•
principles applied during construction
[PAGE 70]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 68
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
Before testing and cleaning is commenced, a method statement should describe how the process will be performed
and the testing required by the commissioning organization. Suppliers may have a “clean for oxygen service” or
similar specification. For easily accessible components, manual cleaning may be employed.
Before the system is accepted by the owner, the distributed compressed air or gas should be tested against design
criteria. Design criteria should meet the final clean compressed air or gas testing requirements. This may include
consecutive testing over time (e.g., 3-days consecutive) for particulates, moisture, and gas “identity” or purity.
[PAGE 71]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 69
Process Gases
6
Design Options – Control and Monitoring Systems
6.1
Introduction
Control and monitoring systems may act as a risk mitigation tool in process gas systems.
Where appropriate in this chapter, a distinction is made between process gas systems and compressed air
systems based upon differences in ownership and responsibility; compressed air systems are usually owned by an
organization, whereas process gas storage/generation systems are usually rented from a specialist supplier.
6.2
Control Systems
There are three categories of system which are controlled:
•
Compressed Air Systems
•
Cylinder Systems
•
On Site Gas Generation and Bulk Storage Systems
6.2.1
Compressed Air Systems
The compressors normally have a specific proprietary control system. This should control and monitor the
compressor, shutting it down in the event of an alarm or sensor failure in order to protect the equipment. Usually
compressor control is based on maintaining a minimum pressure at its discharge – on a basic system through
shutting down or starting up the compressor, on a more sophisticated system through regulating the compressor
output.
There is usually provision for interconnecting these control systems or linking them through a “supervisory” controller
that will manage multiple compressors, usually rotating the primary duty unit to ensure equal use of each system.
The dryers within a system typically come with a supplier’s proprietary control system. The control systems typically
operate based on a timer to control the sequence of operation between the two dryer vessels or the changeover
between vessels is controlled by the discharge pressure dewpoint. The latter system is considered more energy
efficient.
In the event of a system failure, the alarm from a dryer pressure dewpoint monitor may be used to automatically close
the valve downstream of the dryer, as this would prevent putting potentially wet air into a distribution system – where
a sudden loss of supply would create problems, this signal could also initiate a standby dryer.
The system status and any system alarms can be fed through a Building Management System (BMS) to facilitate
remote monitoring, and management of any alarms.
6.2.1.1	 Cylinder Systems
There are two basic types of cylinder systems:
1.
Manual Changeover
2.
Automatic Changeover
[PAGE 72]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 70
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
Manual Changeover
These require the standby cylinder to be manually selected when the duty cylinder runs on low pressure.
These basic systems do not provide capability for remote monitoring, though a low cylinder pressure switch may be
provided for connection to either a local alarm, an alarm in the area in which the gas is used, or to a BMS.
Automatic Changeover
The system automatically changes over from a duty to a standby cylinder, and will give an alarm signal to notify the
system owner that the empty cylinder needs to be changed. This may be connected to a local alarm, an alarm in the
area in which the gas is used, or to a BMS.
6.2.2
On Site Generation Systems and Bulk Storage Systems
These systems are typically supplied and maintained by a specialist supplier; with their own control and monitoring
systems.
The design and operation of these systems should be understood by the user, and alarm signals from the system
made available for connection to a monitoring system, as required. Users may duplicate monitoring instruments for
connection to their monitoring system to allow the gas system supplier to provide a standard package. This also has
the advantage that the user retains management of the calibration of the devices.
The integration and monitoring of process gas systems should be considered during the design phase to ensure that
the optimum solution is specified.
Where there are defined Lower Explosive Limits (LELs) for gas concentrations, monitoring systems and local safety
alarms may be required by local regulations.
6.3
Monitoring
6.3.1
Operation Parameter Monitoring
Pressure is often categorized as a CPP for a process gas system, usually introducing a concomitant calibration and
monitoring regime.
The gas supply system may be controlled by the pressure, either in the system receiver or in the entry point to the
distribution system.
The distribution system should be sized so that end users receive the necessary flow and associated inlet pressure,
based on design usage diversity or calculated pressure drop under peak usage.
This Guide proposes that the pressure is usually an engineering parameter and not a CPP.
The basis for this is:
•
Any piece of equipment supplied by the gas system that has a requirement for a specific flow/pressure will have
an inlet pressure switch that monitors and alarms for that use; this is a critical location/instrument.
•
The system pressure control provides a general indication, but does not monitor at each POU, or consider any
usage, or effect at an individual POU.
It may be appropriate to review specific installations to determine if that rationale is appropriate.
[PAGE 73]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 71
Process Gases
6.3.2
Quality Monitoring
Quality monitoring is required at POUs located in controlled room environments. Regulations require that the
particulate and microbiological quality of the compressed gas be equal to or better than that of the air in the
environment into which the gas is introduced (at rest). (See Eudralex Volume 4 Annex-1, 2004; 21 CFR Part 210
(References 6 and 4, Appendix 8).)
Process gas systems may be operated at very low dewpoints or negative dewpoints, in accordance with user
requirements. A properly operated process gas system with low moisture should not support the growth or survival of
microorganisms.
The quantity of water necessary to support microbiological growth is usually expressed as water activity (aw). (It
is used as a measure for the dryness of foodstuffs; therefore, the resistance to microbiological growth.) The use
of water activity may be applied to non-sterile pharmaceutical products. (See USP/NF 31, General Chapter 1112
(Reference 14, Appendix 8).)
For gases, water activity is related to relative humidity (RH = aw × 100%) and also dewpoint which may be used to
express moisture in a compressed gas. Molds and yeasts do not grow where the aw is less than 0.6 and bacteria do
not grow where the aw is less than 0.85 (Scott et al., 2001) (Reference 32, Appendix 8).
Process gas systems are not normally designed to be sterilized. Sterilization may apply to sections of a system,
following the final filter, which are used for sterile applications. Typically these sections are outside the process gas
system boundary and are part of the connected manufacturing system used for the sterile application. Control of
microorganisms is usually accomplished at the POUs by using 0.2 μm sterilizing grade filters.
Low moisture environments may be used to preserve pharmaceutical products but may not prevent survival of
microorganisms:
1.
Desiccation has been a long recognized method for short term preservation of microbiological cultures (Potts,
1994) (Reference 31, Appendix 8). Desiccated microorganisms have a variable death rate and a sizable
population would have to be introduced into a system to be detectable downstream.
2.
Bacteria may also survive through the production of endospores. Endospores are tough, dormant non-
reproductive structures produced by bacteria with the primary function to ensure survival through periods of
environmental stress (Sonenshein, 2000) (Reference 33, Appendix 8). Endospores may persist indefinitely in a
dormant state awaiting conditions favorable for sporulation or return to vegetative growth.
Where the user requirements are particularly demanding, the requirement to ensure that a process gas system
facilitates cleaning activities may be included, and the design specified accordingly (e.g., facilitate complete
drainage).
6.3.2.1	 Test Method Considerations
Test method(s) normally depend on the types of microorganisms that are desired to be detected. Factors that should
be considered include the:
•
drug product(s) manufactured within the facility
•
type of process gas
•
regulatory controls
•
manufacturing processes
[PAGE 74]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 72
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
The drug product manufacturing associated risks should be considered. Parenteral drug products are manufactured
to be sterile to a probability dependent on the manufacturing process; therefore, the process gas should be rendered
sterile prior to use in the manufacturing process. Non-sterile drug products may be manufactured using process
gases that are not rendered sterile; therefore, the introduction of objectionable microorganisms should be considered.
The designation of objectionable microorganisms should be determined based on the:
•
use of the product
•
nature of the product
•
potential hazard to the user
For further information, see USP/NF 31, General Chapter 1112; PhEur 01/2009:50104 (References 13 and 11,
Appendix 8).
A risk assessment should be used to develop a rationale for the sample point strategy. The rationale should represent
the microbiological hazard presented by the process gas used.
Process gas systems may be designed and controlled using combinations of inline and POU filters. Monitoring
strategies for inline and POU filter sample locations should be considered. Monitoring may occur upstream or
downstream of a filter, or duplex filters may be required.
Testing should confirm that a system is robust. The test plan should consider the parameter to be tested and the
potential sources of risk to that parameter, such that the test strategy addresses the potential risk.
For example, in the case of gas supply to a sterile operation (e.g., nitrogen blanketing during aseptic filling
processes), the process gas sample should be taken before the final sterile filter. As this gas is 0.2 µm filtered for
particulate, the process gas quality should be the same pre- and post- the sterile final filter.
To take a clean compressed air sample after the sterile filter requires the sampling site to follow the same level of
sterilization as the unit operation. Sampling after a final filter poses a potential risk to the unit operation each time a
sample is taken.
Examples of process gas systems with inline and point of use filtration are shown in Figure 6.1 (Parts A-C). Sterile
filters used to protect product may be pre- and post-integrity tested and should have known particulate shedding
characteristics. The decision whether to monitor before the filter or after should be based on an appropriate risk
assessment and on what the data will be used to support.
Design of sample points should avoid piping common to other utilities such as high purity waters and pure steam. An
example is provided in Figure 6.1 (Part D). The proper location of the sample point, proper valve sequencing, and the
use of a hydrophobic inline filter serve as barriers to ingress of moisture into the process gas system. In this example,
the sample point is indicated prior to the inline filter.
A sample should represent the quality at a POU; the location used should be demonstrated to represent the quality at
the POU.
[PAGE 75]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 73
Process Gases
Note: The diagram is a schematic intended to illustrate the issues described; it does not include all the isolation
valves that may be included to facilitate operation and maintenance.
The type of process gas should be considered. Process air and O2 should be monitored for aerobic microorganisms.
Reduced oxygen content gases such as N2, CO2, and Ar should be monitored for microorganisms capable of
anaerobic growth. Consideration for monitoring aerobic microorganisms should be given during performance testing.
During the performance testing phase, once a system has been shown to be free of aerobic microorganisms and/or
spores, the routine sample strategy may require monitoring of only anaerobic microorganisms.
An organization should define a test strategy based on the use of the process gas and potential risks to the product.
The size of a sample can affect the monitoring method chosen for both particulates and microorganisms. Sample
size may be based on the sample size required for room classification (in accordance with ISO-14644, (previously in
accordance with FED209E)). For further information see K. Åkerlindh, et al and Hargroves, J., (References 30 and
31, Appendix 8). Following this approach, a sample size of 0.7 m3 would be required for ISO 5 environments (ISO
14644-1:1999E, Annex B, paragraph B4.2).
The basis to relate directly the sample volume for process gas systems to that for room classification is found in the
requirement for the particulate and microbiological quality of the process gas to be equal to or better than that of
the air in the environment into which the gas is introduced. The acceptance criteria applied are those for the at rest
environment (as a conservative approach), as the gas system is not “in use.”
Process gas distribution systems are not environmentally classified.
Figure 6.1:	Schematic of Inline and Point of Use Filtration (Parts A-C) and Avoid Piping Common to Other
Utilities (Part D)
[PAGE 76]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 74
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
A gas generation and distribution process is a closed environment, with minimal risk of contamination from an
external source. Contaminants in pipe work are most likely to come from the process gas or the pipe work; therefore,
a sample taken from the longest pipe run is the most likely to find issues resulting from this cause of contamination.
This approach should be justified in the risk assessment supporting the qualification of the system, as there may be
unanticipated risks from equipment used in a process gas system.
Cleanliness of pipe work is typically checked as part of the commissioning process to confirm that the installation
meets specification (see Section 7 of this Guide).
Actual process conditions and requirements should also be considered. For example:
Processing within closed systems may occur in an ISO 8/EU Class D environment, while the conditions within the
process gas distribution system, and thus process gas quality, may be required to be sterile. The internal system
environment, however, is not classified in accordance with ISO-14644 (Reference 7, Appendix 8).
The nature of a contaminant and quality perception should also be considered. Where a later process stage filter may
remove a small particle of corrosion, it may not be a patient safety or product quality issue; however, a microbiological
contaminant may be an issue in such circumstances. Risk assessment approaches may be used to define an
appropriate specification for the gas, considering both the process and product. A robust specification for the process
gas may also be developed.
Inclusion of 0.2 μm sterilizing grade filters at a POU can ensure that process gas quality at a POU is equal to or
better than that of the air in the environment into which the gas is introduced. Implementing a point in the distribution
system that provides a break between non-GMP and GMP use during the design phase may provide an appropriate
alternative solution.
The particulate and microbial levels present within the distribution system pre-filtration may be increased compared to
the room environment if filter integrity can be demonstrated and levels do not exceed the certified filter retention rate.
For non-sterile applications, a filter pore size rating of 0.45 1 μm or 1.2 μm may be sufficient.
When selecting a sample size, aspects to consider include:
•
accuracy and sensitivity of the test instrument and method
•
the specified limits
•
the sample location/factors that may influence the test result
•
test frequency
Monitoring of gas for an aseptic process may justify a cubic meter sample4, alternatively initial testing may use a
larger sample, with ongoing monitoring utilizing a smaller volume of process gas, such as a cubic foot volume.
The manufacturing process should be considered when designing a program for monitoring microorganisms.
Processes using terminal sterilization will require additional monitoring rather than aseptic processes, e.g., terminal
sterilization processes, such as steam sterilization and irradiation, will require consideration for monitoring heat
resistant microorganisms, spore forming microorganisms, and radiation tolerant microorganisms.
4 The only test method standard relevant to a process gas is ISO-8573-7 for compressed air. This standard proposes a cubic meter sample, and
although this may apply to initial testing, it has not been widely adopted in the pharmaceutical industry and would not be relevant to ongoing quality
monitoring.
[PAGE 77]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 75
Process Gases
6.3.2.2	 Microbial Monitoring
Methods existing for monitoring environments (Downes and Ito, 2001 (Reference 28, Appendix 8)) may be extended
to monitor process gases. The recovery medium for the microorganisms should include the growth media used
in the environmental monitoring program for room air, surfaces, and personnel (PDA Technical Report No. 13
(Reference 24, Appendix 8)), as a minimum. The medium should include the demonstrated ability to support the
growth of a variety of bacteria and fungi. Considerations should be made for additional growth media depending on
the scope of the monitoring program. The sample device should be sanitizable or sterilizable prior to collection of
each microbiological sample. Validation or performance qualification of the method should be considered prior to
implementation. Such data may be supplied by equipment manufacturers and guidance may be found in ISO-14698-
1, Annex-B (Reference 7, Appendix 8).
Impaction
Slit to Agar Sampler
This method uses a revolving agar plate located at a specified distance from a slit orifice to impinge the sample air
flow onto an agar surface. This device can sample a large volume of gas and can provide a time versus concentration
relationship. The equipment is large, requires 150 mm agar plates, and is difficult to sanitize.
Impact Sampler
There are several impact type samplers available. This type of device pulls a stream of air through a metal plate
containing many small and evenly spaced holes. The correct volume of air is directed through the holes and onto an
agar surface.
The versions of these samplers for process gases are relatively large and difficult to sanitize. The attachments for
monitoring compressed gases are large and bulky; however, the entire sample flow path and impaction plate can be
steam sterilized.
These units have the advantage of sampling a cubic meter of gas in less than ten minutes.
Centrifugal Sampler
These samplers use a fan to pull a cylinder shaped cone of air into the sample head and particles or microorganisms
are deposited by centrifugal force onto an agar strip within the sampling head. The sample head can be steam
sterilized and the units are light in weight. Special agar stripes are required. Special adapters for sampling process
gases are available.
Filtration
Filtration is a simple to use and low cost method for monitoring microorganisms in process gases, relative to methods
requiring instrumentation. When numerous sample points should be monitored on a regular basis, it may be less
costly to stock multiple filter holders than multiple sample instruments and sample heads/adapters.
The method consists of a type of filter holder (plastic or stainless steel), sterile filters, and a calibrated flow meter. The
appropriate volume of gas is filtered through the filter and the filter is aseptically transferred to an agar medium for
growth and enumeration. The membrane usually has a nominal pore size rating of 0.45 μm.
Membrane Filter
Membrane filters for environmental monitoring may be made of:
•
cellulose nitrate
[PAGE 78]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 76
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
•
cellulose acetate
•
mixed cellulose esters
•
Polyethersulfone (PES)
•
hydrophilic PVDF
•
gelatin
•
nylon
Users should verify that the filter does not inhibit the recovery of indicator microorganisms. A cubic meter sample may
be collected in a twelve minute time period. Gelatin membrane filters are not suitable for compressed gas monitoring.
Liquid Impingement
Liquid impingement methods use a liquid to trap and collect microorganisms. The stream of gas is directed through
an orifice at high velocity into the liquid. Microorganisms are forced into the liquid and removed from the gas stream.
Disadvantages may include a glass construction resulting in a fragile device. Improper sample handling may result in
false positive data.
The advantage to the technique is that samples may be diluted prior to direct plating on an agar or by filtration
methods. The method should be qualified to demonstrate that it does not destroy vegetative microorganisms.
6.3.2.3	 Particulate Monitoring
Instrumentation
There are several methods and a variety of instrumentation available for detecting, sizing, and quantifying particulates
in compressed gases.
Methods include laser particle counting, condensation nucleus counting coupled with scanning mobility particle sizing,
differential mobility analysis, and membrane capture. The application of these methods is covered in ISO-8573-
4:2001 (Reference 7, Appendix 8).
The laser particle counter method is commonly used for process gases, due to the moderate sample rate, relatively low
cost, and low maintenance requirements. Care should be taken to avoid including moisture as droplets in particle counts
and to ensure that the sample hose connecting the particle counter and the sample point does not contribute to the
particle count. The tubing should be made of a smooth non-shedding material and as short as possible to avoid particle
fallout. The connection to the sample port should avoid introducing exterior air or generation of particles. Quick type
connections should not continuously generate particles or allow introduction of exterior air through the venturi effect.
Monitoring Process (high/low pressure)
Process gas systems usually supply gas at a flow or pressure that is too high for a particle counting instrument. The
flow to the instrument should be restricted to prevent damage to the particle counter, as high pressure may damage
the sensor. This is usually accomplished by using a device that supplies an appropriate flow rate to the particle
counter while allowing the excess gas to be safely vented.
The monitoring process should ensure that the compressed gas flow to the particle counter does not fall below the
point where outside air is introduced into the sample process. Sample points may supply process gas at flow or
pressure below this critical threshold and a different technique should be used.
[PAGE 79]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 77
Process Gases
For such low flow/pressure sample points, the gas may be passed through a tube that would allow the pressure to
diffuse while allowing the particle counter to sample the airflow without the gas stream being forced into the sensor. A
qualification process should ensure that the particle counter is representatively counting particles in the gas stream.
6.3.2.4	 Moisture Monitoring
Moisture in process gases is usually measured as dewpoint or pressure dewpoint. Methods usually include
condensation devices, e.g.:
•
cooled mirror dewpoint hygrometers
•
electrolytic hygrometers
•
impedance hygrometers
•
polymer film relative humidity sensors
Quartz crystal microbalance and Surface Acoustic Wave (SAW) devices are usually too complex for pharmaceutical
process gas applications.
When using a hygrometer, the temperature and line pressure should be accounted for during dewpoint
measurements. The instruments may be used in line for continuous monitoring or may be used to periodically monitor
critical POUs.
The type used should be determined by the degree of accuracy required for downstream processes, maintenance
and calibration schedules, costs, and equipment reliability. For on line testing of moisture, indicator tubes may be
used. Ingress of external environmental moisture into the sample path should be avoided.
Instrumentation types include:
•
Chilled Mirror Hygrometer
•
Electrolytic Hygrometer
•
Impedance Hygrometers
•
Polymer Film Relative Humidity (RH) Sensors
Chilled Mirror Hygrometer
The chilled mirror is a widely used measurement device with an accurate field measured dewpoint over a wide
range. A surface mirror or polished surface in contact with the gas stream is cooled until condensation forms. The
temperature at which condensation is formed is the dewpoint. Chilled mirror hygrometers are negatively affected
by particulates in the air stream and by hygroscopic inorganic salts and are considered an expensive instrument
routinely used for process gases.
Electrolytic Hygrometer
This method is described in the PhEur and USP as a method for determining water in gases. The method is based
on absorption of water by diphosphorus pentoxide to produce phosphoric acid as an electrical conductor. A voltage is
applied to the water to produce electrolysis. The resulting current is proportional to the water content and based on
Faraday’s Law. The technique can provide stable and repeatable data but requires more attention to proper use to
provide accurate results than other methods.
[PAGE 80]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 78
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
Impedance Hygrometers
These are typically ceramic, aluminum oxide, and silicon oxide based sensors. These sensors rely on a change in
electrical property such as capacitance, impedance, or resistance of a porous layer in response to moisture in the gas
stream. When properly calibrated and maintained, these instruments can provide good quality results. Calibration is
required on a regular basis.
Polymer Film Relative Humidity (RH) Sensors
These sensors are similar to impedance hygrometers. These are constructed of a polymer with a hygroscopic
dielectric material. The dielectric properties of the polymer film depend on the amount of water contained within the
film. As the water content changes, the dielectric properties change and the capacitance of the sensor changes to
provide an electrical response. Hygrometers based on this principle offer relatively low cost and good quality results.
These types of sensors are less susceptible to particulate contamination.
6.3.2.5	 Hydrocarbons Monitoring
Compressed air and other process gas systems intended for pharmaceutical applications should be designed and
constructed with oil free compressors and hygienic piping. The installation of systems should include the concept of
“build clean” where the equipment and piping are supplied in a clean condition and installed in a manner to prevent
contamination.
The monitoring of hydrocarbons in compressed gas systems contributes to the qualification phase to ensure the
piping is free of oils prior to use. When compressed air systems are appropriately designed and installed, the most
significant risk to the system is the introduction of diesel (auto) fumes at the air intake for the compressor. Air intake
for compressors should be considered in the design stage and care should be taken to avoid introduction of fumes
into the system.
Depending on the air quality in the vicinity of a facility, compressed air quality may need to be monitored on an
ongoing basis for high risk contaminants. For contaminants presenting a hazard, which concentration is relevant and
how often monitoring should occur should be considered.
Two distinct methods may be identified based on the type of hydrocarbon component targeted:
1.
Total Hydrocarbon (THC)
2.
Total Volatile Hydrocarbons (TVHCs)
Total Hydrocarbon (THC)
Total Hydrocarbon (oil mist) is the term for oils that can form an aerosol that will remain suspended in the air until
it impinges against a surface. These may be detected and quantified using indicator tubes. The tubes contain
chemicals that are designed to react with an introduced substance and changes color as a result. These are typically
single use only. Oil indicator tubes are designed to monitor for specific oils and mists derived from a variety of mineral
and synthetic oils. The detection limits are dependent on the volume of gas exposed to the tube medium and the
specific type of oil. These tubes are not designed to detect hydrocarbon fumes.
Total Volatile Hydrocarbons (TVHCs)
Volatile hydrocarbons are compounds that are either gases or liquids that can evaporate and act as a gas. The
method does not detect oil mists. TVHCs may comprise many different types of volatile hydrocarbons; therefore, are
measured and expressed as parts per million calculated as methane.
