[PAGE 53]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 51
Process Gases
For systems designed with a lubricant injected compressor, condensate can be contaminated with entrained lubricant
and removal of lubricant may be required before the condensate is discharged to a sewer system.
Regional municipalities should be consulted for allowable contamination levels. An oil water separation system should
be included in the design of the system, or the facility drains as required.
4.9.4
Manual Methods
Manual methods are typically ball valves which require opening to discharge condensate. Manual valves are not
recommended since they are frequently left open to drain condensate from moisture separators, intercoolers,
refrigerated dryers, and filters, allowing valuable compressed air to continually expand to atmosphere. In contrast,
leaving these valves closed for too long can be catastrophic to the equipment that the moisture removal is there to
protect.
4.10
Designing for Redundancy
Compressed air systems are considered critical utilities systems and designed with back up. Critical factors when
considering redundancy include load profiles throughout the day or week.
When operating a lighter shift, back up may need to include a larger multiple of compressors to prevent over sizing
a compressor of a lightly loaded shift. For generally balanced shifts or loads throughout the day or week, a common
practice is to design for three compressors each rated at 50% of maximum load. This reduces the cost of two 100%
compressors and allows one compressor to be down at any given time, while supplying the maximum demand. It also
minimizes power consumption when demand is below 50%, improving the overall efficiency of the system. One or
two 100% desiccant dryers may be designed into the system depending on the need for constant air demand during
maintenance. Multiple desiccant dryers may not be needed for redundancy, as they are usually reliable.
[PAGE 54]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 52
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
Figure 4.11: Typical Multi-Compressor One Line Diagram
Used with permission from Ingersoll Rand Company, www.ingersollrandproducts.com
[PAGE 55]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 53
Process Gases
5
Design Options – Distribution Systems
5.1
Concepts
The initial design of distribution systems for process gases should match the available gas quality and supply method
to the end user specifications. This forms the basis for the design, and should provide detail on the:
•
level of clean-up required for a gas prior to use
•
the pressure control and management of the supply and delivery systems
Delivery of supplies of a gas at the required specification should be consistent. The capabilities of both internal (e.g.,
compressed air or nitrogen) and external (e.g., bottled or bulk gases) supplies should be considered.
A supplier audit may be required for external suppliers. A Certificate of Analysis (CoA) should ensure that a gas is of
the required specification. Equipment used to provide the information for the CoA should be appropriately maintained
and calibrated. The scope of testing of this equipment should match specification requirements. By-products of the
method of production of a gas should be considered, along with how they are reported and any potential effect on the
process. An understanding of the frequency of testing (i.e., by batch, by delivery, or by cylinder) can assist in the risk
assessment and final system design.
Supplies of internally manufactured gases (e.g., compressed air or nitrogen) should be considered in the same way
as external supplies, including:
•
assessment of quality of supply
•
management and reporting of quality of supply
•
measurement and reporting of expected contaminants (e.g., oil carryover from a compressed air system)
5.1.1
Risk Assessment
The design process should include a risk assessment to ensure that the proposed design is fit for purpose. The
assessment should consider potential systems failures and ensure that the controls in place are adequate to mitigate
risks to product quality or patient safety.
Gas suppliers may have technical support staff that can assist during the risk assessment and system design phase
of a project. Where appropriate, they may be able to assist in reviewing the system design supplying their product to
the POU.
Depending on the pharmaceutical application, the environment in which the gas lines are run, and the quality of gas
supplied, some aspects of industrial gas supply may not be required. These requirements should be considered
during a risk assessment, e.g.:
•
Gases distributed for pharmaceutical applications are usually dry and of a high quality and may not require
distribution systems to be drainable; pipe line fall, drop legs, and drain traps may not be needed.
•
Where a distribution system is clean, with a clean gas being distributed, there having gas point take-offs at the
top of a pipeline may not be required.
A risk assessment should also consider:
[PAGE 56]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 54
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
•
how operations are made aware that there is sufficient connected capacity to undertake a batch or process, e.g.:
-
use of monitoring systems and back-up supplies for critical processes
•
Is an automatic changeover for finite supply applications (i.e., bulk or cylinders) required or can this be achieved
with a suitable low pressure/low level warning system, e.g.:
-
For bulk delivered gases, the response time for deliveries and the availability of services, such as remote
telemetry for usage and replenishment, may be considered.
•
For flammable, toxic, or corrosive gases, control of the discharge from regulators and lines during cylinder
change over, line disconnection, or in the event of line or regulator failure should be considered.
•
The effects on staff from exposure to a gas both in general operation and during potential failure modes (e.g.,
oxygen exclusion, flammability, static build-up and discharge, chemical reaction with other reagents/gases).
Additional monitoring may be required where statutory requirements are not sufficient to provide a safe work
environment.
•
High concentration of all gases (including inert) should be considered to present a risk to personnel. Potential
effects on personnel, the process, and the environment should be checked.
Document all steps as part of the design risk assessment.
5.1.2
Basic System Design Concepts
Process take-off requirements should be understood to allow sizing of a distribution system. The rate of gas usage
and pressure required at critical points in the process should be quantified. These critical points should include
periods of peak take-off of gas. The distribution system should be sized to maintain an adequate supply at critical
points.
Averages should not be used, even where there is variable take-off of gas. (Experienced designers may use a system
utilization factor.)
Each process on a distribution system should be assessed in the same way to build up an overall system usage
picture. Where accurate usage figures are not available, a model may be used to perform a number of scenarios
which cover expected operating ranges. The model should allow operations personnel to study the effects of potential
usage patterns on a process. Accurate modeling will assist in ensuring that the design meets user requirements.
Errors in sizing of distribution systems can cause operational issues due to low pressure alarms for POUs, and drive
the requirement to modify the system.
Basic system design concepts include:
•
one way distribution system
•
high demand use points
•
ring main
•
splitting systems
•
use of a non-return valve/receiver to split systems
•
line sizing
[PAGE 57]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 55
Process Gases
•
routing
5.1.2.1	 One Way Distribution System
The simplest distribution system design comprises a single pipeline feeding each POU.
For a small number of widely spaced delivery points, a one way distribution system from a gas source may represent
the lowest initial cost at installation. The pipeline should be sized to accommodate peak usage.
Where with the highest gas consumption POUs are positioned nearest the gas supply, it may be possible to reduce
the size of the pipeline to POUs further along the system. Intermediate receiving vessels may be used to reduce the
effects of usage variability or supply line size. They may be placed in the main branch or on critical POUs and used
where the:
•
highest gas consumption POUs cannot be sited nearest the gas supply
•
size of pipeline to provide peak loads is excessive
•
demand varies significantly
Intermediate receiving vessels can buffer the output to specific POUs (e.g., nitrogen inertion of large API reactor
systems). In addition, the main pipeline could be operated at a higher pressure between the supply and the
intermediate receiving vessels, with each POU below a receiving vessel regulated at a lower pressure. This allows
volume gains due to the expansion of the gas.
Consideration should be given to providing non-return valves at intermediate receiving vessels to ensure that the
main pipeline is not back fed if the main pipeline pressure dips below the receiver pressure at high demand periods.
5.1.2.2	 Ring Main
A ring main comprises two feed sources.
The ring main concept is considered a more robust distribution design when compared to a one way design, as:
•
The system will self balance due to the two feed sources of the ring main allowing line size to be optimized.
Points at the extreme of the ring may be susceptible to pressure drops but these will be reduced.
•
A considered design and placement of isolation valves will allow the line to be serviced, modified, or repaired
without shutting down the complete ring and associated POUs.
•
The ring main itself provides a level of receiver capacity which may be sufficient to buffer high demand, reducing
the need for intermediate receiving vessels receivers to act as buffers.
•
The system allows addition of multiple gas sources (e.g., multiple air compressors) in different locations
throughout the site, enhancing the redundancy of the system.
A ring main system can provide a cost effective solution relative to a one way distribution line, particularly where cost
analysis includes allowances for foreseeable future growth.
5.1.2.3	 High Demand Points of Use
Where there are high demand POUs, it may be more economic to provide gas from a local receiving vessel using a
smaller distribution system pipeline size at a higher supply pressure. Consideration should be given to over-sizing the
distribution pipe. This may be done locally to the POU to provide a “local receiver.”
[PAGE 58]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 56
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
Consideration should be given to providing non-return valves at intermediate receiving vessels to ensure that the
main pipeline is not back fed particularly where several buffering receivers are attached to one supply. Pressure and
flow regulation should be considered in the distribution system design.
5.1.2.4	 Splitting Systems
Requirements of relevant GMP codes (e.g., system design and documentation, validation processes, ongoing
maintenance, calibration quality monitoring, and formal monitoring of the system output quality) add to the installation
and operating costs of GMP gas distribution systems.
Where end-user specifications allow, it may be feasible to split a system into non-GMP and GMP sub-systems. This
may be particularly beneficial in locations where there is a large site gas distribution system, with only a limited part of
the system used for GMP purposes. A non-GMP system can be used to feed a GMP system, providing that the GMP
system is adequately monitored and controlled (see Figure 5.1).
The risk assessment associated with a split system should consider how the integrity, purity, and quality of the
GMP take-off points is maintained under all scenarios. Redundancy in filtration and back flow prevention may
be required.
Use of a Non-Return Valve/Receiver to Split Systems
Figure 5.1 shows a concept that allows separation of a GMP gas sub system from an industrial system, for example,
allowing an instrument air supply to be split to feed a process air system.
Figure 5.1: How a Section of a Gas System Can Be Separated Into a Separate GMP System
Note: Filter set may be used on the infeed line or outfeed; if they are used as policing filters (to provide security in the
event of a failure of the main system filters) they are located as shown; otherwise they would be located at the infeed
to keep the receiver clean.
5.1.2.5	 Sizing of Pipes
Pipe size can be based on either a calculated design maximum use or the total connected load multiplied by a
diversity factor. Where the total connected load is used, modeling the expected peak load will assist in optimizing the
pipe size.
The pipe size may be calculated based on the maximum velocity or the allowable pressure drop. Typical figures used
are 6 – 9 m/s (18 – 27 ft/sec) or 3 – 5 psi (0.3 to 0.4 bar) depending on conditions. (Note: The filter pressure drops
and the acceptable increase in their pressure drops as they get dirty; this should be considered in calculations.)
[PAGE 59]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 57
Process Gases
The greater the pressure drop, the greater the minimum system supply pressure needs to be to ensure that end users
receive the minimum acceptable pressure. As the pressure increases the energy requirement for the compressor
(or cost of bulk gas) increases following a square law – so small differences have a significant effect on the energy
consumption.
Where there is a single POU requiring a high pressure, locating the gas source near this POU and operating the
distribution system at a lower pressure can provide significant cost savings.
5.1.2.6	 Routing
The siting of pipes should facilitate regular inspection and servicing of valves. Annual checks for leaks may be
conducted as part of GEP using techniques such as ultrasonic leak detection. Statutory periodic inspections may be
required for high pressure equipment, including gas pipe work and valves in some geographical regions (e.g., UK,
Australia).
Where a process gas has a dewpoint near the local environmental limits, pipes should be insulated or sited where
they do not intrude on environments that may cause internal (or external) condensation.
5.2
Non-Return or Check Valves
There are several types of non-return valves. For process gases, the spring loaded wafer check valve, using an
elastomeric seal for the wafer, allows a gas tight shut off and rapid action whichever way up the valve is mounted.
Non-return valves should be suitable for both the gas supply side and for likely contaminants from the process side.
For GMP systems, cross contamination can be considered a critical risk. Risk assessments performed during the
design of a process gas system should investigate potential consequences of reverse flow under normal and system
failure modes. Where a potential risk is identified, backflow prevention and non-return valves may be required.
Non-return valves should be fitted as closely as possible to POUs to reduce potential contamination in the supply line.
Where there is a potential for cross contamination, cleaning and servicing of non-return valves should ensure that
non-return valves remain functional. Redundancy may be required for high risk critical processes.
Where the function of a non-return valve is considered critical (as a process or a safety requirement), the systems
design should facilitate testing of the non-return valve. This may be achieved either by making removal of the non-
return valve easy or by the installation of test ports on either side of the non-return valve and isolating valves in the
line either side of the non-return valve.
5.3
Pressure Reducing Valves
Pressure reducing valves should be selected so that the normal operating range is in the mid-point of the valve
capabilities. Operating near the extremes of the valve capabilities may give less consistent results.
Materials of construction should be selected based on the properties of the gas being supplied and anticipated
processes, e.g.:
1.
To extend the operating life of the valve where highly corrosive gases (e.g., hydrogen chloride gas) or processes
occur, purging tees may be used to allow the pressure reducing valve to be purged after use with a suitable
purging gas. For example, for hydrogen chloride gas, the purging gas could be dry nitrogen. Consideration
should be given to the treatment of the purging gas following passage through the reducing valve.
2.
For sterile operations where the gas may come into direct contact with the product (e.g., purging/headspace gas
in a freeze drying process) the materials of construction and finish can be critical.
[PAGE 60]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 58
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
5.3.1
Two-Stage Serial Reduction
The two-stage serial reduction approach uses two valves in series to reduce or eliminate extreme variations between
the inflow pressure and the final reduced outlet pressure. Two stage reduction is recommended when initial pressures
are 200 psi (14 bar) or greater, or when the desired pressure reduction ratio is greater than 4:1, e.g., from 200 psi to
50 psi, (14 to 3.5 bar), or where the inflow pressure fluctuates greatly. The advantage of two-stage serial reduction is
that neither valve is subjected to extreme pressure differentials, thus prolonging the life of the valves and delivering
more precise pressure regulation.
5.3.2
Parallel Connection
Connecting two or more smaller size pressure reducing valves in parallel to serve a single supply main may be
used where there is a wide variation in demand at the reduced pressure. Parallel installations offer the advantage of
providing increased capacity where needed. In addition, the parallel configuration improves valve performance for
widely variable demands. It also permits servicing of individual valves without requiring a system to be shut down.
5.4
Mixing Valves
A mixture of gases may be purchased pre-mixed and supplied through a dedicated system or gases may be mixed at
the POU using a mixing valve arrangement.
Gases may be mixed using a mass flow controller on each gas line. The mass flow controller is controlled by a flow
sensor and feeds the gases into a static mixer.
Gas mixing systems can be accurate to ±1%.
Figure 5.2 shows an example configuration for a blending system.
Figure 5.2:	Control System for Blending Two Gases While Controlling Both the Blend Flow Rate and
Composition
Used with permission from CONTROL magazine, www.controlglobal.com
The blend ratio of the gases can by adjusted by varying the setpoint of the ratio setting of FY (see Figure 5.2). The
setpoints can be adjusted manually or automatically. If automatic blend composition control is needed, the blend
composition should be measured and the composition controller should be arranged to act as the cascade master
which is modulating the setpoint to FY.
[PAGE 61]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 59
Process Gases
5.5
Filtration
5.5.1
Gas Filtration for Sterile Applications
Pharmaceutical gas distribution systems are usually protected with filters rated 1 µm or smaller at the generation
source. Where sterile gas or sterile venting is required, this is usually provided by a 0.2 µm rated hydrophobic
sterilizing grade filter at the points of delivery or use.
Sterile gas/vent filters can either be pre-sterilized by autoclaving and aseptically installed, or sterilized in situ
by Steaming in Place (SIP). For single use bioreactors and other disposable systems filters can be sterilized
using gamma irradiation. Gas sterilizing filters usually incorporate 0.2 µm rated microporous membranes made
of hydrophobic polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) or hydrophobic polyvinylidenefluoride (PVDF). Filters with PTFE
membranes are not compatible with gamma irradiation. Some 0.2 µm rated membrane filters are also rated for
removal of airborne viruses down to 20 nm (0.020 µm) and airborne particles as fine as 0.003 µm. This is possible
because filters are typically rated for particle/microbial size removal from liquids, whereas additional removal
mechanisms occur in gases that enhance removal of particles finer than the liquid pore size rating.
Pharmaceutical grade gas sterilizing grade filters are normally provided with a CoA from the manufacturer. The
manufacturer may perform non-destructive (integrity) testing on filters prior to shipment to confirm that the filters
will retain critical contaminants, i.e., both bacteria and viruses in air, or bacteria when filters are wetted with liquid.
Retention of bacteria under liquid challenge conditions is considered the most stringent qualification for critical gas
sterilizing and venting applications. Manufacturers may specify appropriate integrity test methods for filter users that
have been correlated to the microbial retentive quality of the filters; i.e., non-destructive testing is representative of
the destructive bacterial or virus aerosol challenge test.
Depending on user risk assessments and intended use filters may be integrity tested:
•
prior to use
•
after use
•
at a predetermined interval
•
after events that are considered stress conditions for the filter (e.g., sterilization, high temperature air flow)
Users may accept a CoA from the supplier without additional testing if risk of damage during shipment, installation,
sterilization, and service has been suitably considered and, where appropriate, validated. Critical use filters can be
installed with POU integrity test ports that allow integrity testing in situ.
5.5.2
Filter Integrity Testing
Three methods for integrity testing of sterilizing gas filters are the:
1.
Bubble Point Pressure Test
2.
Forward Flow (Diffusion) Test
3.
Water Intrusion Test
[PAGE 62]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 60
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
5.5.2.1	 Bubble Point Pressure Test
The Bubble Point Pressure test determines the installation integrity of a wetted filter by determining the gas pressure
necessary to force the wetting liquid from the largest flow pathways or defects in the filter. For hydrophobic filters,
the wetting liquid is usually a 70% IPA/30% water solution. Other low surface tension solvent solutions may be
acceptable. The fully wetted filters are pressurized with air or nitrogen and the pressure is gradually increased until
bulk flow of the test gas through the filter is detected.
In a manual test, a length of tubing is connected to the downstream port of the filter assembly and the other end
of the tubing is immersed in liquid. Bulk flow of gas is indicated by rapid bubbling from the end of the tubing which
is in the liquid. The pressure at which rapid bubbling is observed is recorded as the “Bubble Point Pressure.” This
procedure is not applicable to sterilized filters prior their use, but may be utilized prior to sterilization or after use to
confirm filter integrity.
Automated instruments perform a Bubble Point Pressure test by conducting a series of incremental pressure decay
tests from the upstream side of the wetted filter and apply an algorithm to report Bubble Point Pressure based on
detection of non-linear increased gas flow versus pressure measurements. Automated tests can be performed
on sterilized filters before use, as they determine the Bubble Point Pressure from the upstream side only, without
downstream manipulations or risk of compromising downstream sterility.
For either method, a pressure reading lower than the manufacturer’s minimum recommended limit is an indication of
integrity failure.
If filters are tested before use, they should be allowed to dry prior to installation or should be “blown down” with the
pressurized gas to ensure adequate gas flow.
Bubble Point Pressure testing of hydrophobic membrane gas filters is limited by the requirement to wet the filter with
a low surface tension liquid prior to testing and to dry it before returning it to service.
Bubble Point Pressure testing is less suited to testing of high area cartridges and multi-cartridge assemblies due to
the subjectivity of the endpoint detection.
5.5.2.2	 Forward Flow (Diffusion) Test
The Forward Flow or “Diffusion” test determines the integrity of a wetted filter by quantitatively measuring gas flow
(diffusion plus bulk flow through any non-wetted pores) at a gas test pressure set marginally below the minimum
Bubble Point Pressure (typically at around 80%). This confirms filter integrity and that the Bubble Point Pressure is
not yet exceeded. The measured gas flow rate is empirically correlated to microbial retention.
In a manual test, a length of tubing is connected to the downstream port of the filter assembly and the other end
immersed under a graduated column of liquid. The filter is pressured with air or nitrogen to a specified test pressure
and, after a short equilibration period, flow of gas through the filter is measured by displacement of liquid volume from
the column over time. As with the manual Bubble Point Pressure test, this procedure is not applicable to sterilized
filters prior their use, but may be utilized prior to sterilization or after use to confirm filter integrity.
Automated instruments perform a Forward Flow or “Diffusion” test from the upstream side of the filter either by
pressure decay of the test gas in a measured volume upstream of the wetted filter, which is then converted to a flow
value, or by direct volumetric gas flow measurement. Automated Forward Flow (diffusion) tests can be performed on
sterilized filters before use, as they determine the pressure decay or direct flow measurement from the upstream side
only, without downstream manipulations or risk of compromising downstream sterility.
For either method, a Forward Flow rate higher than the manufacturer’s maximum allowable specification is an
indication of integrity test failure.
[PAGE 63]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 61
Process Gases
The Forward Flow or “Diffusion” test is a quantitative measurement of stable gas flow that can be correlated to
external reference standards as well as to bacterial retention, making it suitable for high area cartridges and multi-
cartridge assemblies. Instruments that perform direct flow measurement, rather than pressure decay, do not require
prior determination of the upstream test volume, enabling a faster and potentially more accurate test.
The Forward Flow or “Diffusion” test of hydrophobic membrane gas filters is also limited by the requirement to wet the
filter with a low surface tension liquid prior to testing and to dry it before returning it to service.
5.5.2.3	 Water Intrusion Test
In the Water Intrusion Test, the integrity of a clean and dry hydrophobic membrane filter is determined by flooding the
filter assembly with water, applying air overpressure to overcome the hydrophobic resistance of the membrane and to
force water into or through the largest flow paths in the membrane, or defects in the filter. Water flow through the filter
is measured in an air overpressure headspace upstream of the filter either by pressure decay or by direct volumetric
flow. Integral clean and dry filters with sufficient hydrophobicity and without oversized pores or defects will show little
water flow (equivalent to evaporation from the downstream of the filter).
A flow rate higher than the manufacturer’s maximum allowable limit is an indication of integrity test failure.
Water intrusion testing avoids the use of alcohol or other low surface tension wetting liquids and does not
contaminate the downstream of integral filters, making it particularly suitable for testing of sterile hydrophobic
membrane filters in situ. As the water does not actually wet the filter, gas flow at low pressure can be reinitiated as
soon as the filter assembly is drained. Water intrusion testing of hydrophobic membrane gas filters is limited by the
requirement to introduce water into the upstream of the filter assembly and drain it after test, higher false failure rates
due to wet or contaminated filters, and sensitivity to temperature variation. It is not well suited for very small filter
assemblies due to very low flow values.
Figure 5.3: Schematic of a Water Intrusion Test
Notes for Figure 5.3:
•
The hydrophobic membrane filter assembly is flooded with water.
•
An automated integrity tester is connected to an isolated upstream air pressurization chamber to minimize
temperature fluctuation.
[PAGE 64]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 62
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
In operation, sterilizing gas filters are usually integrity tested before sterilization or after use by the Forward Flow
(Diffusion) or Bubble Point Pressure tests, using the reference wetting liquid, test parameters, and limit values
recommended by the filter manufacturer. When testing filters in situ after sterilization, sterilizing gas filters can be
tested using a variation of the Water Intrusion Test, using an automated test instrument.
Integrity test systems of different manufacturers may report Bubble Point Pressure test results differently depending
on the proprietary algorithm applied. Manufacturers of both the filters and automated integrity test equipment should
be consulted to ensure that appropriate testing is performed. The filter manufacturer’s recommendations for testing
should be followed.
5.6
Filters in Compressed Air Systems
The concepts described in this section can be applied to other process gas systems, depending on the risks
associated with the gas supply source and the CQAs for a gas.
A suite of filters used in a commercial application may comprise the following filters:
5.6.1
Compressor or Source Gas Pre-Filter
Reduction of particulate on the gas feed can use lower cost filter media and installation methods than in-line filtration
systems. This is, therefore, a cost effective filter and helps to prolong equipment life.
5.6.2
Compressor Discharge
It is considered good practice to install a moisture separator or coalescing filter and a general purpose filter on the
discharge from the compressor. This should help to reduce the moisture and particulate build up in the receiver.
Coalescing filters remove moisture droplets condensed by the compressor after cooler.
5.6.3
Pre-dryer Filtration
A general purpose filter will normally be used to remove particulate down to 1 µm and to help keep the drying media
clean. The general purpose filter is usually used in conjunction with a high efficiency oil/hydrocarbon removal filter, to
remove any atmospheric contamination and particulate down to 0.01 µm.
5.6.4
Post Dryer Filtration
After the dryer, a similar suite of filters will be used to prevent any particulate migration from the dryer into the system.
For oil-lubricated compressors, the high efficiency oil/hydrocarbon coalescing filter is used here as a means of
particulate control (oil-less compressors do not require coalescing filters).
After a gas storage system (receiver), filter sets are usually provided as parallel systems. This allows for replacement
of a filter while the system is kept operational.
5.6.5
Post Receiver Filters
A final filter is normally used before the distribution system to ensure that the gas entering the distribution system
meets required specifications. For sterile applications this may be a 0.2 µm rated membrane filter, which will need to be
sterilized. For oral solid dose applications, a 0.45 µm or 1 µm rated filter may be suitable. (Note: 1 µm rated absolute
filters have high efficiency for finer particles in air due to enhanced impaction/interception removal mechanisms.)
[PAGE 65]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 63
Process Gases
5.6.6
Alternative Post Dryer Filter Arrangement
For small systems, where there is a very low risk that system operation and maintenance could affect gas quality,
POU filtration may be considered unnecessary. A robust post dryer filter arrangement may be considered as an
alternative:
•
The post dryer filter set may be arranged as a “double” set of gas filters, with a second set in series acting as a
“policing” filter set. The gas quality is checked in normal operation on the pre-filter set; if a gas fails a test, the
second set of filters should ensure that the gas will be re-filtered prior to entering the system. During system
maintenance the final set of filters are used to replace the pre-filter set and new filters are installed in the final
location, minimizing operating cost.
5.7
Material Selection
Factors which should be considered when selecting materials of construction for a distribution system include:
•
potential impact on the desired gas quality attributes
•
local regulations
•
robustness
•
installation time
•
local custom and practice
•
insurer’s requirements
•
cost
Materials used for a process gas distribution system and associated equipment should be resistant to adverse
effects of the gas being transported. They should also comply with the necessary national and local regulations for
a gas. Equipment and pipe work should be sufficiently strong to contain the operating pressure across expected
environmental conditions (i.e., ambient conditions).
The process gas distribution system should be able to support valves and associated equipment and should be able
to resist expected failure modes and accidental damage.
The effects of the environment on the external surfaces of the distribution system (e.g., cleaning and maintenance),
should be considered. For example, copper may not be resistant to cleaning materials and may develop a surface
coating (by oxidation) which may shed particles, so copper is usually not used within a production area; however,
copper may be acceptable outside a production area.
If an installation is in a damp environment, then the risk of corrosion of external surfaces should be considered,
particularly if a distribution system is constructed of dissimilar metals. Extremes in ambient temperature may require
expansion and contraction of the distribution system to be addressed.
Where the normal range of operating parameters of a process gas may be exceeded, potential effects on the
materials used for the distribution system should be considered. For example, if failure of a compressed air dryer
could allow wet air into a distribution system, the effects on the downstream equipment and how this could be
addressed should be considered. In this example, the design may incorporate an automatic shut off valve that
operates if high pump discharge pressure is detected, preventing moist air from entering the distribution system.
[PAGE 66]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 64
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
5.7.1
Moisture Ingress
Materials used for distribution systems should provide a robust vapor barrier to prevent an increase in the moisture
levels of a gas. Vapor ingress can be a significant issue for flexible POU pipes.
Careful selection of fittings is also necessary where moisture ingress may affect critical attributes, e.g., pneumatic
push-in fittings can lead to moisture ingress.
5.7.2
Particulate Generation
Once any loose material in a process gas distribution system has been blown out, particulate generation is not
usually an issue in relation to a gas, even for carbon steel. Steel does not normally corrode if the Relative Humidity
(RH) is below 35%. At the low Pressure Dewpoints (PDPs) typically used in pharmaceutical systems, carbon or
galvanized steel would not normally be a source of particulate.
Where the installation is exposed in a classified area, the risk of particulate shedding from the external surface of the
pipe work should be considered. This is especially relevant where aggressive cleaning agents are used for microbial
control.
5.7.3
Ease of Assembly and Modification
Ease of assembly together with cost/installation time/robustness in use have a major impact and may give different
results depending on the application.
Copper pipe may be the material of choice for a distribution system, whereas stainless tube with compression fittings
may be used locally for a specific piece of equipment.
It is considered good practice to provide for additional outlets for a distribution system where an area is likely to be
revised or equipment modified.
5.7.4
Availability of Fittings
An acceptable range of valves and fittings should be available for the material selected.
“Push fit” fittings are not usually specified as sanitary, so require careful consideration before use.
Suppliers should have a readily accessible source of fittings to ensure that a system can be maintained over its entire
lifetime. The use of “special” fittings during construction may become costly to maintain.
5.7.5
Pipe Work Support Requirements
Some materials used for pipe work can require a higher number of supports, which can increase installation costs.
Additional supports also may be required where a system is subject to:
•
rapid changes in pressure
•
changes in extremes of temperature which require additional expansion points
Where ball valves are used, these can induce movement in pipe work and additional supports may be required to
compensate for this movement.
[PAGE 67]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Page 65
Process Gases
5.7.6
Optional Materials
Material selection is dependent on the risks the interaction between the gas and materials of construction of all
components of the distribution system presents to the end user. Decision processes should be documented and
checked.
5.7.6.1	 Stainless Steel
Stainless steel is usually used in production areas:
•
ASTM 304 grade stainless steel may be adequate for non-sterile manufacturing areas, but there may be a risk of
corrosion depending on the cleaning and sanitizing materials used.
•
For sterile operations, ASTM 316 grade or equivalent is normally used, as the cleaning and sanitizing materials
used are generally more corrosive.
Valves and fittings should be specified to match the piping material. Sanitary jointing methods are not usually
required, as there is slight risk of microbial growth within a dry system (see Section 6 of this Guide). Orbital welding
may be specified to ensure consistent reliable welds, with a purge gas used to prevent oxide formation inside pipe
work.
It may be cost effective to specify lower grade stainless steel (e.g., ASTM 304) for distribution systems, with the
benefit of a clean good quality internal finish, with a higher grade used in production areas where it will be subject to
more corrosive cleaning agents.
The quality of the stainless steel used for a system will depend on the end use. Suppliers/installers should be
consulted to ensure the required cleanliness can be obtained and that the correct documentation is available to
support the installation.
5.7.6.2	 Medical Grade Copper
Medical gas grade copper (e.g., ASTM B 280ISO n7396-1 part 4.3.6) BS EN13348, may be used in major
installations (100 ft (30.5 m) of pipe or more). Material should be specified as clean and degreased, purged during
fabrication, and jointed without flux using “hard” or silver solder. Joints to valves are usually by flange or soldered
connections. For more information, see http://www.copper.org (Reference 35, Appendix 8). Refrigeration grade
copper may be considered.
Copper pipe may used for a distribution system, with a break at a service outlet panel, or a service void, with the final
part of the pipe work in stainless steel within a production area. Copper pipe may not be recommended for use with
nitrogen, as moisture in the gas may cause internal corrosion.
5.7.6.3	 Plastics
Modern thermoplastic (e.g., high density polyethylene) can be used for the clean distribution of gases. Thick walled
High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE) pipe is available, suited to compressed gases up 160 psi (11 bar). HDPE systems
can be quick to install, provide a corrosion free smooth internal bore and a clean external surface. The systems can
be color coded to match codes for the gas being transported.
Disadvantages of plastic pipe work include:
•
Systems may require additional supports (compared to metal systems). Lines may be supported in a channel.
•
The material may require additional expansion requirements over those required for a metal system.
[PAGE 68]
Mr. Gerardo Gutierrez, Sr.
Mexico, DF,
Page 66
ISPE Good Practice Guide:
Process Gases
•
Ultra violet stability of the material for use in external applications should be checked.
•
Plastic material cannot be used for a flammable or oxidizing gas:
-
The plastic may not present such a high quality vapor barrier as metals.
In some regions, e.g., the US Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA) regulates against using brittle
plastics for compressed air distribution systems.
Plastic may be used for subsystems where pipe work is protected from mechanical damage, and the outlet valves are
mechanically supported, so that there is no stress transmitted to the pipe work, e.g., an inert gas distribution system
in a laboratory.
Where pipe work is to be routed though a hazardous area, the melting point of the material should be considered
along with the implication of a melted distribution line.
5.7.6.4	 Aluminum
Proprietary systems using aluminum pipe work may be limited in size and connected using plastic push in
connectors. These systems should not be used for a flammable or oxidizing gas.
Where pipe work is to be routed though a hazardous area, the melting point of the material should be considered
along with the implication of a melted distribution line.
5.7.6.5	 Carbon Steel
Where a gas is kept at a low Relative Humidity (RH) (below 35%), risk of internal corrosion is minimal; therefore, steel
is an option for use in a distribution system. If used, galvanized material is usually selected to provide a corrosion
resistant external finish.
Where galvanized material is used, the internal finish should be of good quality and clean, or it will require a long
blow down period to clean up the system.
Jointing has to be specified carefully, to ensure minimal risk of generating loose material or contaminating inside
a pipe with hydrocarbon, e.g., welding with a purge gas, or screwed joints made using without lubricant/sealant,
assembling the joint with non shedding material, such as PTFE tape.
For these reasons as well as the general appearance, carbon steel is not generally used.
Testing and Cleaning
Materials specified for use in a processed gas system should be specified to be free of particulates and any
hydrocarbon. They should be shipped and stored on site wrapped and sealed. Storage and release for use should be
managed to ensure that the specified material is used.
Before use on site, system fittings and components should be inspected to ensure that the internal finishes are as
specified and not marked or damaged. A GMP protocol should be used to ensure the system is kept clean during
construction, e.g.:
•
no opening left open
•
only clean tools used
•
tools marked for their purpose
