USP General Chapter 〈659〉 PACKAGING AND STORAGE REQUIREMENTS
Status: Currently Official on 12-Feb-2025 | Official Date: Official as of 01-Apr-2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.31003/USPNF_M2773_06_01

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this chapter is to provide packaging definitions, auxiliary packaging information, and storage condition definitions relevant to the storage and distribution of active ingredients, excipients, and medical products, such as pharmaceuticals, combination products, and, when labeled as being USP compliant, dietary supplements.

PACKAGING
Packaging materials must not interact physically or chemically with a packaged article in a manner that causes its safety, identity, strength, quality, or purity to fail to conform to established requirements. Any plastic material used to construct a Packaging system must meet the applicable requirements of Plastic Materials of Construction 〈661.1〉. (Official 1-Dec-2025) All Packaging systems must meet the applicable requirements specified in Containers—Glass 〈660〉, Plastic Packaging Systems and Their Materials of Construction 〈661〉, Plastic Packaging Systems for Pharmaceutical Use 〈661.2〉, (Official 1-Dec-2025) and Auxiliary Packaging Components 〈670〉. All elastomeric closures must meet the applicable requirements in Elastomeric Components in Injectable Pharmaceutical Product Packaging/Delivery Systems 〈381〉.

Every monograph in USP–NF must have packaging and storage requirements. For the packaging portion of the statement, the choice of containers is provided in this chapter. For active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), the choice would be a tight or well-closed container (as specified in the monograph), and, where needed, a light-resistant container. For excipients, given their typical presentation as large-volume commodity items (Packaging systems ranging from drums to tank cars), a well-closed container is an appropriate default requirement. Articles must be protected from moisture, freezing, and excessive heat (see General Definitions) when no specific directions or limitations are provided.

The compendial requirements for the use of specified containers apply also to articles packaged by Dispensers, Repackagers, or other individuals, unless otherwise indicated in the individual drug product monograph.

POISON PREVENTION PACKAGING ACT
This act, which is administered by the US Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), requires special packaging for most human oral prescription drugs, oral controlled drugs, certain non-oral prescription drugs, certain dietary supplements, and many over-the-counter (OTC) drug preparations, to protect the public from personal injury or illness from misuse of these preparations [16 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §1700].

The primary packaging of substances regulated under the Poison Prevention Packaging Act (PPPA) must comply with the special packaging standards. These apply to all packaging types, including reclosable, non-reclosable, and unit-dose types.

Special packaging is not required for drugs dispensed within a hospital setting for inpatient administration. Also, special packaging does not need to be used by manufacturers and packagers of bulk-packaged prescription drugs that will be repackaged by the pharmacist. PPPA-regulated prescription drugs may be dispensed in non-Child-resistant packaging upon the request of the purchaser or when directed in a legitimate prescription.

Manufacturers or packagers of PPPA-regulated OTC preparations are allowed to package one size in non-Child-resistant packaging as long as popular-size, special packages are also supplied. The non-Child-resistant packaging requires special labeling.

TEMPERATURE AND STORAGE
Specific directions are stated in some monographs with respect to storage conditions (e.g., the temperature or humidity) at which an article must be stored and shipped. Storage and shipping directions apply except where the label on the article or its prescribing information has different storage conditions that are based on stability studies. Where no specific directions or limitations are provided in the article's labeling or prescribing information, articles must be protected from moisture, freezing, and excessive heat, and, where necessary, from light during shipping and distribution; drug substances are exempt from this requirement.

GENERAL DEFINITIONS

Packaging Definitions
Packaging system (also referred to as a Container–closure system): The sum of Packaging components and materials that together contain and protect the article. This includes Primary packaging components as well as Secondary packaging components when such components are required to provide additional protection.
Container: A receptacle that holds an intermediate compound, API, excipient, or dosage form, and is in direct contact with the article (e.g., ampules, vials, bottles, syringes, and pen injectors).
Closure: A material that seals an otherwise open space of a Container and provides protection for the contents. It also provides access to the contents of the Container (e.g., screw caps and stoppers).
Packaging component: Any single part of the Package or Container–closure system, including: the Container; Closures; ferrules and overseals; Closure liners; Container liners (e.g., tube cartridge liners); inner seals; administration ports; overwraps; administration accessories; labels; cardboard boxes; and shrink wrap.
Primary packaging component: A Packaging component that is in direct contact with or may come into direct contact with the article.
Secondary packaging component: A Packaging component that is in direct contact with a Primary packaging component and may provide additional protection for the article.
Tertiary packaging component: A Packaging component that is in direct contact with a Secondary packaging component and may provide additional protection for the article during transportation and/or storage.
Ancillary component: A component or entity that may come into contact with a Tertiary packaging component during the distribution, storage, and/or transportation of the packaged article (e.g., pallets, skids, and shrink wrap).
Associated component: A Packaging component that is typically intended to deliver the drug article to the patient but is not stored in contact with the article for its entire shelf life (e.g., spoons, Dosing cups, and dosing syringes).
Materials of construction: The materials (e.g., glass, plastic, elastomers, and metal) of which a Packaging component consists.
Small-volume injection (also referred to as Small-volume parenteral): An injectable dosage form that is packaged in Containers labeled as containing 100 mL or less.
Large-volume injection (also referred to as Large-volume parenteral): An injectable dosage form that is packaged in Containers labeled as containing more than 100 mL.
Child-resistant packaging: A Packaging system designed or constructed to meet CPSC standards pertaining to opening by children (16 CFR §1700.20 et seq. and 16 CFR §1700.15).
Senior-friendly packaging: A Packaging system designed or constructed to meet CPSC standards pertaining to opening by senior adults (16 CFR §1700.15 and 16 CFR §1700.20).
Restricted delivery system: A Packaging system designed or constructed to restrict (control) the amount of the drug product that may be delivered in order to limit unintended access by children and other similarly vulnerable populations.
Tamper-evident packaging: A Packaging system that may not be accessed without obvious destruction of the seal or some portion of the Packaging system. Tamper-evident packaging must be used for sterile drug products intended for ophthalmic or otic use, except where extemporaneously compounded for immediate dispensing on prescription.
Reclosable packaging: A package that after it has been initially opened is capable of being reclosed with a similar degree of security and is capable of being used a sufficient number of times to dispense the total contents without loss of security.
Non-reclosable packaging: A package or part of a package that cannot be closed again after all or part of the contents have been removed. Examples of Non-reclosable packaging are blisters, sachets, strips, and other Single-unit containers.
Hermetic container: A Container–closure system that is impervious to air or any other gas under the ordinary or customary conditions of handling, shipment, storage, and distribution.
Tight container: A Container–closure system that protects the contents from contamination by extraneous liquids, solids, or vapors; from loss of the article; and from efflorescence, deliquescence, or evaporation under the ordinary or customary conditions of handling, shipment, storage, and distribution, and is capable of tight reclosure.
Well-closed container: A Container–closure system that protects the contents from contamination by extraneous solids and from loss of the article under the ordinary or customary conditions of handling, shipment, storage, and distribution.
Light-resistant container: A Container–closure system that protects the contents from the effects of light by virtue of the specific properties of the material of which it is composed, including any coating applied to it.
Equivalent container–closure system: A Container–closure system that is as protective as or more protective than the original manufacturer's Packaging system in terms of moisture vapor transmission rate, oxygen transmission, light transmission, and compatibility.

Table 1. Packaging Systems Definitions: Injection versus Noninjection
Injection | Noninjection
Multiple-dose | Multiple-unit
Single-dose | Single-unit
— | Unit-dose
— | Unit-of-use
Pharmacy bulk package | —
Imaging bulk package | —

Injection Packaging Systems
Multiple-dose container (also referred to as Multi-dose): A Container–closure system that holds a sterile medication for parenteral administration (injection or infusion) that has met antimicrobial effectiveness testing requirements. A Multiple-dose container is intended to contain more than one dose of a drug product. Multiple-dose containers are generally expected to contain 30 mL or less of medications. The beyond-use date for an opened or entered (e.g., needle-punctured) Multiple-dose container is 28 days unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer on the label.
Single-dose container: A Container–closure system that holds a sterile medication for parenteral administration (injection or infusion) that is not required to meet the antimicrobial effectiveness testing requirements. A Single-dose container is designed for use with a single patient as a single injection/infusion. Examples of Single-dose containers are vials, ampules, and prefilled syringes.
Pharmacy bulk package: A Container–closure system of a sterile preparation for parenteral use that contains many single doses. The contents are intended for use in a pharmacy admixture program and are restricted to the preparation of admixtures for infusion or, through a sterile transfer device, for the filling of empty sterile syringes. The Closure must be penetrated only one time after constitution.
Imaging bulk package: A container of a sterile preparation for parenteral use that contains many single doses of a contrast agent (medical imaging drug product) for use with a medical imaging device.

Noninjection Packaging Systems
Multiple-unit container: A Container–closure system that permits withdrawal of successive portions of a noninjection article without changing the safety, strength, quality, or purity of the remaining portion (e.g., bottle of capsules, tablets, oral or topical liquids, and semisolids).
Single-unit container: A Container–closure system that holds a quantity of a noninjection article intended for administration as a single dose or a single finished device intended for use promptly after the Packaging system is opened.
Unit-dose container: A single-unit Container–closure system for an article intended for administration by other than the parenteral route as a single dose.
Unit-of-use container: A Container–closure system that contains a specific quantity of an article that is intended to be dispensed as such without further modification except for the addition of appropriate labeling.

Miscellaneous
Repackaging: The act of removing a drug product from the original manufacturer's Packaging system and placing it into another Packaging system, usually one of smaller size.
Repackager: A firm that repackages drug products for distribution (e.g., for resale to distributors, hospitals, or pharmacies).
Dispenser: A licensed or registered practitioner who is legally responsible for providing the patient with a preparation that is in compliance with a prescription or a medication order.
Beyond-use date: See 〈7〉.
Expiration date: See 〈7〉.
Black closure system or black bands: The use of a Black closure system on a vial (e.g., a black cap overseal and a black ferrule) or the use of a Black band on an ampule is prohibited, except for Potassium Chloride for Injection Concentrate.

INJECTION PACKAGING
Packaging for sterile products intended for injection must be validated as meeting the containment, protection, and compatibility requirements that are essential for maintaining the article's strength, quality, and purity. Refer to Package Integrity Evaluation—Sterile Products 〈1207〉.
The volume of injection in a Single-dose container provides the amount specified for one-time parenteral administration, and in no case is more than sufficient to permit the withdrawal and administration of 1 L. Preparations intended for intraspinal, intracisternal, or peridural administration are packaged in Single-dose containers only. Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, a Multiple-dose container contains a volume of injection sufficient to permit the withdrawal of NMT 30 mL.

MEDICAL GAS PACKAGING
Gas cylinder: A metallic Packaging system constructed of steel or aluminum and designed to hold medical gases under pressure; these gases may include: Carbon Dioxide USP, Helium USP, Medical Air USP, Nitrogen NF, and Oxygen USP.

ASSOCIATED COMPONENTS
Many Associated Components are graduated for measurement and dose administration. The markings on associated components must be in metric units only and limited to a single measurement scale that corresponds with the dosing instructions on the OTC or prescription container label. Under expected conditions of use, the volume error incurred in measuring an individual dose by means of such graduated components should be NMT 10% of the indicated amount.
Dosing cup: A measuring device consisting of a small cup that may be packaged with oral liquid articles.
Dosing spoon: A measuring device consisting of a bowl and handle that may be packaged with oral liquid articles.
Medicine dropper: A measuring device consisting of a transparent or translucent barrel or tube that is generally fitted with a collapsible bulb.
Oral syringe: A measuring device consisting of a plunger and barrel made of transparent or translucent plastic material and a seal on the end.

TEMPERATURE AND STORAGE DEFINITIONS
Freezer: A place in which the temperature is controlled between −25° and −10° (−13° and 14° F).
Refrigerator: A cold place in which the temperature is controlled between 2° and 8° (36° and 46° F).
Cold: Any temperature not exceeding 8° (46° F).
Cool: Any temperature between 8° and 15° (46° and 59° F).
Room temperature (also referred to as Ambient temperature): The temperature prevailing in a working environment.
Controlled cold temperature: The temperature maintained thermostatically between 2° and 8° (36° and 46° F), which allows for temperature excursions between 2° and 15° (36° and 59° F) that may be experienced during storage, shipping, and distribution, but not to exceed 24 h, such that the allowable calculated mean kinetic temperature (MKT) is NMT 8° (46° F) with no excursions below 2° (36° F) or above 15° (59° F).
Controlled room temperature: The temperature maintained thermostatically that encompasses the usual and customary working environment of 20°–25° (68°–77° F). MKT may be used during an excursion provided: 1) MKT does not exceed 25° (77° F); 2) excursion between 15° and 30° (59° and 86° F); 3) transient excursions are NMT 40° (104° F); and 4) excursion time is NMT 24 h.
Warm: Any temperature between 30° and 40° (86° and 104° F).
Excessive heat: Any temperature above 40° (104° F).
Dry place: A place that does not exceed 40% average relative humidity at 20° (68° F) or the equivalent water vapor pressure at other temperatures.
Do not refrigerate: The Container label will bear an appropriate instruction to protect the article from refrigeration in cases where refrigeration exposes the article to loss of strength or potency or destructive alteration of its characteristics.
Protect from freezing: The Container label will bear an appropriate instruction to protect the article from freezing in cases where freezing exposes an article to loss of strength or potency or to destructive alteration of its characteristics.
Protect from light: Where light subjects an article to loss of strength or potency or to destructive alteration of its characteristics, the Container label bears an appropriate instruction to protect the article from light. The article must be packaged in a light-resistant Container.
