--- PAGE 21 ---
16
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
STAGE
Business
TT PM
Process
Analytical
Engineering
Manufacturing
Regulatory
Quality
Sourcing/Supply Chain
Handover
Activities
Determine 
Changes Needed 
for Commercial 
Production
Coordinate 
Knowledge Transfer 
to Post-Transfer 
Operations Team
Set up Continued 
Process Validation 
(CPV)
Maintain Stability 
Program
Define Changeover 
Requirements for 
Future Production
Knowledge Transfer 
to Post-Transfer 
Operations Team
Obtain Regulatory 
Approval
Monitor Stability 
Data
Validation Batch 
Distribution
Document Lessons 
Learned in TT 
Document 
Potential Process 
Improvements
Maintain Validation 
Batch Storage
Consider Post-
Approval Changes
Set up Quality 
Management Review 
Requirements
Coordinate 
Transportation 
Strategy
Deliverables
Commercial 
Resourcing to 
Implement Changes
Full Handover of 
Product
CPV Program, 
Report Template (or 
initial report when 
sufficient batches 
produced)
Stability Results/
Report
Product Changeover 
Plan
Trained Personnel
Regulatory Approval
Commercial QMS
Stage Gate Approval
Lead Quality 
Management 
Reviews
Commercial Quality 
Agreement
(Figure 5.0-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 22 ---
17
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
While a TT PM can use the Reference Guide to develop a robust TT program, the guide does not 
address each unique requirement for an individual product transfer. The TT Team will need to de-
termine the specific requirements necessary to ensure that the RU obtains and implements all the 
knowledge needed to manufacture safe, effective, and consistent product in compliance with CMC 
requirements. 
5.1	
Initiation Stage
The Initiation stage covers the process of determining whether the TT of CMC activities for a phar-
maceutical or biopharmaceutical product should be performed. In this stage, the team evaluating the 
need for the TT often has limited information on the product characteristics, process requirements, 
and analytical testing from the SU, particularly if the product is still under development. While the 
Initiation stage is primarily driven by the Business function of the MAH, technical experts also should 
conduct high-level risk assessments. 
A PM should be assigned to facilitate RU site selection and to develop the initial charter. This stage 
results in a decision on whether to perform the TT, the choice of an RU site, the formation of a steer-
ing committee, and the development of an initial TT charter as well as an overall product strategy, 
including business and regulatory considerations. Table 5.1-1, excerpted from the Reference Guide 
(Figure 5.0-1), shows the activities and deliverables for the Initiation stage.
5.1.1	 Business
The Business function at the MAH takes the lead role in the Initiation stage, developing the busi-
ness case for initiating a TT activity. It facilitates obtaining key information from the SU, such as the 
quality target product profile (QTPP) and/or specifications to identify the product characteristics and 
high-level process requirements. Using a high-level risk assessment, the Business function develops 
the product strategy to guide the TT decision. Legal counsel also is engaged for intellectual property 
review to ensure the freedom to operate, if needed. 
At this point, the RU site selection process can begin. If the product will be sourced externally, the 
Business function secures nondisclosure agreements or confidentiality agreements with potential RUs. 
The criteria laid out in the QTPP or product specification, the product strategy, the intellectual prop-
erty review, and the information required for product lifecycle phase (see Section 3.1) are used in 
the site selection process. Typically, potential RUs are assessed for capability, age of facility, location, 
capacity, resourcing, costs, tax implications, compliance history, regulatory strategy, and other logis-
tical considerations. Once a RU site is selected, the initial TT charter is approved, and the steering 
committee is formed. Section 8.1 presents a case study of best practices and benefits of establishing a 
steering committee for a project. 
The stage gate for Initiation results in a decision to proceed with the TT; selection of the RU, often 
with a signed contract; and approval of the initial charter. Two case studies, Section 8.4 on using a 
regulatory strategy for decision-making and Section 8.8 on TT of an aseptic drug product, illustrate 
factors to consider when selecting a RU or supplier. 
5.1.2	 Initiation Stage Project Manager
Involvement of a PM during the Initiation stage of a TT is critical to provide overall leadership and 
accountability for the project. The PM needs to be knowledgeable across all relevant functional areas 
and able to communicate across organizational levels. Additionally, this role requires such soft skills 
as facilitation, negotiation, decision-making, and motivation to effectively lead a cross-functional 
team to achieve business goals. Once the RU has been selected and the TT moves into the Planning 
stage, a TT PM will be assigned. In many TTs, the RU PM will serve as TT PM for the remainder 
of the project.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 23 ---
18
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Table 5.1-1	 	
Initiation Stage Activities and Deliverables 
STAGE
Business
TT PM
Process
Analytical
Engineering
Manufacturing
Regulatory
Quality
Sourcing/Supply Chain
Initiation
Activities
Develop Business 
Case
Coordinate Subject 
Matter Expert (SME) 
Assessments
Determine 
Preliminary Process 
Flow
Perform Initial 
Method Evaluation
Perform Permit 
Reviews  
(Licenses, 
Construction)
Perform Permit 
Reviews 
(Environment, Health, 
and Safety (EHS))
Evaluate Market 
Requirements
Perform RU Quality 
Assessment(s)
Perform RU Capacity 
Analysis
Identify Technology 
Transfer (TT) Project 
Manager
Perform Initial Risk 
Assessment 
Define Batch Size
Evaluate Laboratory 
Capabilities
Evaluate SU and RU 
Site Capabilities
Assess EHS 
Requirements
Develop Regulatory 
Strategy
Evaluate Import/
Export Requirements
Perform Patent 
Review
Perform Due 
Diligence
Develop/Obtain 
Sending Unit (SU) 
Qualtiy Target 
Prodcut Profile 
(QTPP) and Product 
Specifications
Estimate Capital 
Requirements
Evaluate Material 
Sourcing
Develop Product 
Strategy
Drive Receiving 
Unit (RU) Selection 
Decision
Evaluate 
Manufacturing 
Process Equipment 
Requirements
Determine 
Requirements for 
Tightly Regulated 
Materials
Obtain Non-Disclosure 
and/or Confidentiality 
Agreements
Develop/Update 
Project Plan
Identify Scale-Up 
Needs
Deliverables
Business Case
Initial TT Charter
Process Flow/
Description
Laboratory 
Evaluation Report
Facility Fit 
Assessment
EHS Viability Report
Regulatory Strategy
 Quality 
Assessment(s)
Preliminary Product 
Supply Chain Strategy, 
Including Map
Product Strategy
High-Level Project 
Plan
Process Fit/Gap 
Assessment
Methods Evaluation 
Report
Permit Requirements
Permit Requirements
Regulatory Approval 
Timing
Critical Material List
Patent Review 
Report
RU Due Diligence 
Report
Product QTPP
Capital Estimate
Non-Disclosure and/
or Confidentiality 
Agreements
Risk Assessment 
Report
RU Site Selection
Steering Committee 
Formed
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 24 ---
19
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The Initiation Stage PM coordinates an initial high-level risk assessment using cross-functional ex-
pertise and drives site selection by ensuring the completion of proper due diligence of the RUs under 
consideration. These assessments must be documented to support both the TT decision and site selec-
tion. One methodology for these assessments is risk-ranking and filtering.
One key deliverable the Initiation Stage PM must fulfill during the Initiation stage is the establishment 
of a charter with the steering committee. While the initial charter at this stage may not yet include 
all the details, it should document the boundaries, major risks, and assumptions used to determine 
whether the TT will proceed as a part of the product strategy, and it should specify the RU site that 
is selected. Boundaries and/or assumptions that should be considered during the Initiation stage to 
determine the scope of the TT include:
• 
Required time frame for completion
• 
Regulatory strategy options
• 
Estimated capital required
• 
Resource needs and constraints
• 
Scope of process to be transferred
• 
Target markets
• 
Annual production volume
• 
Site selection decision and criteria used
Finally, the PM creates an initial, high-level project plan estimating timing, resource needs, and budget.
5.1.3	 Process
The Process function first determines the subject matter expertise required on the TT team for the 
product under evaluation by modality or stage of manufacture. For instance, a small-molecule drug 
substance would need a process expert who has worked with organic chemistry processing, while a 
filled-vial drug product would need an expert in sterile manufacturing. Second, the MAH Process func-
tion develops a preliminary process flow and works with the SU to develop or obtain the QTPP and/or 
specification for the product. Third, using the assumptions provided by the Business function, Process 
develops batch size options and assesses scale-up or scale-down requirements against the current process 
at the SU. Finally, working with the Engineering, Manufacturing, and Analytical functions, Process 
assesses the process fit and evaluates the facilities, equipment, and operations group of the potential 
RU site to determine its capability to manufacture the product, noting gaps and investments required. 
5.1.4	 Analytical 
The Analytical function uses the SU’s QTPP and/or specification to determine product testing require-
ments and to evaluate potential testing of raw materials, single-use and other components, and pack-
aging. Test methods are categorized either as compendial or non-compendial for the target markets to 
define the complexity of method transfer from the SU. With this information, the Analytical function 
assesses the potential RU’s laboratory capabilities and capacity and provides a high-level estimate of 
what would be required for the TT. This evaluation covers instrumentation needs, glassware, reference 
standards, personnel, external laboratory services, and timing. Evaluation of site analytical capabilities 
of potential RUs is an essential element of due diligence. At this stage, the Analytical function docu-
ments the laboratory and method evaluations.
5.1.5	 Engineering
Evaluation of site manufacturing capabilities is another essential element of due diligence in selecting 
the most appropriate RU and deciding to proceed with the TT. This evaluation, also referred to as a 
facility fit assessment, includes such items as site utilities and infrastructure, processing equipment, 
and automation capabilities. The Engineering function, working closely with Process, Analytical, and 
Manufacturing functions, performs the facility fit assessment to form an initial rough estimate of capital 
that would be required. The case study in Section 8.6 provides more detail on the facility fit assessment. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 25 ---
20
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
5.1.6	 Manufacturing
To perform site selection, the Business function needs to understand the potential RU’s ability to 
implement the process. Capability extends beyond capital requirements. The Manufacturing function 
assesses the potential RU’s resource flexibility, operational training program, previous and current 
manufacturing activities in the facility, organizational structure, current operating shifts, and process 
data management systems. 
Environment, health, and safety (EHS) issues at the potential RU should be evaluated as well. An 
employee health and safety viability report can be used in evaluating potential issues. The Manufactur-
ing function should assess the environmental and occupational permits or certifications that will be 
needed, along with the RU’s ability to obtain them and their potential impact on the TT timeline.
5.1.7	 Regulatory
Involving the MAH Regulatory function as soon as possible is critical to a TT project. A regulatory strate-
gy should be developed to align the product strategy with the Business function and to establish boundar-
ies and assumptions for the TT charter. Key elements of the initial regulatory strategy are filing category, 
regulatory assumptions, likely data requirements and source documents required, potential need for a 
health authority meeting, projected timing of regulatory submission to each health authority, and regula-
tions applicable to the product in the region(s) in which it is to be manufactured and marketed. 
The regulatory strategy is a living document that will evolve throughout the project. It should be 
reviewed at each stage for required updates and further refinement based on the knowledge gained at 
that stage. Therefore, the ultimate regulatory strategy may look significantly different than this initial 
draft as knowledge is transferred and more information becomes available. 
The regulatory strategy typically would address the following: 
• 
List of markets and the planned timing of submission for each market
• 
Proposed filing category for the TT and the justification for this determination 
• 
Specific regulations applicable to the product and region(s) where it will be marketed
• 
Specific data requirements and source documents to support the change related to the TT that the 
governing regulatory agency would expect (e.g., sterility and aseptic processing, stability, qualification 
and validation considerations, clinical/bioequivalence requirements, and potential required permits)
• 
Key regulatory assumptions and risks that could impact the overall TT success and possible 
mitigation strategies
• 
Documents the RU will need to prepare for authoring, review, approval, and submission of the 
regulatory filing
• 
Product approval timeline
• 
GMP inspection history (lack of)
• 
Current GMP certificates
The Regulatory function also will perform due diligence of potential RUs for outstanding actions 
taken by regulatory authorities that would make the RU unsuitable for use.
5.1.8	 Quality
The Quality function at the MAH performs the quality assessment as part of due diligence on the 
potential RUs. In preparing the quality assessment for each RU, which includes the RU site assess-
ment, the Quality function typically asks the potential RU to complete a questionnaire and conducts a 
search for compliance history records. For external RUs, the compliance history records may be public, 
while the assessment of an internal site can involve records internal to the company. The purpose of the 
quality due diligence is to determine the maturity of the RU quality system, the RU’s organizational 
mindset regarding GMPs, and its adherence to applicable regulatory requirements. Quality will pro-
vide a compliance risk evaluation of the potential RUs. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 26 ---
21
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.1.9	 Sourcing/Supply Chain
The Sourcing/Supply Chain function develops initial capacity-planning models using estimated yield 
and cycle times. These models are used to evaluate potential RUs for batch size, manufacturing cycle 
time, and on-site storage needs as part of the facility fit assessment. The capacity model should in-
corporate product volumes for development and validation activities as well as commercial scale. The 
Sourcing/Supply Chain function evaluates sourcing of the required materials, consumables, and com-
ponents to determine any potential long-lead items and specially regulated materials (e.g., materials 
subject to national quotas), and it works with the Regulatory or appropriate function to identify spe-
cial import/export requirements where permits would be needed. The Sourcing/Supply Chain func-
tion also prepares a preliminary supply chain strategy to assess the impact of each potential RU on the 
product value chain.
5.1.10	 Best Practices and Additional Suggestions
Table 5.1.10-1 details additional ideas for consideration as well as best practices for the Initiation 
stage.
Table 5.1.10-1	 Best Practices and Additional Suggestions for the Initiation Stage
Topic
Details
Establish a steering 
committee 
• Establish the steering committee early to ensure that the steering committee, site leadership (if applicable), 
and executive leadership understand the project scope and requirements and that the steering committee is 
ready to respond as the primary escalation channel early in the project
Develop project charter
• At this stage, the project charter may be a simplified document summarizing the project’s key requirements 
and scope that can be further defined as the project progresses
Document agreements 
and contracts 
• Ensure a documented plan is in place that specifies who is responsible and accountable for specific activities 
to avoid assumptions, missed requirements, or misalignment so that the next stage (Planning) can start 
efficiently
• Describe strategies in the charter that represent the full scope of the project and avoid documenting only 
short-term needs
• Some aspects of the charter may be included in contractual agreements for clarity
• Draft an initial regulatory strategy, including the expected approval timeline for the submission
Involve key functions 
early
• Involve key functions and personnel early during the Initiation stage to review the project requirements. This 
can help avoid missed requirements or changes to scope later in the project
• Leverage expertise and lessons learned, if possible, from personnel with experience transferring products and 
with experience in the existing process
Ensure adequate talent, 
expertise, and focus on 
TT team
• Ensure the TT Team includes all key functions and expertise pertinent to the project and that team members 
have appropriate experience with transferring a product
• Ensure personnel on the TT Team are either dedicated to the project or are held strictly accountable for their 
deliverables to prevent inattention to key details at critical times 
• Develop a backup plan to mitigate the potential loss of key personnel
Utilize risk 
management
• Use risk management tools to assess and document risks related to the process requirements, facility selection 
(e.g., gap assessment with process requirements), safety assessment, and quality requirements
• Document formally the assessment of project and company requirements for the product being transferred, 
record any risks identified, standardize the risk classification of findings, and describe mitigation strategies or 
actions required. Include formal alignment of the steering committee and/or TT Team
Identify and plan for 
long-lead items
• Consider use of process analytical technology (PAT) as a component of the process control strategy and 
implement PAT as early in development as possible for new products
• Identify long-lead equipment
• Ensure critical path workstreams have a clear plan for the start and completion of activities 
• Identify and develop a plan for filling key project leadership positions to ensure personnel are in place and 
trained in time
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 27 ---
22
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Develop checklists 
• Prepare a checklist to assist in leveraging lessons learned from previous TTs 
• Use checklists for (1) requirements pertaining to capability, equipment, material, quality, safety, or personnel, 
and (2) documentation of procedural, physical, automation, and process requirements 
• A checklist may define documents or information to collect from facilities, teams, or third parties
• Another checklist may define included documents to share across SU and RU to compare needs as the TT 
project launches
Arrange adequate 
funding
• Ensure that the project budget takes into account contingencies, such as changes to the scope of the project 
or the addition of any equipment, activity, resource, or requirement that may have been missed in planning. 
Revisit the budget assumptions regularly.
Consider other 
concurrent and 
near-future projects in 
planning
• Check how other projects might impact the project timeline and plan accordingly, paying special attention to 
shared work centers (e.g., Analytical, Regulatory)
• Forecast resource capacity requirements and confirm timeline expectations as early as possible, covering the 
full scope of the project
• Verify internal and external (as applicable) commitment to the project and identify any risks with resources 
and timing
• Ensure that all involved parties are transparent in their needs for the key milestones, drivers, and ability to deliver
5.2	
Planning Stage
The Planning stage begins after the site selection decision has been made and the initial charter has been 
approved; it is the start of the knowledge transfer from the SU. At this point, the TT PM is assigned, 
and the core TT Team at the RU is resourced. The members of the TT Team at the SU or MAH may or 
may not be the same personnel who performed the initial assessments in the Initiation stage. 
Building on the risk assessments developed in the Initiation stage, the TT Team collaborates with the 
SU and/or MAH to perform detailed risk assessments to define all CMC and operational readiness 
requirements for the TT. This risk assessment becomes a living document that results in a revised and 
more detailed version of the project plan, which covers project timing, capital required, resource needs, 
and critical path items. Other key outputs of the Planning stage are the final TT charter and a TT 
agreement between the SU, RU, and MAH (see Section 5.2.2). Once the Planning stage activities 
and deliverables have been completed, the TT team should hold a stage gate meeting with the steering 
committee to obtain agreement for moving to the Knowledge Transfer stage. At this stage gate, the 
steering committee will approve the final charter and the project plan, which signals acceptance of the 
risks defined for the TT. Table 5.2-1, excerpted from the Reference Guide (Figure 5.0-1), shows the 
activities and deliverables for the Planning stage.
5.2.1	 Business
The MAH Business function coordinates with the Sourcing/Supply Chain function to execute supply 
agreements (e.g., Master Service Agreement) with the RU and external laboratories. Critical to the 
outcome of the TT, supply agreements should be reviewed by the TT PM to ensure they contain the 
same boundaries and assumptions as the TT charter, align with the RU roles and responsibilities in the 
TT agreement, and support the requirements of the quality agreement. Many RUs ask that the supply 
agreements guarantee a fixed number of batches for both the initial qualification and the annual com-
mercial production, as this allows for better resource planning.
Jointly, the Business functions and steering committee provide oversight of the project by approving 
resource and capital needs. A resource plan should be developed to understand staffing requirements 
both for the TT and for the long-term commercial needs, based on the following key inputs:
• 
Personnel required and organization of shifts to be used
• 
New equipment to be qualified and degree of automated vs. manual operational requirements 
• 
Type of expertise needed
• 
Complexity of the technical requirements, including risk mitigation requirements
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 28 ---
23
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Table 5.2-1		
Activities and Deliverables for the Planning Stage
STAGE
Business
TT PM
Process
Analytical
Engineering
Manufacturing
Regulatory
Quality
Sourcing/Supply Chain
Planning
Activities
Approve Resource 
Needs
Define Resource 
Requirements
Detailed Process Risk 
Assessment
Detailed Analytical 
Risk Assessment
Define RU 
Requirements
Operational 
Requirements Analysis
Obtain Current 
Dossiers
Perform RU Quality 
Audit
Production Planning
Approve Capital Plan
Define Critical Path 
Items
Align QTPP and 
Product Specification 
with RU
Define Analytical 
Equipment 
Requirements
Develop Capital Plan
Perform EHS 
Assessment
Interact with RU 
Regulatory Affairs 
Function
Define SU/
RU/Marketing 
Authorization Holder 
(MAH) Quality 
Management System 
(QMS) Responsibilities
Determine Product 
Logistics
Interact With 
Customers
Develop Detailed 
Project Plan
Define Material 
Handling 
Requirements
Determine External 
Lab Needs
Write Capital 
Appropriation 
Request (CAR)
Initiate Permits
Interact with Health 
Authorities if 
Necessary
Define 
Documentation 
Requirements
Source Materials/
Disposables/ 
Packaging/
Consumables
Sponsoring Steering 
Committee
Create 
Communication Plan
Define Commercial 
Process at RU
Define Sampling 
Plan
Write Change 
Controls
Define Comparability 
Requirements
Order Long-Lead 
Materials
Implement 
Documentation 
Sharing
Define Bill of 
Materials
Develop Stability 
Plan
Hold Steering 
Committee Meetings
Deliverables
RU Supply 
Agreement
Final TT Charter
TT Change Control
Analytical Risk 
Assessment Report
Capital Project Plan
Operational 
Requirements Report
Current Product 
Filings and Annual 
Product Reports
RU Audit Report
Product Supply Chain 
Strategy
External Lab Supply 
Agreement
Project Plan 
Process Risk 
Assessment Report
Sampling Plan
Equipment/Facility 
Change Controls
EHS Assessment 
Report
Current Compendial 
Specifications
Quality Agreements SU/
RU/MAH/External Labs
Plant Schedule 
Availability
Resource Plan
TT Agreement 
between SU/RU
Commercial Process 
Established
CAR Approval
Comparability 
Protocol
TT QMS
Long Lead Material 
Plan
Stage Gate Approval
Critical Paths 
Identfied
Initial Bill of 
Materials
Change Controls
Quality Improvement 
Plan
RACI
Comparability Plan
Stability Plan
Communication Plan
Final TT Team Formed
Kickoff Event
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 29 ---
24
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Section 8.3 provides a case study of the importance of incorporating the learnings from previous proj-
ects into the resource plan during the Planning stage. 
The Business function should provide input on the regulatory strategy, including volume require-
ments, required timing for market release, and the salability of the validation batches. 
5.2.2	 Technology Transfer Project Manager
Once the Business function determines that a TT will take place and has reached agreement with 
the RU, the TT PM is assigned. The TT PM, provides overall leadership and accountability for the 
remainder of the project. Therefore, the same qualities are important: knowledge across all relevant 
functional areas, ability to communicate across organizational levels, and skill in facilitation, negotia-
tion, decision-making, and motivation. Section 4.1 discusses the selection and role of the TT PM.
The TT PM should put in place a team representing the relevant cross-functional areas to begin plan-
ning and assessing the requirements for knowledge transfer. This team is established in collaboration 
with each site’s functional managers. The case study in Section 8.2 discusses the importance of estab-
lishing a cross-functional project team. 
The TT PM works with the SU and RU to define the roles and responsibilities for all knowledge trans-
fer requirements. If both the SU and RU are external, then the MAH should be included as a third 
party. A responsibility assignment matrix denoting those to be responsible, accountable, consulted, 
and informed (RACI) can prove valuable in documenting key responsibilities to ensure alignment and 
clarity throughout the project. Once negotiated, these roles and responsibilities should be documented 
in a TT agreement, or in a shared procedure for internal-internal TTs, and personnel can be assigned. 
The TT agreement can aid significantly in defining resource needs and in facilitating communication. 
The TT PM plays the lead role during the Planning stage by coordinating the final risk assessments 
and developing the project plan. Using the detailed risk assessments, the TT PM will work with the 
TT Team to ensure that the project plan includes the schedule, critical path activities, and resource 
requirements. The TT PM also will ensure that the project requirements and timeline meet the needs 
of the business and stakeholders, taking into account the capabilities of the functions and systems sup-
porting the project. The project plan typically covers:
• 
Capital procurement, installation, and qualification timing
• 
Procurement and release of all materials and consumables
• 
Process development and/or demonstration
• 
Analytical method validations, transfers, or qualifications
• 
Operational readiness requirements
• 
Plant-scale process validation
• 
Key milestones and critical path activities
Once the project plan has been developed, the TT charter can be expanded to include the communica-
tion plan. A communication plan and a system for sharing documents between the parties is necessary 
to facilitate knowledge transfer. The communication plan should define modes of escalation to ensure 
the TT Team can resolve any roadblocks that may occur. 
At this time, the TT PM should hold a kick-off meeting with the final cross-functional TT team mem-
bers (including both the SU and RU) and project sponsor. 
5.2.3	 Process
During the Planning stage, the Process function begins to specify the key elements of the commercial 
manufacturing process for the TT, including batch scale, unit operations needed, cycle time, and material 
handling requirements, which will result in an initial bill of materials. These knowledge elements are used 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 30 ---
25
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
by the Sourcing/Supply Chain function for production planning and plant logistics and by the Engineer-
ing function to design and order the required capital. The Process function aligns QTPP and/or specifica-
tions with the RU. Often, Process will develop a comparability plan to identify the information necessary 
to show that the product made at the RU is comparable to that of the SU. The Process function also 
performs a more detailed risk assessment to define the changes that will be required at the RU based on its 
equipment, scale, and capabilities. The risk assessment should include evaluation of the properties and re-
quirements of the product being transferred. This risk assessment not only defines the knowledge transfer 
requirements from the SU, but also is used by Engineering to estimate the capital requirements. If the TT 
involves a new product or technology, the process needs to be designed such that it will run reproducibly 
at the RU to consistently meet the requirements of the QTPP and/or specifications. 
The Process function, working with Quality and Regulatory, will define strategies for both process and 
cleaning validation at the Planning stage and ensure that the SU and RU align their change control 
processes. The Process function will issue the change request for the TT in the change management 
system as well. 
5.2.4	 Analytical
The Analytical function will perform a more detailed risk assessment to determine final analytical equip-
ment requirements that will help determine analytical testing sites. Testing sites may be located at the 
SU, RU, MAH, or an external laboratory. The analytical risk assessment needs to include raw materials, 
packaging, in-process controls, and product, stability, and cleaning test requirements, specifically noting 
which methods are compendial. Adequate quantities of source materials, reference standards, and criti-
cal analytical reagents must be estimated and made available for analytical method validation, transfer, 
and future manufacturing. As the amount of sample source material can impact yield from validation 
batches, Analytical will work with the Process and Regulatory functions to develop an initial sampling 
plan that covers the number of samples taken, amount of sample required, tests performed, sample loca-
tion, and whether the sample should be assessed only during process validation. This initial assessment 
of the sampling plan allows for planning of adequate analytical resources during qualification.
5.2.5	 Engineering
Working closely with the Process function, Engineering will develop the capital requirements for the 
chosen RU, which are then documented in a capital appropriation request (CAR). Even before the TT 
user requirements specifications (URS) or CAR are complete, it may be necessary to decide to order 
long-lead equipment to meet TT timing requirements. Engineering also should be involved in change 
control for facility retrofits as well as laboratory modifications. 
If the RU is a CMO or CDMO, the responsibilities of the Engineering function may reside at the 
contract site with strong oversight from the TT Team. The TT PM works closely with Engineering to 
coordinate the timing for equipment and facility installation, qualification, and training to align with 
the overall project plan.
5.2.6	 Manufacturing
In the Planning stage, Manufacturing coordinates with the TT PM to ensure that the project timeline consid-
ers all necessary steps for full operational readiness of the RU site. Operational requirements of the technology 
being transferred should be considered relative to the staff capabilities at the RU, permit requirements, and 
operational training that will be needed for the new process and modified facility. Manufacturing also will 
work with the Engineering and Process units on plant design to define URS and CAR requirements.
EHS considerations must be assessed against the RU’s procedures and experience so necessary permits 
can be prepared. The EHS assessment includes protective equipment, product biosafety, aseptic practices, 
hazardous materials, and potential vent and waste streams. A report on the operational requirements and 
an EHS assessment report will focus attention on the areas that need to be addressed in the project plan. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
