--- PAGE 33 ---
28
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Topic 
Details
Engage vendors 
early 
• Engage all vendors (e.g., equipment, excipients) early to identify tentative lead times and begin drafting a project 
timeline
• Ensure that the RU understands the quality requirements for raw materials and drug substance to ensure that 
selected vendors will meet the quality requirements outlined in the marketing authorization
• Stay in contact with vendors throughout the process, as it may take months to receive the project award and 
approval, delaying placement of orders 
• Identify backup suppliers as alternative sources
Engage 
Regulatory 
function early
• Further define the regulatory strategy with project assumptions and constraints and with regulatory requirements
• Discuss the regulatory strategy with the TT Team to ensure alignment on assumptions and the basis for the strategy 
• Engage the TT Team to define variations that might cause a deviation to the regulatory strategy or might reduce complexity 
• Consider the need to proactively engage a regulatory agency if required to support the strategy and confirm needs. Meetings 
may be advisable if a unique situation exists or if the TT could create a situation that may impact supply (e.g., drug shortage)
Create timeline 
that ensures 
sufficient time 
for drafting 
and review of 
regulatory filing
• Ensure the project timeline includes key milestones related to drafting, review, and submission of filing and allows 
for regulatory agency approval 
• Ensure the regulatory filing strategy is realistic so the project timeline is accurate, and the Business function can plan 
• Develop a stability plan, making sure to include any areas where the product will be marketed 
• Coordinate activities and documents required for submission to avoid extensive loss of finished product due to 
shelf-life restrictions while awaiting submission approval 
• When developing the timeline, anticipate that additional questions may need to be addressed after initial 
submission, and that SMEs may need to be involved in developing responses 
Documentation 
quality
• Understand that quality documentation is critical to ensure that the regulatory filing will be approved within the 
expected timeline, supporting support product launch, demand requirements, and business needs
• Have Regulatory review during drafting any documents that are necessary for the regulatory filing
• Consider conducting a risk review of documents that may be reviewed during an inspection that could impact the filing
Maintain 
communications
• Ensure that changes are communicated throughout the TT Team to allow all functions to adjust and adapt in a 
timely manner
Understand how 
small changes 
can impact 
the regulatory 
strategy
• Minimize changes that are not necessary to keep the regulatory strategy straightforward. Additional changes will 
require more bridges to be built to justify changes
• Ensure that all changes during a commercial-commercial TT are vetted through Regulatory, as the cumulative effect 
of changes could result in a need for further regulatory action that may cause additional work and delays
• Ask the MAH Regulatory function to ensure that regulatory documentation to be used for knowledge transfer 
reflects the current process, test methods, and specifications 
Forecast 12-18 
months for 
project and/
or commercial 
needs
• Forecast supply needs, including needs for both the TT and initial post-transfer manufacturing, as far in advance as 
possible (in the range of 12-18 months) 
• Ensure that the RU functions capture and understand the needs relating to timeline, lab testing, labor, and 
document approval to ensure that personnel can plan ahead and execute on time 
• Plan early for the project’s long-term/commercial needs to avoid capacity restriction risks later
Plan appropriate 
engineering 
work during TT
• Exercise care when leveraging from similar processes
• Plan for multiple batches to verify scale-up
• Leverage expertise early (both in product and process and on equipment) to assess requirements and anticipated 
timelines
• Transfer may require significant development work. Incorporate principles of quality by design and stages 1-3 of the 
process validation lifecycle to fully understand the process
Start reviewing 
equipment 
needs early
• Ensure equipment at the RU is equivalent to equipment at the SU, or that comparability is demonstrated
• Ensure URS are well defined so that pricing is accurate, CAR approvals can follow quickly, and equipment 
requirements are understood upon award
• Ensure that lead times from the vendor(s) are understood
(Table 5.2.10-1 Continued)
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 34 ---
29
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
5.3	
Knowledge Transfer Stage 
The Knowledge Transfer (KT) stage significantly overlaps with the prior Planning stage and the fol-
lowing Readiness stage. During Planning, key pieces of the KT are needed to finalize the TT charter 
and perform risk assessments. KT often is still in progress while key activities in the Readiness stage 
are being developed. Throughout the TT, and especially in the KT stage, any events or changes that 
occur at the SU that impact the product being transferred require immediate communication to the 
TT PM. KT can be a highly iterative and challenging process. At the KT stage, all cross-functional 
roles involved in performing the TT are fully engaged.
The TT agreement, quality agreement, TT charter, and project plan that were completed in the prior 
stage allow the SU and RU to execute the full transfer of information, systems, data, technical require-
ments, and practical experience necessary to deliver the CMC and operational requirements to the 
RU. The TT Team members will work very closely during the KT stage, employing the communica-
tion plan and document-sharing platform developed during the Planning stage. 
KT extends beyond the direct TT team members. All supporting personnel across the SU and RU 
need to understand the TT requirements, product and regulatory strategies, and success factors as 
defined in the TT charter so workloads can be prioritized across the organization and timelines will be 
met. In addition, supporting personnel across the SU and RU may hold key information and expertise 
based on experience with the intended equipment, a similar process, or a previous project. This ad-
ditional expertise can assist in KT.
During the KT stage, a proactive knowledge management (KM) approach can improve KT, create ef-
ficiencies between the SU and RU, and facilitate more effective transfer of both explicit (documented) 
and tacit information held by personnel. The transfer of tacit information may offer the greatest op-
portunities for improvement, as this type of information often may not be uncovered unless a failure 
result leads to its discovery. A robust KM approach that includes review of TT performance also can 
provide more detail that can be used to refine the control strategy after the TT is complete and to 
improve future transfers. Every opportunity should be taken to leverage KM to preserve, transfer, and 
increase knowledge about the product and process (2).
The TT package developed in the KT stage will include all the details needed to reproducibly manu-
facture, test, and release the product being transferred. During the stage gate at the end of the KT 
stage, the steering committee ensures that the TT package is complete and assesses the risk factors, 
with mitigation strategies, that remain after the KT.
Table 5.3-1, excerpted from the Reference Guide (Figure 5.0-1), shows the activities and deliverables 
for the KT stage.
5.3.1	 Business
With the required contracts and nondisclosure agreements in place, the Business function focuses 
on refining and executing the resource plan developed in the Planning stage. The Business function 
monitors progress of the interactions between the SU and RU and removes any contractual roadblocks 
that may limit KT activities. The case study in Section 8.10 discusses best practices and the benefits 
of proactively driving KT between the SU and RU to help ensure a right-first-time project execution 
mindset. 
5.3.2	 Technology Transfer Project Manager
Using the TT agreement developed during the Planning stage, the TT PM, with the TT Team, facili-
tates KT across key functions in the SU and RU (and third parties, as applicable) to ensure timely and 
complete knowledge-sharing. The KT is typically documented by the SU in a TT package containing 
all the information needed to manufacture the product robustly. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 35 ---
30
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Table 5.3-1		
Activities and Deliverables for Knowledge Transfer Stage
STAGE
Business
TT PM
Process
Analytical
Engineering
Manufacturing
Regulatory
Quality
Sourcing/Supply Chain
Knowledge Transfer
Activities
Removes Roadblocks
Communicate with 
SU
Define Critical 
Process Parameters
Evaluate Material 
and Product Method 
Requirements
Identify Plant/
Analytical Equipment 
Requirements
Assess SU Master 
Batch Record
Obtain SU Product 
Label
Perform Quality Risk 
Assessment
Materials/Disposables/ 
Packaging Supply 
Agreements
Executes Resource 
Plan
Obtain Process 
Knowledge from SU
Determine In-Process 
Tests
Evaluate In-Process 
Test Methods
Identify Disposables
Define Personal 
Protective Equipment 
(PPE) Requirements
Refine Regulatory 
Strategy
Perform Material 
Supplier 
Qualifications
Obtain Material 
Specifications
Configure Material 
Requirements 
Planning/Enterprise 
Resource Planning 
Systems for New 
Product Introduction
Facilitate Writing of 
RU  Specifications
Finalize Process at RU
Evaluate Cleaning 
Methods
Write Capital 
Validation Master 
Plan
Define Operations 
Documentation
Provide Regulatory 
Support
Develop Training 
Curricula
Source Reference 
Stds
Define Cleaning 
Procedure and Limits
Evaluate Microbial 
Methods
Design/Order Capital 
Items
Review Stability Plan
Establish Expiry/
Retest Date
Develop Bill of 
Materials
Assess Rework/
Reprocess
Order and Qualify 
Reference Standards
Design Environmental 
Disposal
Write Validation 
Master Plans (VMPs)
Assess Compendial 
Methods
Write Change 
Controls
Define Process 
Monitoring 
Requirements
Define Harmonized 
Methods
Demonstrate Process
Deliverables
Stage Gate Approval
SU Technical Package
RU Technical Package
Reference Standards
User Requirements 
Specification (URS)
PPE Requirements
Updated Regulatory 
Strategy
Quality Risk 
Management (QRM) 
Report
SU Material/Packaging/ 
Consumables 
Specifications
Change Orders
RU Material 
Specifications
Mass Balance
Analytical Method 
Validation Plan
Equipment Validation 
Master Plan
Health Authority 
Interaction
Supplier Qualification 
Reports
Bill of Materials
RU Product 
Specification
Waste 
Characterization
Engineering 
Drawings
Stability Plan
Compliance Training
Qualified Supplier 
List
Process VMP
Change Controls
Cleaning VMP
Lab Demonstration 
Runs
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 36 ---
31
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
The TT PM should be sure to include the sharing of practical experience, or “know-how,” which 
may or may not be documented. To capture tacit knowledge, the TT PM should coordinate on-site 
interactions between SU and RU personnel, allowing the SU to demonstrate activities specific to the 
product or process being transferred. This knowledge also should be captured in the KM system being 
used for the product. 
KT is key to a successful handover from the project team. During KT, the TT team should both lever-
age learnings from previous projects and capture lessons that are learned as part of the current TT. The 
case study in Section 8.5 illustrates the importance of KT and of leveraging past learnings. 
The TT PM establishes project controls, including lifecycle document management, and now actively 
manages the project scope, timing, budget, and risk factors according to the TT charter requirements. 
Regular TT Team meetings are used not only for KT but also for timely execution of the deliverables, iden-
tification of roadblocks, and tracking of additional action items that may be specific to the ongoing TT.
5.3.3	 Process
If the product is already established commercially at the SU, the SU shares process performance qualifi-
cation (PPQ) information for the process with the RU Process function. This information will include 
CPPs and their impact on CQAs, in-process tests, and proven acceptable ranges for the manufacturing 
process. The SU should share learnings from the implementation of commercial or pilot-scale manufac-
turing processes, along with process improvements that have been made. To ensure full understanding 
of the process history, lessons learned, challenges, and early development of the process, the SU and/or 
MAH also should share with the RU historical performance and development data wherever possible. 
For new products, the RU will work with the SU to define the PPQ requirements and ensure their 
feasibility at the RU facility. These PPQ requirements will include a list of CPPs that are derived from 
quality risk assessments and laboratory and or pilot-scale data. For more information on parameter 
classification and the quality risk assessment process, please see PDA Technical Report No. 60: Process 
Validation, A Lifecycle Approach (5). Using the PPQ requirements, the Process function will determine 
the data to be collected and will define how this information will be captured to ensure data integrity.
In this stage, the Process function writes the process and cleaning validation master plans (VMP) as 
key deliverables, using the strategies developed during the Planning stage and the RU’s standard oper-
ating procedures (SOPs). The SU shares with the RU all information required for cleaning validation, 
including solubility, toxicology category (with data, if possible), and safety data sheets, so that the 
cleaning VMP can document the cleaning limits.
The process VMP outlines the PPQ requirements covering: 
• 
Process description, including control strategy and CPPs 
• 
Batch size and expected yield
• 
Raw material qualification plan
• 
Number of PPQ production runs, detailing any matrix or bracketing assumptions
• 
Hold-time strategy
• 
Rework or reprocess steps allowed
• 
Stability strategy 
• 
Success criteria
Using the risk assessment from the Planning stage, the Process function performs activities needed to 
define the control strategy, including CPPs that impact CQAs and their allowed ranges, in-process 
testing, and control systems. For drug products, these activities may include, for example, mixing, 
hold time, filter integrity, container closure, and transport or shipping studies. When possible, the RU 
should demonstrate the process in the laboratory to ensure full understanding of the knowledge being 
transferred from the SU.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 37 ---
32
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
5.3.4	 Analytical
In the KT stage, the Analytical function at the RU develops the full method-implementation strat-
egy, known as a validation plan, using the sampling plan, actual non-compendial methods used at 
the SU, and compendial methods for the markets included in the business and regulatory strategies. 
The analytical validation plan must align with the QTPP and/or specification requirements provided 
by the SU or documented in the marketing authorization file. When a marketed product is being 
transferred to a different site, validation may be performed through the analytical method transfer 
plan. The Analytical function determines the requirements for reference standards to allow for the 
ordering of reference standards for method qualification and testing. During the KT stage, potential 
opportunities for harmonization of analytical methods are identified and an implementation plan for 
use of these methods is discussed with the Regulatory function. The Analytical function documents 
the agreed-upon approach to implementation of all analytical TT requirements, including the use of 
any contract testing sites.
5.3.5	 Engineering
The Engineering function performs a detailed facility-fit assessment in the KT stage. In doing so, the 
Engineering function uses the knowledge being transferred from the SU to compare the existing (for 
approved product) or proposed manufacturing process with the RU’s capabilities. Process steps can be 
modified as part of the final facility fit to facilitate execution of the manufacturing process at the RU. 
However, any process modification should be proven to work prior to the Readiness stage. Engineering 
also should design and implement an appropriate waste management system covering all steps from 
waste identification to disposal. The Engineering function writes the change controls for the facility, 
often as part of the overall TT change control.
Working closely with the Process, Analytical, Manufacturing, and Quality functions, Engineering 
will define all facility, equipment, automation, and laboratory requirements and document these in 
the URS. Single-use components (sometimes known as disposables) also should be part of the URS 
development. A layout should be used to confirm single-use component design and to ensure all quali-
fication requirements (i.e., extractables/leachables) are identified. The key aspects of the equipment 
involved in the TT, defined in the URS, are used in designing and ordering resources. In the KT stage, 
vendors are identified, engineering drawings are completed, and all required capital equipment is or-
dered. The timeline for Engineering function activities and deliverables can be highly influenced by 
how the URS is defined, which vendors are selected, whether on-site vendor support is used, and how 
well standard vendor activities can be leveraged for the capital qualification plan. For instance, some 
vendors offer validation packages or will participate in equipment qualification to ensure a smooth 
process. Use of the factory acceptance test (FAT) or site acceptance test (SAT) as part of the equipment 
qualification may also reduce effort and documentation requirements during the Readiness phase. 
Engineering works with the Quality and Regulatory functions to develop a capital VMP that describes 
the strategy for qualification or requalification of the facility. The capital VMP also may include the 
minimum requirements for developmental purposes in order to execute an engineering batch.
5.3.6	 Manufacturing
The RU Manufacturing function works with the Engineering and Process functions to ensure that 
the RU plant has adequate capability to complete the TT. Manufacturing will review the SU’s master 
batch record, if applicable, and define the operational documentation requirements for the TT (e.g., 
batch records, SOPs, work instructions, training). Throughout the KT stage, all cross-functional areas 
should be interacting with Manufacturing to ensure plant design and training result in a process that 
can be operated in a reproducible manner to make a product of consistent quality. SU personnel or 
experts should meet with RU personnel to convey practical experience in making and/or developing 
the product, including lessons learned from process deviations, if applicable.
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 38 ---
33
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
In the KT stage, Manufacturing should define personal protective equipment requirements to protect 
both operator and product so that the Sourcing/Supply Chain function can order the needed equipment. 
5.3.7	 Regulatory
During the KT stage, the Regulatory function supports the RU’s ability to receive the process, re-
fines the regulatory strategy, aligns with validation approaches, continues planning activities, and 
focuses on building key relationships. KT from the SU or MAH Regulatory unit should include 
relevant health authority interactions relating to the regulatory process, historical audits, and licen-
sure. Regulatory should communicate project-specific risks to the TT Team to ensure alignment and 
understanding. 
The regulatory strategy developed during the Initiation and Planning stages should be further devel-
oped during the KT stage, considering the finalized stability plan. Regulatory also should consider the 
need for any changes to the primary and secondary labeling. 
The revised regulatory strategy also should address the timing and content of planned interactions 
with regulatory authorities, including meetings, scientific advice, protocols, and/or correspondence. 
Important considerations for the regulatory strategy include definition of the matrixing approaches 
for qualification and validation as well as any approach to be taken to prove comparability. The 
MAH may consider submitting correspondence or requesting a meeting with the regulatory author-
ity if the acceptability of the comparability strategy is uncertain. The MAH also should consider 
submitting a post-approval change management protocol to gain concurrence on the approach be-
ing used for this TT or to potentially reduce the reporting category for future submissions addressed 
in the protocol. 
5.3.8	 Quality
At the KT stage, the RU Quality function performs a quality risk assessment to evaluate the ability of 
the RU’s quality systems to make a safe and efficacious product. In conducting this risk assessment, 
the Quality function will use the knowledge and information that has been shared by the SU. The 
quality risk assessment will rely on findings from audits, outcomes from the quality improvement plan 
(if applicable), SU quality metrics, and market actions. For a product already being manufactured un-
der a marketing authorization, the quality risk assessment also can examine deviations and corrective 
actions at the SU as well as process trends, product complaint history, and annual product reports as 
available. The Quality function should perform compliance training and address any gaps identified 
by the quality risk assessment.
Quality also finalizes the stability plan based on the requirements in the QTPP and/or specifications 
and ensures its alignment with the regulatory strategy for the TT.
The RU Quality function works with the Sourcing/Supply Chain function to identify, schedule, and 
perform supplier qualification audits for all materials being sourced for the TT. These functions will 
document the findings and recommendations in a supplier qualification report. They also will define 
expiry/retest dating requirements for both materials and product.
Quality also plays a key role in assessing the compliance of the analytical validation plan, change con-
trols, project plan, and process, cleaning, and capital VMPs.
5.3.9	 Sourcing/Supply Chain 
The RU Sourcing/Supply Chain function, with the Process function, defines the RU bill of materi-
als using the material requirements that are shared during knowledge transfer. Key considerations 
include the SU bill of materials, storage requirements, shipping regulations, regulatory classification, 
and specifications. Lead time for material delivery is often a critical path item for the project plan. The 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 39 ---
34
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
RU should consider obtaining samples of materials from suppliers for testing and performing either 
laboratory runs or a future engineering batch. Storage and handling requirements may also drive capi-
tal investment, so the capacity plan developed in the Initiation stage should be reevaluated. 
Capacity-planning also impacts the recruitment and training of personnel required to perform the TT. 
The supply chain map lays out the projected flows from materials-in to product-out, including the 
testing needed to support production. Therefore, it serves as a key input for resource-planning in the 
Operations and Quality Affairs/Quality Control units, and other critical functions. 
5.3.10	 Best Practices and Additional Suggestions
Table 5.3.10-1 describes best practices and presents some additional ideas for consideration in the KT stage.
5.4	
Readiness Stage
In the Readiness stage, the TT Team has all documentation, equipment, and analytical methods in place, 
and the RU site is prepared to safely perform process qualification in a compliant manner. Preliminary 
KT has occurred, so the RU can finalize the control strategy, qualify the analytical methods, and complete 
the facility modifications. Activities in this stage often are performed in parallel with the KT stage, which 
requires an iterative process in document development and approval. Because the risk assessment is a liv-
ing document, risk identification and risk mitigation strategies should be constantly reviewed throughout 
the TT project. A practical plant capability assessment should be conducted prior to PPQ. During this 
assessment, preliminary water or engineering runs may be performed as part of the overall project plan. 
As the name implies, Readiness sets the stage for a successful PPQ at the RU. In the stage gate for 
Readiness, the steering committee determines whether all requirements are in place for batch execu-
tion and gives approval to proceed with the engineering batch. The case study in Section 8.11 high-
lights the importance of executing a stage gate meeting to ensure that all Readiness requirements have 
been met prior to proceeding to the Execution stage. 
Table 5.4-1, excerpted from the Reference Guide (Figure 5.0-1), shows the activities and deliverables 
for the Readiness stage.
5.4.1	 Business
At this point of the TT, the RU Business function should be focused on completing all resourcing 
requirements so personnel can be trained in preparation for PPQ. The Business function also actively 
monitors the TT Team’s ability to achieve the business objectives defined in the TT charter, including 
budget, launch date, and projected volume. 
As the MAH Business function actively engages customers for the product being transferred, it must 
effectively communicate any changes to the business strategy when they occur. This allows the TT PM 
to assess the impact of the changes to the overall project assumptions and risk.
5.4.2	 Technology Transfer Project Manager
During the Readiness stage, the TT PM monitors all workstreams and team members executing the 
requirements for plant readiness documented in the project plan. With many critical activities com-
ing together, in order to proceed to the next stage the TT PM’s thorough execution and coordination 
of the communication plan is critical in monitoring progress, challenges, and obstacles. The TT PM 
must continually evaluate the impact of changes on the TT charter, facilitate decision-making, and 
actively manage risk. 
The TT PM also documents the PPQ requirements governing the TT in a TT protocol, summarizing 
the process and cleaning VMPs, the analytical validation plan, and the stability and sampling plans. If 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 40 ---
35
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Table 5.3.10-1	 Best Practices and Additional Suggestions for the Knowledge Transfer Stage
Topic 
Details
Prepare package of 
materials for the RU site 
prior to KT kick-off 
• Ensure a clear, well organized TT package is accessible to the RU team. Ensure the Regulatory function 
confirms the version of key documents to be provided
• Ensure the RU has access to key documents and learnings from the SU to avoid reinventing existing 
documents or repeating past mistakes
• Ensure data is in a transferable format and does not require manual reentry
Establish a 
communication plan for 
effective collaboration
• Avoid sending lengthy or complex documents or a very large number of documents to the RU 
• Arrange for the SU/MAH to provide training sessions to orient the RU and personnel to explain documents 
and to share expertise during the review process
Leverage expertise from 
the existing process and/
or previous projects
• Review and/or incorporate knowledge from similar projects or processes to avoid additional work, 
repeating issues, etc.
• Ensure that the SU provides key personnel (e.g., scientists, engineers, analytical personnel, production 
operators) to support and/or train the RU staff
• Encourage face-to-face interaction and site visits to support governance and to facilitate engagement 
between RU and SU SMEs
• Obtain samples of product for development
• Capture tacit knowledge
• Confirm sourcing of reference standards
Provide the RU with 
historical data and 
performance of product 
manufactured by existing 
processes 
• The SU should provide the RU with historical data not already included in the TT package. For an existing 
commercial process, for instance, this may include several years of commercial data such as release testing, 
CPV reports, annual product reports (APR), deviations, and complaints 
• The RU may leverage such learnings from the SU as process control and operational performance, as well 
as employee training and batch record needs
Perform comparability 
assessment and define 
strategy
• Depending on project scope, the TT Team may perform a comparability assessment and review learnings 
from the SU and MAH to define overall project strategy (i.e., scaling up, creating a new process, or proving 
equivalency)
• Develop a decision tree to consider whether process data is sufficiently equivalent between SU and RU
• Plan for engineering batches or appropriate analyses to demonstrate comparability or equivalence
Use a quality-by-design 
approach
• A quality-by-design approach might be used to fully understand the process design space before starting 
engineering batches. This will depend on the scope of the project (e.g., transferring an existing product 
with commercial history and available development data or scaling up from development) and on the 
business strategy (i.e., whether development data and design space will be made available to the TT Team) 
Leverage risk 
assessment to define KT 
requirements
• Prepare a clear, well-organized plan documenting the process requirements against all site, company, and 
industry requirements, identifying any gaps that will need to be addressed in the next stage
• Use risk assessment throughout the TT project to identify any gaps in process, methods, materials, and people
Formulate an adequate 
process data-monitoring 
plan
• Prepare a plan for how process data will be recorded, by whom, and in what system
• Consider data integrity requirements as well as any requirements for inclusion in a data lake or other 
enterprise repository
• Determine if the RU requires additional software capabilities to match the SU’s
• Ensure appropriate data are collected to support project execution/completion and to meet requirements
• Ensure data monitoring requirements are supported by the RU’s information technology infrastructure 
Plan adequately for 
validation needs or 
leverage existing 
knowledge 
• Leverage learnings, such as those for cleaning validation, and plan for sufficient equipment to allow time 
for in-between cleanings while meeting process-throughput requirements 
• Identify and leverage SMEs with knowledge on existing or similar equipment systems at both the RU and the SU
• Review validation information for existing or similar equipment systems, if available, for lessons learned 
and validation strategies 
• Leverage support from the vendor for new equipment and technology, which may include on-site visits 
during the next stage 
Hire/train RU personnel
• Ensure that needed personnel are hired/trained at RU to avoid errors and repeat work throughout the TT
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 41 ---
36
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
Table 5.4-1		
Activities and Deliverables for the Readiness Stage
STAGE
Business
TT PM
Process
Analytical
Engineering
Manufacturing
Regulatory
Quality
Sourcing/Supply Chain
Readiness
Activities
Completes Resource 
Plan
Write TT Protocol
Develop Control 
Strategy
Write Method 
Validation/ Transfer 
Protocols
Perform Factory 
Acceptance Test 
(FAT)/Site Acceptance 
Test (SAT) 
Write Master Batch 
Records
Review Product 
Labeling Mock-Ups 
Review and Approve 
Documentation
Order Materials
Communicate 
Changes to Business 
Strategy
Remove Roadblocks
Demonstrate Process 
Monitoring
Execute Method 
Validations/Transfers
Install Capital Items
Write Standard 
Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) and Work 
Instructions
Review Change Order 
Notifications
Write Procedure for 
Batch Release
Define Distributors
Establish Customers
Facilitate Decisions
Write Process 
Validation Protocol
Confirm Compendial 
Method Viability
Set Up Control 
System
Perform EHS Risk 
Assessment
Develop Submission 
Tracker
Train Quality 
Assurance Personnel 
on Process
Set Up Inventory 
Control Software 
Requirements
Write Cleaning 
Validation Protocol
Write Stability 
Protocols
Write Capital 
Qualification 
Protocols
Perform Operations 
Training
Identify Necessary 
Permits & Licenses 
Release Materials
Establish Hold Points
Perform Analytical 
Training 
Perform Equipment/
Facilities Qualifications
Perform Pre-Cleaning
Audit Vendors and 
Suppliers
Develop Sampling 
Plan
Write Preventative 
Maintenance Plan
Set Up Warehouse
Develop Preapproval 
Inspection (PAI) 
Readiness Plan
Write Shipping 
Validation Protocols
Set Up Spare Parts 
Requirements
Execute Cleaning 
from Installation
Review Product 
Labeling Mock-Ups 
Perform Process 
Training
Deliverables
Resources Available
TT Protocol
Control Strategy
Validated or Qualified 
Methods
Installed Equipment
Master Batch Record
Final Regulatory 
Strategy
Approved 
Documentation
Supply Chain Map
Current Business 
Strategy
Process Validation 
Protocol
Qualified Reference 
Standards
Capital Qualification 
Protocols
SOPs and Work 
Instructions
Submission Tracker
Equipment Readiness 
Approval
Materials Delivery
Customer Contracts
Cleaning Validation 
Protocol
Stability Protocols
Capital Qualification 
Reports
EHS Risk Register
Internal Product 
Labeling Approval
Deviation/Corrective 
Action/Preventive 
Action (CAPA) Closure
Stage Gate Approval
Hold Points
Trained Personnel
Preventative 
Maintenance Program
Trained Personnel
Qualified Vendors 
and Suppliers
Sampling Plan
Spare Parts List
Clean Equipment
PAI Readiness Plan
Shipping Validation 
Protocol
Internal Product 
Labeling Approval
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 42 ---
37
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
multiple TTs are taking place across the supply chain for drug substance production, drug product man-
ufacture, and packaging and labeling, the project plan may include details of the product value stream. 
5.4.3	 Process
The Process function in the Readiness stage focuses on having all data necessary to finalize the product 
control strategy. The control strategy defines the criteria to ensure a robust and repeatable process for 
making a product that meets the QTPP and includes hold points, in-process sampling, CPPs, process 
ranges, and critical unit operations. Close collaboration with Process, Engineering, Analytical, and 
Manufacturing is needed to ensure deployment of an effective control strategy. 
In accordance with ICH Q10, the classification of process parameters and their ranges typically is de-
termined by the results of laboratory batches and the increasing knowledge gained during the clinical 
phases of development. For commercial products, the RU can leverage a control strategy already in 
use by the SU by using its historical data and practical experience. For new products, process charac-
terization studies at laboratory- or pilot-manufacturing-scale will provide understanding of the design 
space and the edges of failure for product quality and process efficiency. The results of such studies will 
be proven acceptable ranges and normal operating ranges for all unit operations. These lab runs also 
may include evaluation of product compatibility with single-use systems or assessment of equipment 
materials of construction proposed for the manufacturing process. 
Final engineering batches that demonstrate the control strategy should be performed prior to PPQ. To 
complete the Readiness stage, the entire process should be tested to demonstrate operational readiness 
before moving into PPQ. Such readiness includes any final modifications, document or procedural 
readiness, and third-party resources. The TT Team should avoid introducing any new conditions or 
variables to the process once the Readiness stage has closed. 
In the Readiness stage, Process writes the process validation protocols capturing all process parameters, 
the sampling plan, and the analytical testing strategy. The strategy for testing during PPQ typically in-
cludes additional sampling locations and requirements compared to routine commercial production. 
Shipping and cleaning validation protocols also are written and approved during this stage. 
5.4.4	 Analytical
The RU Analytical function executes the validation plan developed during the Planning stage. In Readi-
ness, all method validation and/or transfer protocols covering raw materials, product, packaging, clean-
ing, microbiological testing, and in-process tests are written, approved, and executed. Compendial 
methods should be performed at the RU to verify suitability. The Analytical function also writes the sta-
bility protocols prior to the Qualification stage. New analytical equipment will need to be installed and 
qualified before the method validation activities begin, and analytical personnel will need to be trained. 
In the Readiness stage, the Analytical function also supports the Process function by analyzing re-
quired samples from laboratory- or pilot-scale batches. 
5.4.5	 Engineering
In the Readiness stage, the Engineering function installs and qualifies all facility, utility, process, and 
analytical equipment, including control systems. Engineering works with vendors to facilitate FATs 
at the vendor sites to confirm compliance with specifications derived from the URS, and with subse-
quent SATs upon delivery to the RU. The capital VMP often leverages the FATs and/or SATs to reduce 
the number of qualification protocol deviations or to use FAT/SAT data to meet initial qualification 
requirements. While some developmental studies and testing may begin with equipment or at facilities 
that have not completed qualification, qualification of all new equipment and facility modifications 
must be complete and must pass all requirements prior to proceeding to the Execution stage. 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.


--- PAGE 43 ---
38
© 2022 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
Technical Report No. 65 (Revised 2022)
The Engineering function writes and executes all qualification protocols for facility and utility modi-
fications, as they must be completed prior to performing PPQ batches. In addition, Engineering will 
provide training on specific unit operations and facility and/or utility modifications for maintenance, 
manufacturing, and technical staff. Whenever possible, SU and vendor personnel should participate 
in this training. 
By the end of the Readiness stage and using input from Manufacturing, Engineering incorporates a 
preventive maintenance plan and spare parts requirements into the RU systems.
5.4.6	 Manufacturing
The Manufacturing function writes all SOPs, work instructions, and batch records required for the RU 
to execute the process. These documents are used to train all personnel involved in the TT at the RU 
and are used as part of the EHS risk assessment, which is completed during this stage. 
Manufacturing cleans the plant facilities and equipment following the Engineering qualification ac-
tivities, supports the TT Team during execution of various Readiness activities, and conducts testing 
to determine whether the plant is ready for use. Manufacturing also should finalize documentation 
and training requirements prior to proceeding to the next stage to ensure the Manufacturing function 
is fully ready to support execution of the PPQ. 
5.4.7	 Regulatory 
During the Readiness stage, the Regulatory function begins to obtain and author documents necessary 
for the regulatory submission. Some common activities include:
• 
Assessing any new information that may influence the regulatory filing, including presubmission 
advice, as well as feedback from the health authority on submission of a post-approval change 
management protocol
• 
Assessing change controls
• 
Assessing data from any preliminary engineering runs to provide input to the Process function in 
finalizing the comparability strategy
• 
Finalizing the regulatory strategy based on any new information discovered
• 
Finalizing the scope of work for the authoring and review of the regulatory submission, which 
includes:
–	
Creating and/or finalizing a detailed submission tracker for authoring, reviewing, and ap-
proving submission documents with a matrix denoting who will be responsible, account-
able, consulted, and informed for providing materials, as well as the projected timing 
–	
Confirming the availability of report authors and report and submission reviewers
–	
Ensuring the submission tracker timeline aligns with the availability of the source information
• 
Reviewing validation documents supporting PPQ
• 
Participating in development of PAI readiness plan 
The Regulatory and Quality functions will discuss the expected timing of the completion of validation 
documents and stability data in support of the TT. As an outcome of this stage, the regulatory strat-
egy should be assessed against any findings during the Readiness activities including process control, 
validation strategy, and market strategy. Regulatory will also begin to finalize the product labels during 
the Readiness stage.
5.4.8	 Quality
During the Readiness stage, the Quality function is extensively involved with all cross-functional areas, 
performing compliance reviews and approving documentation involved in preparing for PPQ, includ-
ing quality elements of the control strategy. Quality ensures closure of all deviations, corrective and 
preventive actions (CAPAs), and change controls prior to PPQ. The Quality function should develop 
a procedure for PPQ batch release with input from the SU. Collaborating with the SU on the PPQ 
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
