1. Introduction and Scope
This document is designed to communicate best practices and considerations and to encourage further
dialog with industry, health authorities, and suppliers of technology and materials while taking into acﾂｭ
count the changes and needs of the modern, global, sterile, healthcare product manufacturing industry.
In 2001, PDA issued Technical Report No. 34: Design and Validatoi n ofI solator Systems for the Manufacﾂｭ
turing and Testing ofH ealth Care Products. Since then, much has been learned by industry, and several
important regulatory guidelines, scientific articles, and conference presentations have been published.
In an effort to address the impact of the knowledge gained, this task force was established to focus on
important regulatory and technology updates impacting isolator design, validation, and operations
for aseptic processing. Two primary types of isolators--open and closed-will be addressed in this
Points to Consider (PtC) document (see Glossary). Additional related topics, such as sterility testing
isolators and containment isolators, will be discussed in a separate PtC document in the future.
Isolators provide superior environmental control compared with conventional grade A/B aseptic
manufacturing operations and restricted access barrier systems (RABS), since isolators increase the
sterility assurance of aseptically prepared products.1 This document is intended to support identificaﾂｭ
tion and use of modern technology; it does not represent a standard or regulatory guidance.
Aseptic processing within isolation systems ph ically separates the external environment from the aseptic
ys
processing line, minimizing personnel exposure. By design, isolators are decontaminated while closed,
using validated methods (e.g., controlled application of vapor phase hydrogen peroxide). A traditional
isolator enclosure consists of a shell, viewing window, glove/ sleeve assemblies, supply and exhaust filters,
lights, input and output openings (e.g., equipment door airlocks, rapid transfer ports), and various other
connection points. Filling isolators are designed to allow continuous or semicontinuous pass-through of
materials during operation. A properly designed positive pressure isolator, along with adequate procedures
for its maintenance, monitoring, and control, provides great advantages over traditional aseptic processing
of sterile dosage forms, offering fewer opportunities for microbial contamination during processing.
Throughout the process of creating this document, two guiding and linked principles for improveﾂｭ
ment in sterile health care products emerged that were used to develop these points. Science-and
risk-based approaches should be used to obtain information needed to make decisions related to the
evaluation, design, qualification, operation, monitoring, and interpretation of results from various
studies of sterile product manufacturing processes. Science-and risk-based approaches should be
used to develop and implement control strategies and acceptance criteria designed to ensure the esﾂｭ
tablishment and maintenance of manufacturing conditions that affect the sterility of products. Sterile
drug substance/product manufacturing processes and testing requirements should be based on and
relevant to the risk to product quality and patient safety. Quality risk management and assessment
methods should be developed to identify risk and allow for the continuous improvement of processes
l
and control strategies. It should be recognized that a propery designed and operated isolator will
have a lower contamination risk than a conventional aseptic process design.
Where scientific approaches are similar and agreed upon, global health authority requirements and
guidance should be consistent in technical language and definition. Having harmonized technical
and regulatory language in place, where possible, consistent with approaches presented in other simiﾂｭ
lar guidance's is an important factor. This practice should provide greater clarity of global regulatory
expectations and reduce the risk of misunderstandings and redundant efforts.
This PtC is organized by Topics, followed by relevant Points to Consider. Each Point begins with a
problem statement in the form of a question, representing issues or points needing clarification on
that specific topic. Recommendations from subject matter experts on the PDA task force are presentﾂｭ
ed in response to each question. The rationale for the recommendation follows, as well as references,
Note: This PtC does not specifically address RABS, however, some of the recommendations may
be applicable.
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators ﾂｩ 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

where available. The questions and answers reflect topics suggested by the pharmaceutical industry
and recommendations of the members of the task force on what to consider when designing and
managing isolator systems.
NOTE: In this document, "Qualification" refers to efforts to obtain documented evidence that items,
systems, and processes are suitable for their intended purpose and can reliably meet prescribed criteﾂｭ
ria for acceptability. "Validation'' refers to efforts to obtain documented evidence that the process will
perform effectively and reproducibly, meeting prescribed quality attributes, acceptance criteria and
specifications. These terms are often used interchangeably or differently by different companies, thus
it is important to understand how they are used in this document.
2. Glossary
The following definitions describe how terms are used specifically in this PtC document. These terms
may be defined differently outside of this document.
Biological Indicator (Bl} Corrective Intervention (or nonroutine
Test systems that contain viable microorganisms intervention)
with a defined resistance to a specific decontamﾂｭ An intervention that is performed to corﾂｭ
ination process. They help monitor whether the rect or adjust an aseptic process during its
necessary conditions were met to kill a specified execution. Examples include such activities
number of microorganisms for a given process. as clearing component misfeeds, adjusting
sensors, and replacing equipment parts.
Conventional Aseptic Filling
Aseptic filling that occurs in an environment Inherent Intervention (or routine
where one or more critical work areas are not intervention)
contained in an isolator or RABS. An intervention that is an integral part of
the aseptic process and is required for setup
Critical Work/Processing Area
or routine operation and/or monitoring,
Typically, a Grade NISO 5 area where sterile
for example, aseptic assembl container
y,
product, direct product contact surfaces, or
replenishment, or environmental sampling.
indirect product contact surfaces are or may be
Inherent interventions are required by batch
exposed to the environment.
record, procedure, or work instruction for
the proper conduct of the aseptic process.
Decontamination
An action taken to render the surface of an item,
Isolator
environment, material, or component in the isolaﾂｭ
A contained, decontaminated environment
tor incapable of microbiologically contaminating
meeting Grade NISO 5 conditions used for
sterile product, product contact surfaces, or mateﾂｭ
aseptic process manufacturing that provides an
rials (also referred to as bio-decontamination).
uncompromised, continuous isolation of its
interior for m the external environment. Once
Disinfection
decontaminated by a validated cycle, an isolator
Process by which surface bioburden is reduced
prevents the microbiological contamination of
to a safe level or eliminated. Some disinfection
sterile products and product contact surfaces
agents are effective only against vegetative miﾂｭ
of the interior by enclosures and the supply of
crobes, while others possess additional capability
continuous, controlled overpressure ofHEPAﾂｭ
to effectively kill bacterial and fungal spores (1).
filtered air (I).
Intervention
Closed isolator systems
Activities, manipulations, and tasks performed
Excludes external contamination from the
in Grade NISO 5, or other critical processing
isolator's interior by transfer material via
areas during aseptic operations.
2 ﾂｩ 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators

aseptic connection to auxiliary equipment, of the isolator, in order to maintain the sterility
rather than using openings to the surroundﾂｭ of the transferred materials and the decontamiﾂｭ
ing environment. Closed systems remain nated state of the isolator interior, e.g., Double
(DPTE").
sealed throughout operations. Porte pour Transfer Etanche
Open isolator systems Restricted Access Barrier System {RABS)
Designed to allow for the continuous or An area that includes one or more critical work
semicontinuous ingress and/or egress of areas that is fully or partially enclosed with
materials during operations through one or ridged or semi-rigid walls, which restricts the
more openings. Openings are engineered access of aseptic processing personnel, via fixed
(e.g., using continuous overpressure) to gloves, to the critical work area during aseptic
exclude the entry of external contamination operations.
into the isolator.
Unidirectional Flow
Product Contact Surfaces An airflow moving in a single direction in a
Direct product contact surface robust and uniform manner and at sufficient
Stationary or placed surfaces within the speed to reproducibly sweep particles away from
isolator that directly contact sterile prodﾂｭ the critical processing or testing area (1).
uct, e.g., filling needles, hosing, and valve
Vapor Hydrogen Peroxide, or
interiors.
Vaporized Hydrogen Peroxide {VHP)
Indirect product contact surface Agent for the decontamination of the interior
Stationary or placed surfaces within the isoﾂｭ of the isolator, including all exposed surfaces,
lator that contact items, materials, surfaces, fixed isolator glove exteriors (portion extending
or components that will contact sterile into the isolator), transfer systems, equipment,
product, e.g., stopper bowls and tracks. and certain supplies, materials, and parts, usﾂｭ
ing a defined and validated gaseous mixture or
Rapid Transfer Port {RTP)
micro-atomization of hydrogen peroxide over
Systems that denote interlocking systems for the
a defined and validated period of time, under
transfer of sterilized materials into the isolator
defined and validated conditions.
without the interchange of environment outside
References
1. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic
Processin魹ｽCurrent Good Manufacturing Practice; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Rockﾂｭ
ville, Md., 2004.
2. EudraLex, The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union: Volume 4, EU Guidelines to
Good Manufacturing Practices for Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use-Annex 1, Manufacture
ofS terile Medicinal Products; European Commission: 2008. http://ec.europa.eu/health/files/eudralex/vol-
4/2008_11_25_gmp-an1_en.pdf (accessed November 19, 2014).
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators ﾂｩ 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 3

Topic 1: Isolator Design
4 ﾂｩ 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators

Ql-1: What should the pressure differential be between the isolator interior
and the surrounding area?
Recommendation
When designing an isolator for aseptic processing, the pressure differential between the isolator
inside and the outside environment must be positive while performing critical operations to prevent
the reversal of flow. The pressure differential set point between the isolator internal environment and
the background environment should generally be higher than 10 Pa, with a positive pressure differﾂｭ
ential between the two maintained and monitored at all times during operation.
In sterile facilities that employ conveyers to move components through isolators, material transfer
openings (e.g., mouseholes) are often needed between environments. Mouseholes must be positively
pressured with airflow from the cleaner space. The positive airflow direction must be demonstrated
with airflow visualization studies.
Pressure both inside and outside the isolator should be monitored continuously and alarmed with
the appropriate limits to provide an indication of deviation from acceptable pressure differential.
Rationale
Isolators rely on a physical partition that affords the aseptic processing area (Grade A/ISO 5) protecﾂｭ
tion by separating it from the surrounding area. Therefore, the appropriate design of isolators must
enable the isolator to achieve the intent of separating the internal environment from the external
surroundings and maintaining an aseptic processing area within the isolator during manufacturing.
Critical design consideration includes the appropriate pressure differentials between the inside of an
isolator and the outside environment. A positive pressure is required to maintain the aseptic environﾂｭ
ment inside the isolator and prevent air oflesser quality from the surrounding environment from
entering the isolator.
Reference
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Processing-Current
Good Manufacturing Practice, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Rockville, Md., 2004. www.fda.gov/
ownloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulator.yinformation/Guidances/UCM070342.pdf (accessed Jan 19 2019).
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators ﾂｩ 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 5

Ql-2: What are the design considerations for isolator gloves?
Recommendation
Quality risk management principles should be used to identify and address special considerations for
the safe and effective use of isolator gloves. Efforts should be made to minimize the need to use isolaﾂｭ
tor gloves, including reducing, eliminating, or repositioning activities, manipulations, and intervenﾂｭ
tions to reduce the impact or risk to process performance and product sterility.
A risk assessment should be used to identify, assess, and mitigate risk posed by the installation and
use of isolator gloves in the aseptic operation. When determining the position and composition of
isolator gloves, a number of factors that may pose a risk to the performance of the aseptic process
and the sterility of the product should be considered, such as:
窶｢ Ergonomics to address personnel fatigue 窶｢ Proximity to sharp objects or surfaces that
and safety can pierce gloves
窶｢ Diversity of personnel height and reach 窶｢ Ease of placement and donning of gloves
窶｢ Orientation and location of planned and 窶｢ Position of environmental monitoring
anticipated activities, manipulations, and apparatus, instruments, and sampling sites
interventions 窶｢ Need to perform tasks requiring dexterity
窶｢ Proximity to critical work surfaces, such as turning handles or fitments
transfer ports, and exposed sterile items, 窶｢ Thickness of glove material to address dexterity
components, containers, and products
needed to perform task in isolator gloves
窶｢ Blockage of HEPA air flow creating 窶｢ Thickness of glove material to resist
excessive turbulence in critical work areas
puncture, cracking, or excessive wear
窶｢ Blockage of airflow restricting adequate 窶｢ Ability to adequately seal gloves and glove
distribution of decontamination chemicals,
ports
vapors, or gases
窶｢ Ability to confirm or test integrity of gloves
窶｢ Crowding of materials and glove ports
窶｢ Expiry date of gloves
窶｢ Excessive reaching or stretching of gloves
窶｢ Exposure to direct sunlight that can
窶｢ Weight and orientation of materials and
degrade gloves or glove seal material
items to be handled by gloved personnel
窶｢ Operators with sharp fingernails or jewelry
窶｢ Ability to decontaminate and aerate gloves
that can pierce gloves
窶｢ Orientation of gloves during 窶｢ Safe position for storage of gloves in the
decontamination, aeration, and non-use
isolator after or between operations
A review of the positioning should be performed using a simulation method. Modeling, rendering,
3-D model, virtual reality, mock-up, or any method that allows for demonstration and testing of
glove-related procedures with different operators of diverse heights and arm length could be used.
Rationale
The performance of personnel-related activities, manipulations, and interventions in the isolator
during aseptic operations can pose a risk to the sterility of the product or adversely affect it. Thereﾂｭ
fore, the improper or incorrect positioning and composition of isolator gloves used to perform these
activities, manipulations, and interventions can pose a such a risk. Choosing the right glove material
will affect dexterity, glove resistance, and chemical resistance of the glove, and is therefore an imporﾂｭ
tant decision point.
References
Denk, R, et al. Isolator Surfaces and Contamination Risks to Personnel. PDA Letter 2017, Nov/Dec, 36-40
6 ﾂｩ 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators

Ql-3: How should the isolator be designed to minimize risk posed by
interventions?
Recommendation
Risk-based assessments should be used to evaluate the need for and design of human interventions, and
interventions should be eliminated, reduced, or modified to reduce their relative risk where possible.
窶｢ Interventions within the isolator should 窶｢ Activities that do not require Grade A/
be designed to minimize those factors of ISO 5 protection should be located outside
the intervention that contribute to the the isolator or outside the area where
risk of microbiological contamination, sterile product, materials, and surfaces are
such as intervention duration, complexity, exposed.
and proximity to exposed sterile product,
窶｢ The use of robotics, automated process steps,
components, and surfaces.
and intervention-reducing technology should
窶｢ The isolator and process should be be considered to minimize interventions
designed to allow for interventions and during setup, operations, and sampling.
manipulations in the Grade A/ISO 5 space
窶｢ Materials and equipment within the isolator
to adhere to proper aseptic technique.
should be positioned to avoid crowding
窶｢ Number and location of glove ports should and need for reaching overexposed sterile
be designed based on need for and ease of product, materials, and surfaces.
performance of interventions.
Rationale
Human interventions and manipulations within the isolator in the vicinity of exposed sterile prodﾂｭ
uct, materials, and surfaces can add the risk of microbiological contamination to sterile product.
Where possible, the elimination or reduction of these activities through process design, equip-
ment layout, technology, and automation can reduce risk. Where activities cannot be eliminated or
reduced, process and equipment design that allows for proper aseptic technique and practices can
reduce risk. Where interventions cannot be eliminated or reduced in number, modifying these activiﾂｭ
ties to reduce risk factors can reduce the overall relative risk.
References
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 34: Design and Validation ofI solator Systems for the Manufacturing and
Testing ofH ealth Care Products; Bethesda, Md, 2001. www.pda.org/bookstore (accessed June 26, 2019).
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Processin魹ｽCurrent
Good Manufacturing Practice; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Rockville, Md., 2004. www.fda.gov/downﾂｭ
loads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoi:ylnformation/Guidances/UCM070342.pdf (accessed Jan 19 2019).
U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Chapter <1208> Sterility Testing-Validation oflsolator Systems. In USP 39-
NF 34, USP: Rockville, Md., 2016.
European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture ofS terile Medicinal Products, EudraLex -Volume 4 -Good Manufacturing Pracﾂｭ
tice for Medicni al Products for Human and 魹ｽterinary Use Consultation Document. European Commission: Brussels, 2017.
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/Cooperation Scheme (PIC/S). GMP Annex 1 Revision 2008, Interpretation ofM ost
Important Changes for the Manufacture ofS terile Medicinal Products; PI 032-2. PIC/S: Geneva, 2010. http://www.picﾂｭ
scheme.org/pdf/30 pi032-2technicalinterpretationofannexl togmpguide-copyl .pdf (accessed Nov 15, 2018).
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/Cooperation Scheme (PIC/S). Isolators Usedfo r Aseptic Processing and Steriliry
Testing; PI 014-3. PIC/S: Geneva, 2007. http://www.picscheme.org/pdf/29 pi-014-3-recommendation-on-isolators.pdf
(accessed Nov 15, 2018).
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 14644-1:2015 Cleanrooms and Associated Controlled Environments -
Part 1: Classification ofa ir cleanliness by particle concentration; ISO: Geneva, 2015. www.iso.org (accessed Nov 19, 2014).
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators ﾂｩ 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 7

