qualification?
Recommendation
Decontamination cycle development and cycle qualification may involve similar equipment and
process performance testing and monitoring. The objective is to develop and qualify the suitability,
reliability, and performance of equipment, systems, and instrumentation supporting the decon­
tamination process, as well as the ability or effectiveness of the decontamination agent to eliminate
microorganisms.
Cycle Development
Cycle development establishes the conditions, parameters, and settings for an effective cycle. As such,
cycle development may involve the adjustment of conditions, parameters, and settings to meet the
objective of the effective cycle. Cycle development testing and monitoring may indicate the reaction
of adjustment to the output of the cycle.
Cycle Qualification
Cycle qualification provides documented evidence of the reliability and effectiveness of the developed
cycle. As such, cycle qualification involves testing the performance of the prescribed conditions, pa­
rameters, and settings of the cycle development that normally would not be changed during or after
the cycle qualification. Cycle qualification testing and monitoring is designed to confirm that the
cycle is performing to specifications. For a production cycle, an overage of decontaminating agent
and/ or exposure time is typically included.
The qualification or validation of the decontamination process should provide confidence that mi­
crobiological contamination of all surfaces within the isolator have been eliminated or reduced to a
level that will not result in contamination of sterile product, materials, or surfaces. This is achieved,
in part, by showing that the conditions that allow for decontamination effectiveness are attained and
that the process variables that can adversely affect the decontamination process are controlled.
The deactivation of biological indicators should provide further confidence that these objectives are
met. Decontamination cycles for critical areas used in aseptic processing are commonly validated to a
6 log reduction of the biological indicator. Lower levels of log reduction may be acceptable, however,
that should be determined based on the risk assessment and analysis.
Documentation
Since cycle development provides information needed co design and qualify the cycle, proper docu­
mentation is important; however, it may not require the same level of rigor and quality assurance
scrutiny as cycle qualification documentation.
Cycle development protocols should be flexible, allowing for parameter adjustments as the result of a
failure or an unexpected outcome. While triplicate runs are common for validation activities, a single
confirmation run could be acceptable for cycle development.
The cycle qualification protocol should use findings and recommendations from cycle development
to confirm the robustness and repeatability of the process. Triplicate runs are expected for the process
qualification. Failure to meet acceptance criteria would typically involve an investigation and imple­
mentation of corrective action along with additional testing.
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
47

For both cycle development and qualification, a risk assessment should be conducted to determine
the potential impact and the likelihood of impact of cycle variables and conditions that may affect
the performance of the cycle, including:
• Isolator loading configurations, placement, orientation, and loading of materials and equipment
within the isolator (e.g., orientation, packaging, number of items)
• Biological indicator selection and placement
• Chemical indication selection and placement
• Process parameters for qualification cycle and for production cycle
• Decontamination agent concentration, dose, and application rate
• Effect of decontamination agent and cycle on isolator interior, material, and equipment surfaces
• Process parameters for aeration and decontamination agent removal
• Effectiveness of decontamination agent
• Interference of the decontamination cycle effectiveness as a result of contact with the isolator
interior, equipment, or material surfaces
• Systems and instrumentation in place to control the decontamination cycle
• Automation programs
• Air circulation fan and blower placement, configuration, and speeds
• Distribution of the decontamination agent throughout the isolator
• Temperature and humidity distribution throughout the isolator
• Bioburden within the isolator or on the surfaces within the isolator that require decontamination
Rationale
A k difference between decontamination cycle development and cycle qualification is that the
ey
objective of cycle development is to design a decontamination cycle or procedure chat achieves the
intended result. The objective of cycle qualification is to provide evidence that the developed cycle
can reliably perform co prescribed specifications and meet prescribed acceptance criteria.
Decontamination cycle development determines the decontamination process capability and the
process settings and conditions required to decontaminate the isolator. As such, it determines or
uncovers the conditions under which the decontamination cycle can repeatedly result in a process
meeting prescribed acceptance criteria. If a process weakness is discovered, adjustments can be made
to improve the process and mitigate the risk of process failure. Once the decontamination cycle is
finalized, the decontamination cycle qualification demonstrates that the decontamination process is
capable of repeatably meeting prescribed decontamination specifications and acceptance criteria.
Cycle qualification will have set acceptance criteria that include maintaining process set points and
settings, and running within certain specifications. Cycle development has targets aligned with the
qualification acceptance criteria. Settings, load configurations, and operating conditions may change
during cycle development to meet that criteria, while settings, load configurations, and operating
conditions must remain constant and unchanging during qualification.
References
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 51: Biological Indicators for Gas and Vapor-Phase Decontami­
nation Processes: Specification, Manufacture, Control and Use; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 20 I 0. www.pda.org/book­
store (accessed Oct 11 2018).
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators
48

Q7-6: Which Bl should be used for cycle development and cycle
qualification? What are the requirements for such a Bl (e.g., spore
count, D-value)?
Recommendation
General requirements for BI use for isolator cycle development and qualification include:
• BI should be a suitably qualified organism (e.g., Geobacillus stearothermophilus) with not less
than 106 spores/carrier.
• Microbial count recovery of incoming biological indicator control should be between 50% and 300%.
•
Bis should be handled and stored at temperatures and humidity conditions as specified by the
vendor prior to use.
• Carrier should be made of a material that is also commonly used in the isolator, typically
stainless steel. Additional studies might be required, based on risk assessments, if these carrier
materials differ significantly from stainless steel, which might affect the decontamination cycle.
BI spores are inoculated directly on coupons of these distinct materials.
•
BI should consist of a monolayer of spores to guarantee direct contact of the VHP to the spores
on the carrier. A monol r might not be achieved if the spore suspension used to inoculate
aye
the carriers contains too much debris from the cultivation, or if the spores stick together due to
other reasons. If the BI's are prepared appropriately, inconsistent results during VHP validation
or revalidation are avoided. The consisten of Bis within one BI batch should be checked prior
cy
to use (e.g., by determining the survival-kill window).
•
BI should be packed in a material permeable for H 0 and easy to handle in the lab.
2 2
• D-value of the BI should be known and should be comparable from one validation to the next
in order to make validations comparable and in order to see any shift in the effica of the VHP
cy
decontamination efficacy.
Different methods are available for determining the 0-value. First, the 0-value should be tested in
a given isolator system, not just assigned to a BI lot. Results could depend on the system used to
test it and the test method used. The 0-value can be defined as the time required to kill 90% of the
population, reduced by 1 log. A fractional approach may be used as an initial check at one location
without a full load.
The D-value is usually determined in a routine place in the isolator, not a hard-to-reach surface. Bis
are placed in a configuration so that air can reach all sides for best absorption. 0-values are more dif­
ficult to determine in larger isolator systems with more potential variability in surfaces and airflows.
Some isolator manufacturers offer a service to pretest Bis prior to shipment, and to test for 0-value
and consisten within the lot. Maintaining one BI supplier and a consistent lot within cycle devel­
cy
opment and qualification may reduce variability.
Rationale
The high variability of Bis must be taken into account for development of a consistent and effective
cle, as the BI lot will obviously change during the life cle of the line during requalification work.
cy cy
The variability in the process used to make Bis and in the systems to be tested can be significant.
Although in-house 0-value testing is not often performed, it provides valuable information and
can ensure more successful requalification over time. Unlike temperature-sensitive Bis, the effective
exposure to VHP varies greatly based on a variety of factors. The value assigned by a vendor, there­
fore, effectively represents the 0-value obtained in their isolator under their cycle conditions. This
will invariably differ compared to the 0-value obtained in any other system. As Bis may not al
ways
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
49

come from the same supplier or be tested by the same lab or under the same conditions, performing
in-house testing provides an equivalent measure over time to accurately assess the difference between
a current and past or future BI lot. Accurate control over BI quality is a key attribute to ensure suc­
cessful requalification.
There is significant risk associated with using a 0-value for a BI lot from a supplier as opposed to
confirming it in your own isolator system prior to use. The 0-value depends on the saturation of air
with hydrogen peroxide and the consistency of the cycle over time. If hydrogen peroxide levels are
not changing and the air is not saturated with VHP, the calculated D-value can vary greatly.
References
Parenteral Drug Association. Tce hnical Report No. 51: Biological Indicators for Gas and Vapor-Phase Decontamination Processes:
Specification, Manufacture, Control and Use; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2010. www.pda.org/bookstore (accessed Oct 11 2018).
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient Committee (APIC). Guidance on Aspects o/Cleaning Validation in Active Phannaceutical
Ingredient Plants; APIC: Brussels, 2016.
Sigwarth, V; Staerk, A. Effect of carrier materials on the resistance of spores of Bacillus stearothermophilus to gaseous
hydrogen peroxide. PDAJ Pharm Sci Technol2003, 57(1), 3-11.
50 © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators

Q7-7: How should multiple Bis be used and evaluated during VHP
decontamination cycle development and validation?
Recommendation
The exposure of multiple, usually three, Bls at given locations may be used to evaluate and qualify
the effectiveness of the decontamination cycle.
BI location andp lacement
Bis should be placed in locations that will provide the best opportunity for identification of difficult
to decontaminate surfaces. BI locations and placement should be determined through a risk assess­
ment of the isolator, including the configuration of the isolator, the composition and positioning of
nonproduct contact surfaces that may impact the effectiveness of the cycle, and the condition and
distribution of decontamination agent.
Where difficult-to-decontaminate surfaces or locations are identified, placement of multiple (usu­
ally triplicate) Bis at individual locations during cycle development and qualification may provide
information about the efficacy of the decontamination cycle.
BI evaluation and investigation
The accuracy of the analysis is dependent on the number of Bis placed at all locations and other
aspects of the isolator configuration and process conditions.
The logarithmic reduction of surface contamination may be determined through empirical evidence,
mathematical formula, experiment, most probable number (MPN) of surviving spores, and/or data
evaluation.
Where all Bls at a location are deactivated or killed, a more efficient decontamination effect and log
reduction level may be assumed. Where one or more of the Bis are not deactivated, a less effective
decontaminating cycle or log reduction level may be assumed.
The failure to deactivate one or more of the Bis at a given location should be investigated. The
outcome of the investigation should indicate whether the growth is due to the cycle failure or to a
Bl-related issue.
The investigation should consider conditions that may adversely affect the decontamination cycle,
such as:
• •
Confirmation of indicator organism growth Decontamination cycle parameters
• •
BI lot or batch variation Decontamination agent concentration
• •
BI D-value, population, and resistance Decontamination agent application or
• injection
BI preparation and handling
•
• Control and monitoring instrumentations
BI spore clumping or occlusion (rogue
and sensors
spores)
•
• Temperature or humidity changes
Review of handling, incubation, and
•
recovery methods Condition, bioburden, and cleanliness of
• the isolator interior
BI placement configuration and location
•
• Effect of decontamination agent retention
Insufficient exposure to the
•
decontamination agent Results of chemical indicator monitoring
If the outcome of the investigation indicates a decontamination cycle failure, the cause should be
determined, a corrective action implemented, and validation studies repeated.
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 51

If the outcome of the investigation is that the cause is a problem with the Bl, then the reason for the
positive BI must be determined and documented. The investigation should include an analysis of the
BI lot and historical performance to determine if clumping or occlusion of spores is possible.
Where problem areas within the isolator are identified, the cycle should be modified to obtain the
desired levels of contamination reduction.
Rationale
The primary objective of the isolator is to act as a barrier to prevent human-borne contamination of
sterile product. To do this effectively, the non product contact surfaces of the isolator should not con­
tribute to the microbiological contamination of sterile product or product contact surfaces. There­
fore, the decontamination cycle should be designed to render nonproduct contact surfaces incapable
of contaminating sterile product or product contact surfaces.
Confidence that the isolator is decontaminated is obtained through the design of the isolator, the
condition and distribution of the decontamination agent, the composition and positioning of
nonproduct contact surfaces, the development of the decontamination process and cycle, and the
qualification of the instruments and systems that support the decontamination process.
The deactivation of Bis during the decontamination cycle qualification provides further evidence
that the decontaminating agents have contacted the surfaces to the extent needed to provide the
decontaminated environment required for the aseptic processing. However, the inactivation of all Bis
may not be needed to demonstrate that the isolator has been decontaminated to a level that will not
contribute contamination to product or product contact surfaces.
References
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 51: Biological Indicators for Gas and Vapor-Phase Decontamination Processes:
Specification, Manufacture, Control and Use; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2010. www.pda.org/bookstore (accessed Oct 11 2018).
Sigwarth, V; Moirandat, C. Development and quantification ofH202 decontamination cycles. PDAJ Pharm Sci Technol
2000, 54 (4), 286-304.
Halvorson, H O; Ziegler, N R Application of Statistics to Problems in Bacteriology: I. A Means of Determining Bacterial
Population by the Dilution Method.] Bacteriol 1933, 25 (2), 101-21.
52 © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators

Q7-8: What effect could oil-based HEPA-filter integrity agents have on the
isolator decontamination cycle?
Recommendation
HEPA-filter testing should be carried out as part of routine installation and operation qualification
as well as requalification activities. 1he test method and potential impact on the decontamination
process must be considered. Care should be taken to ensure that any residue for m HEPA-filter test­
ing that might be trapped on filters or surfaces can be removed and that any remaining residue will
not compromise subsequent decontamination cycles. 1he equipment vendor (e.g., isolator or pass­
through chamber) should be consulted for the appropriate test method and post-test activities.
If using an oil-based material to test the filters, ensure that the filter does not retain any of the mate­
rial, because it could interact with the VHP in the system and negatively impact the efficacy of the
decontamination process. A risk assessment of the system to be tested should include this consider­
ation, and the timing of the HEPA-filter testing would, ideally, occur before requalification cycles.
Rationale
HEPA-filter testing is critical to ensure efficacy of the decontamination process, but it is also impor­
tant to consider any potential contamination that could be introduced in the system by the proce­
dures used to test the filters.
References
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Processin�Current
Good Manufacturing Practice; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Rockville, Md., 2004. www.fda.gov/down­
loads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryinformation/ Guidances/UCM070342.pdf (accessed Jan 19, 2019).
European Commission. Annex 1: Manufacture ofS terile Medicinal Products, Eudralex -Volume 4 -Good Manufacturing
Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use Consultation Document. European Commission: Brussels,
2017. https:// ec.europa.eu/health/ sites/health/files/files/ gmp/ 2017 12 pc annex 1 consultation document.pdf faccessed
Oct 25, 2019).
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
53

Q7-9: Should each load be qualified during the decontamination cycle
qualification?
Recommendation
Typically, production isolators do not have high-load variability. The variability of the load within
the isolator should be minimized and controlled. If variability does exist, however, a risk-based ap­
proach should be used to qualify the decontamination of these loads.
The most conservative approach is to qualify each manufacturing cycle or load as a separate activity.
Testing each load type would provide data to show that each approach is controlled and products
are manufactured as expected. The requalification process should align with the original validation
strategy. If the approach includes qualifying each presentation within the isolator, the requalification
should mimic that approach. It may become possible to choose alternate revalidation strategies, such
as rotating loads, where all loads are qualified over time. This approach is supported by data collec­
tion and risk-based principles. That is only possible with data and strong monitoring processes to
ensure control of the process. Bracketing strategies (e.g., minimum and maximum loads) may also be
employed with proper assessment.
Rationale
Strong process understanding is the best basis for determining validation requirements. Robust
monitoring and aseptic manufacturing processes will add to the confidence that the manufacturing
process is under a state of control. Decisions should be made based on the facilities process, control
structure, and process understanding. Then, based on those decisions, validation programs should be
initiated and followed. Decisions regarding the types of loads and frequency of revalidation should
be included in the validation program.
References
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/Cooperation Scheme (PIC/S). Isolators Usedfo r Aseptic Processing and Sterili-ty Testing;,
PIC/S: Geneva, 2007. www.picscheme.org/pdf/29 pi-014-3-recommendation-on-isolators.pdf (accessed Nov 15, 2018).
54 © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators

