Topic 7: Cleaning, Disinfection, Decontamination: Cycle
Development and Validation
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
39

Q7-1: What are the special considerations for cleaning and disinfecting
isolator interiors (nonproduct contact surfaces) prior to
decontamination?
Recommendation
The qualification or validation of the deaning and disinfecting of nonproduct contact surfaces
should be based on risk assessment. The cleanliness of nonproduct contact surfaces should be visually
verified, at the least.
Cleaning
The decontamination process does not remove product or foreign material. The interior of the isola­
tor should be deaned to remove product residue and foreign material prior to the decontamination
process.
The deaning process should be documented in a procedure. The deaning process should be reliable
and adequate to remove levels of product residue and foreign material that can pose a risk to the
quali of the next product or the performance of the decontamination process.
ty
The deaning process should be developed based on process and product requirements, the design of
the isolator interior, and the surfaces to be deaned. Potential considerations include:
• Dedicated verses shared or multiproduct isolators
• Complexi or variabili of the deaning process
ty ty
• Location of surfaces to be deaned within the isolator
• Activities performed at given locations within the isolator
• Exposure of product to potentially contaminated environment or surfaces
• Toxici and potency of previous product
ty
• Sensitivi of next product to presence of previous product
ty
• Difficul in removing product residue of foreign materials from isolator surfaces
ty
• Abili to visually or anal ically detect presence of product residue or foreign material
ty yt
• Diversi of products handled or filled in the isolator
ty
• Effect of deaning material residue on product or isolator interior
• Material surface quali and cleanabili
ty ty
• Effect of product or foreign material residue (including deaning material residue) on
decontamination process
• Other controls in place to address the risk of contamination of product with previous product
residue and foreign material
Disinfection
Since the effectiveness of the decontamination process may depend on the level of bioburden pres­
ent, a disinfection process may establish a baseline prior to the decontamination of the isolator
interior.
The disinfection process should be validated and documented in a procedure. The disinfection
process should include limits on hold time prior to disinfection (time after end of isolator deaning to
initiation of disinfection process) and hold time after disinfection (time after completion of disinfec­
tion process to initiation of decontamination process).
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators
40

A risk assessment should be used to determine the maximum level of bioburden allowable to assure
effectiveness of the decontamination process and the method for disinfection. Risk-based consider­
ation may include the follow factors:
• Complexity, variability, and effectiveness of the disinfection process
• Complexity, variability, and effectiveness of the decontamination process
• Location of surfaces to be disinfected within the isolator
• Bioburden levels assessed through periodic surface monitoring of the opened isolator
• Routine environmental monitoring program of the isolator
• Environmental monitoring of environment surrounding the isolator
• Ability to remove disinfectant from isolator interior and sensitivity of product to levels of
disinfectant
• Occurrence of any occluded surfaces from moving parts that will be exposed during
manufacturing operations, e.g., conveyor belts
If the bioburden of the isolator interior is higher than the spore log reduction of the validated decon­
tamination cycle, an additional disinfection step may be required after the cleaning process.
The design of the isolator interior should be adequate for the cleaning and disinfection process. De­
sign considerations may include the following factors:
• Materials of construction of the isolator interior should be cleanable and resistant to cleaning
and disinfectant chemicals, treatment, and process
• Surfaces should be smooth and nonporous
• Surfaces should drain properly and not pool or accumulate liquids
• Surfaces close to exposed product or product contact surfaces should not have excessive or deep
seams that can harbor product residue or foreign material
• Critical spaces (areas, surfaces, or environments that, if microbiologically or chemically
contaminated, pose a risk of contamination to product or product contact surfaces) should be
accessible to the cleaning procedure
• Areas within the isolator that expose product or generate or harbor foreign material should be
limited
Other Considerations
Precautions should be taken to avoid excessive exposure to foreign material and microbiological
contamination when opening the isolator and exposing the interior to the surrounding environment.
To reduce the risk of particulates and microbial load, in addition to Grade C garments, wearing an
additional hood, sterile goggles or glasses, and gloves should be considered.
A quality risk document for the complete process within the isolator must define critical areas where
product could be open and process operations are critical. The higher the risk to the product, the
more detailed the cleaning and disinfection procedure needed. For the most critical areas, dedicated
cleaning equipment and utensils should be used by appropriately trained operators.
Rationale
The objective of the isolator cleaning and disinfection procedure is to remove residues, foreign mat­
ter, and bioburden prior to decontamination of the isolator interior to ensure the effectiveness of the
decontamination cycle and, thus, the sterility of product. Cleaning should further reduce the levels
and risk of particulate, cross-contamination, chemical contamination, and toxic substances in prod­
uct filled or processed in the isolator.
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 41

The objective of the decontamination process is to render isolator surfaces and items in the isolator
incapable of contaminating sterile product, materials, or surfaces. Effective decontamination of the
isolator interior, including gloves, transfer ports, STUs, equipment, materials, and items within the
isolator, is essential to the control of sterile product contamination and the sterility of the product.
A risk-based approach to designing the deaning, disinfection, and decontamination processes will
help identify the conditions and variables that must be controlled. This approach will also help
establish the procedures, parameters, and acceptance criteria needed to ensure that the isolator is in a
condition that allows for an effective decontamination and manufacturing process.
References
I
Denk, R, et al. Isolator Surfaces and Contamination Risks to Personnel GMP Cleaning Requirements for
Nonproduct Contact Surfaces. PDA Letter 2017, Nov/Dec, 36-40.
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 51: Biological Indicators for Gas and Vapor-Phase Decontami­
nation Processes: Specification, Manufacture, Control and Use; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2010. www.pda.org/book­
store (accessed Oct 11 2018).
PI O 14-3 PIC/S Guide: /sokztors Usedfo r Aseptic Processing and Sterility Testing, Pharmaceutical Inspection
Convention (Scheme): 2007. http://www.picscheme.org/pdf/29 pi-014-3-recommendation-on-isolators.pdf
(accessed November 19, 2019).
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators
42

Q7-2: What are the current options for isolator interior decontamination?
Recommendation
The predominant decontamination agents currently being used for isolator interior decontamination
are VHP and peracetic acid.2 Alternative agents and technologies could become available that may
be considered for decontamination. A careful risk assessment should be performed to evaluate, select,
develop, qualify, and validate agents, technologies, methods, and cycles based on equipment condi­
tion, process performance, product quality and sterility, and personnel safety.
The selection of the decontamination process, agent, and dispersion technology or procedure should
take into consideration the:
• Effectiveness of the decontamination process as applied to the condition, design, and use of the
isolator
• Production requirements
• Potential impact of the agent and procedure on the isolator, product, process, and personnel
• Corrosive or reactive properties of the agent and its impact on the equipment and materials
present in the isolator
• Potential impact of the agent on personnel and the external environment
• History or familiarity with an agent or technology
• Preference for an agent or technology at the user's site or location
• Availability of alternative agents or technologies
Decontamination agents are typically dispersed in two basic states: gaseous and vapor phase. VHP in
the vapor phase may be used to decontaminate pharmaceutical isolators. VHP decontamination is an
extremely potent, complex process due to its biphasic nature [both liquid and vapor (gas) phases are
typically present in the chamber]. The phase equilibrium is extremely sensitive to minor differences
in temperature, VHP, and water concentration, making it virtually impossible to know the exact pro­
cess ph ical parameters at any given time and location. Consequently, no industrial standard exists
ys
that defines the required process parameters of either the mechanical design of vapor generation or
the distribution systems. As a result, there are a vast variety of commercial systems used throughout
the industry with different designs and process descriptions.
No matter what s tem is being used, the process fundamentals remain the same. VHP is distributed
ys
in the decontaminated chamber until enough VHP has been deposited (i.e., adsorbed/condensed)
on the decontaminated surfaces to yield the targeted decontamination effect. The generally accepted
understanding is that increasing the saturation of the VHP atmosphere increases the efficacy, because
a large amount ofliquid VHP is deposited on the surfaces.
Too much deposited VHP, however, can lead to long aeration and increasing material compatibil­
ity and VHP ingress concerns. Depending on the VHP and water concentration, air pressure, and
temperature, systems operating below or above saturation (i.e., surface temperature below or above
VHP-water mixture vapor dew point) can be used. Two main approaches for VHP vapor generation
used in the industry are hot plate vaporization and fo ing.
gg
Hot plate vaporizers use heat to transform injected liquid aqueous VHP solution into hot vapor,
which is then distributed within the chamber to be decontaminated. Hot plate vaporizers should be
operated to ensure flash vaporization of injected VHP. An operating temperature too low or liquid
dosing too high may result in VHP boiling that will affect the efficacy and may even lead to explo­
sion! Hot vapor entering the chamber should be well distributed to prevent local hot spots or posi-
2 According to responses to Question 160 of the 2017 PDA Aseptic Processing Survey, the majority
of the pharmaceutical industry uses only VHP.
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
43

tions with too much VHP condensation. When using remote vapor generators, premature cooling
and condensation of generated VHP vapor inside the piping needs to be prevented before reaching
the target destination.
Fo ing processes are based on the generation of micron-sized droplets with enormous surface area,
gg
which facilitates natural vaporization without the need of additional heat. The vaporization of drop­
lets continues until the maximum vapor saturation is reached and the fog is created. Depending on
the generated droplet size, fog is termed "dry" or "wet" by the industry. In this context, "wet" fog is
considered aerosol with droplet sizes larger than approximately 15-20 µm. Such particles settle and
attach more easily to surfca es compared to smaller droplets. Consequently, decontamination using
"wet" fog is a combination of vapor-and liquid-deposited VHP. Sprays with a droplet size below
15 µm are typically considered "d ." Small droplets experience minimal sedimentation and tend to
ry
bounce off surfaces without leaving liquid deposits. Adsorption of vapor phase VHP on surfaces is
the main mechanism of action. Dry fogging provides fast surface decontamination and reduces the
aeration time due to short contact time of the VHP on the surfaces. Nozzles or nebulizers should be
operated to allow enough space for the spray to develop and spread throughout the chamber; objects
too close to the nozzle may receive an excessive deposit of VHP "wetting." The initial temperature
and humidity should be considered for fo ing processes as these determine how much VHP vapor
gg
can be generated by atomization.
Rationale
This recommendation primarily focuses on VHP because it is the predominate agent and technology
used. Factors and limitations are presented that should be understood and considered when using
this method. Other means to decontaminate the isolator interior are under development and are
being evaluated. This section is not intended to be all-inclusive or to dissuade firms from exploring,
considering, or using alternative methods.
Regardless of the method selected, due to the design and use of the isolator, having an effective
method for decontamination of the environment and surfaces is essential to the proper performance
of the isolator and the aseptic process. The toxic nature of the decontamination agent emphasizes
the equal importance of the effects of the decontamination procedure on equipment and personnel
safe .
ty
Due to the complexity of the entire decontamination process, diversity of isolator designs, aseptic
processes, products, components, and materials exposed in the isolator, a risk-based approach is rec­
ommended for such a selection. It is essential to carefully evaluate, qualify, and validate the method
and the equipment used to disperse and monitor the process.
References
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 51: Biological Indicators for Gas and Vapor-Phase Decontamination Pro­
cesses: Specification, Manufacture, Control and Use; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2010. www.pda.org/bookstore (accessed Oct 11
2018).
Parenteral Drug Association. PDA Research: 2017 PDA Aseptic Processing Survey; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2017. www.pda.org/
bookstore (accessed Feb 11, 2019).
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators
44

Q7-3: Should empty isolator mapping of temperature and humidity be
performed as part of decontamination qualification studies?
Recommendation
Temperature mapping of isolators or decontamination chambers should be consistent with the
requirements for decontamination. When using a decontamination agent that is in a gaseous or
vapor phase, surface temperatures can influence the amount oflocalized condensation, which may
impact the effectiveness of the chosen decontaminant. Ideally, surface temperatures are uniform, thus
promoting homogeneous levels ofs urface condensate.
The intent of temperature and humidity mapping is to provide evidence that th are distributed
ey
evenly, ensuring a consistent distribution and lethality oft he chemical decontaminant. When choos­
ing mapping locations, things to consider include:
• Energy sources (e.g., lights, fans, servos, • External room conditions
squales) • Attached process equipment, like autoclaves
• Movement of items during the and lyophilizers, that could generate heat
decontamination cycle on the outer surfaces attached to the
• Material properties (e.g., stainless versus isolator
polymer) • Loading items with temperatures different
• Placement ofe quipment, parts, shelving, from the room (e.g., bottles directly from a
freezer)
platforms, or surfaces that can affect the
flow of air or act as a heat sink
Infrared cameras can be used during initial assessments to determine the placement oft emperature­
sensing instruments. The reflective properties oft he internal surface material, however, must be
considered, because th could negatively impact findings. Based on this initial screening, infrared
ey
cameras may prove useful in identifying hot and cold spots, which could then be mapped with ther­
mocouples. In some instances, however, equipment configurations or existing cold spots may mask
the existence of hot spots.
Humidity mapping within the isolator should be considered if there are materials of construction
that could cause localized variances in humidity.
Mappings could be performed during "empty'' conditions, if the load items are not expected to influ­
ence temperature or humidity conditions. Mapping is expected to be performed under loaded condi­
tions. The influence ofl oad items on air flow and material of construction should be considered.
Rationale
Since the effectiveness ofa gaseous or vapor phase process can be impacted by surface condensation
levels, and that temperature plays an important role in determining the degree of condensation, tem­
perature mapping is an important aspect of cycle qualification. Ift here are specific conditions that
determine potential variations, humidity mapping should also be undertaken.
References
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Process­
ing-Current Good Manufacturing Practice; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Rockville,
Md., 2004. www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulator_yinformation/ Guidances/
UCM070342.pdf(accessedJan 19, 2019).
European Commission. Annex I: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, EudraLex -Volume 4 -Good
Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use Consultation Document. Euro­
pean Commission: Brussels, 2017. https://ec.europa.eu/healrh/sites/healrh/files/files/gmp/ 2017 12 pc an­
nexl consultation document.pdf <accessed Oct 25. 2019).
Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators © 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 45

Q7-4: What conditions and configurations should be considered during
decontamination cycle development and validation?
Recommendation
A risk assessment should be used to determine the "worst case" conditions and configurations to
challenge during decontamination cycle development and validation.
The load configuration should be set up to avoid any materials potentially touching, which could
lead to occluded surfaces where the decontamination agent could not reach.
Process, loading configuration, and load item variables, which could impact either the distribution or the in­
activation rate of the decontamination agent, must be considered when determining worst-case conditions.
Clutter, pilin,g or placing materials that can occlude surfaces from contact with decontamination agent
should be avoided, as shoudl contamination of surfaces with substances, such as oil, grease, fingerprints, or
silicone, that can interfere with or otherwise adversely affect the decontamination of those surfaces.
Conditions and configurations that should be considered during decontamination cycle develop­
ment and validation may include:
Decontamination Process
• Environmental conditions (temperature, humidity range, and variation)
• Fan or blower speed (fixed or variable) or isolators without a fan
• Decontamination agent concentration, dose levels, and rates of application
Load Configuration
• Minimum and maximum loads • Exposure of material and load surfaces
• Load placement and orientation • Extension of gloves
• Characteristics of load materials • Position of doors and openings
Material Properties
• Compatibility of materials with the • Porosity of materials
decontamination agent or process • Stacking or placement of materials
• Substances or materials on a surface chat • Wrapping or folding of wrapping materials
could adversely affect the decontamination
chat occlude surfaces for m decontamination
process or outcome
Rationale
The intent of decontamination cycle development and validation is to ensure that the decontamina­
tion process is robust and provides the desired spore logarithmic reduction at conditions that create
the greatest challenge for biological indicator (BI) inactivation or decontamination distribution, while
remaining within the planned operating conditions. The isolator environment and load characteris­
tics pl a crucial role in the effectiveness of the cycle. Effective surface decontamination requires the
ay
exposure of the surface to a sufficient quantity of the agent; consequently, many variables are involved.
For more information, PDA Technical Report No. 34 details considerations of several of the condi­
tions listed above, and PDA Technical Report No. 51 explores the potential factors involved in BI
manufacturing that can also impact the accuracy of data gathered during cycle validation.
References
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 51: Biological Indicators for Gas and Vapor-Phase Decontamination Processes:
Specification, Manufacture, Control and Use; PDA: Bethesda, Md., 2010. www.pda.org/bookstore (accessed Oct 11 2018).
Parenteral Drug Association. Technical Report No. 34: Design and Validation ofIs olator Systemsfo r the Manufacturing and Testing
ofH ealth Care Products; Bethesda, Md, 2001. www.pda.org/bookstore (accessed Nov 19 2018).
© 2020 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Points to Consider for the Aseptic Processing of Sterile Pharmaceutical Products in Isolators
46

Q7-S: What are the key differences between cycle development and cycle
