3.0 Current State of Visual Inspection for Particles
A review of recalls of injectable products over the last ten years provides a useful measure of the current
state of manufacturing and particle control. Figure 3.0-1 shows this information for product regulated
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The major contributors to these recalls are lack of
sterility/sterility assurance and particles.
Particle recalls alone in Figure 3.0-2 shows a notable upward trend in 2013 with a peak in 2014. This
was driven by an increased occurrence of both glass and metal particles. This resulted in greater aware-
ness by both manufacturers and regulators and contributed to the higher number of particle recalls in
following years. This situation was exacerbated by the nonspecific requirements for particles found in
the global pharmacopeias but improved with the official publication of USP <790> in 2014 (6). At
present, annual recalls for particles have returned to historical levels, but still account for a significant
amount of product removed from the market and does not consider lots rejected while still within the
control of the manufacturer.
Figure 3.0-1 FDA Recall Notices For Injectable Products, Years 2010-2019 (5)
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 3

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 3.0-2 FDA Recall Notices For Particles In Injectable Products, Years 2010-2019 (5)
3.1 Patient Risk Assessment
All parenteral drug preparations contain particulate matter. Particles ultimately administered to a pa-
tient may originate from the primary packaging components or may enter through the manufacturing
process and during administration from the syringe or infusion set apparatus. Therefore, the potential
patient particulate exposure burden derives from the sum of these sources.
The clinical implications of visible particulate matter in injectables have been reviewed in several recent
publications (7,8). Historically the presence of unintended visible particulate matter has been regarded
as a quality defect which can impact safety resulting in additional batch-related actions, including
batch reinspection, rejection, or recall. Visible product defects such as cracked or leaking containers or
product discoloration often point to a product quality and possible safety issue. While the presence of
a rare or isolated visible particle induces a similar instinctive response, the potential safety implication
requires a comprehensive and contextually-based evaluation.
Patient exposure to particles occurs across a size continuum from submicron to millimeters, while risk
assessments are generally conducted on particles reported as visible or subvisible components and not
the aggregated risk of both subgroups. Assessing the potential risk that patient exposure to particles
might present requires identifying the source of the particle; determining particle-specific attributes
such as size, number, and composition; and ascertaining the intended use including the route and
frequency of administration and relevant patient population characteristics (9). Any impact to the
final product’s benefit-risk profile that might result from the presence of particulate matter arises from
the combination of these elements and calculated once the reference product and characteristics of the
intended recipient are known.
In all instances of injections, the size of the particle is a restricting attribute. The particle must be small
enough (or nonrigid) to pass through the bore of the needle (i.e., the particle must be less than the
internal diameter of the needle in at least two dimensions). Detection probability increases with size
such that larger particles are more likely to be identified with a detection probability (under ideal condi-
tions) typically exceeding 95% for particles that are 200 µm and larger (2). Consequently, the product
is either rejected during manufacture or found during dose preparation and discarded. There have been
no reports identifying patient harm from randomly administered visible particulate matter in pharma-
ceutical preparations (8). Therefore, particles that are ultimately injected will be at or below the limit
of detection of the qualified manufacturing environment with most of those particles being subvisible.
In most instances, the greatest risk to patients receiving injectable medicines is related to a lack of prod-
uct sterility. For this reason alone, a robust inspection program is not sufficient; but rather, a broad
4 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
range of other visible attributes is assessed along with laboratory testing of microbiological, chemical,
and physical parameters. These are based on statistical sampling plans to assess the risk of elevated
bioburden or other related harms in the batch. The risks to product sterility may be mitigated through
processing decisions such as qualified component and product terminal sterilization processes (e.g.,
moist or dry heat, irradiation, or gaseous or vapor treatments). While the presence of a single particle is
unlikely to provide a sufficient substrate to support microbiologic proliferation, multiple units identi-
fied with extrinsic particles should raise an alarm since the source is likely from a nonsterile environ-
ment. Appropriately qualified depyrogenation and autoclaving processes preclude the introduction of
bioburden through primary packaging components.
Inert particles such as those from elastomers or glass generally pose little concern when introduced into
a patient’s subcutaneous tissue or muscle because they are typically sterile or sanitized. However, the
particles could potentially stimulate a local immunologic reaction consisting of macrophages and for-
eign body giant cells at the interface of the particulate material (e.g., a granuloma), but it is likely that
such a reaction would remain asymptomatic (10). More commonly, complications from subcutaneous
and intramuscular medications arise from the irritating properties of the drug product and are often
drug-specific but generally have a minimal impact (11).
Intravenous (IV) infusion of particles may induce phlebitis due to the particles causing direct traumatic
irritation to the vein or from chemical damage by undissolved particles (12). Recent observational studies
have also described instances in select patient cohorts where morbidity has been reduced through the use
of infusion filters, suggesting that particles in the infusate were responsible for the difference in outcomes
(13). Other studies have failed to corroborate these findings in additional patient populations (14).
A particle introduced intravenously that exceeds the internal diameter of a pulmonary capillary (7–12
µm) will lodge in that capillary or a more proximal pulmonary arteriole. While clinical outcomes are
generally benign, such matter introduced into the systemic circulation might stimulate a local immuno-
logic reaction (e.g., a granuloma) in the lung (15). These isolated, small parenchymal lesions generally
remain asymptomatic. In addition, as demonstrated in animal studies, the massive infusion of particu-
lates has been accompanied by histologic evidence of injury to pulmonary capillary endothelial cells (16),
microscopic thrombi in the pulmonary capillaries (17), pulmonary microscopic granulomata (18), and
hepatic inflammatory effects (19). An important distinction to note is that most of the studies above
infused massive amounts of subvisible particles. While an all-inclusive review of the clinical implications
of particulate infusions is beyond the intended scope of this technical report, the potential exists for the
intravascular infusion of particulate matter to cause pathophysiologic injury depending upon the size and
quantity of the particles, and, therefore, should be included as an element in any clinical risk assessment.
In summary, particulate matter will be present in every injectable dose. The risk of visible particles in
injections to a patient is low from products manufactured and inspected under appropriately qualified
current Good Manufacturing Practices conditions (20,21). Their origin, composition, size, numbers,
and characteristics of the intended patient population are all important factors to weigh when assessing
the clinical import from exposure.
3.2 Existing Test Methods and Limitations
Visual inspection of primary packaging components prior to use is hindered by four factors: the lack
of a standardized industry inspection method for particle detection; the diversity of potential particle
defects introduced through the manufacturing process; decreased visual detection capabilities on iso-
lated or empty components; and the probabilistic nature of particle detection (3). Visual inspection
of the packaging components is generally conducted by sampling and not inspection of every piece
(100% inspection), thereby limiting the information necessary to construct an adequate library of the
type and number of particles the process produces. Detection of particles by MVI, SAVI, or AVI is a
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 5

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
cumulative function of the particles’ visible attributes including particle size, shape, color, density, and
reflectivity. Particle detection can also be more difficult in the empty components because the particles
cannot be put in motion as with particles in a liquid product (22).
The absence of standardized methods or visible particle acceptance criteria leaves it to each supplier and
pharmaceutical manufacturer to establish these requirements for each product supplied. While regula-
tory guidance documents and industry publications may provide useful perspectives, the absence of a
clearly articulated standard results in manufacturers subsequently adopting a hybrid approach using
various portions of the published pharmacopeial (6,23) and International Standards Organization
(ISO) methods (24). Identifying the limitations of test methods adapted for the evaluation of primary
packaging components provides the opportunity to develop component-specific methods that would
serve as a common standard for supplier-customer quality consideration.
Understanding the particle attributes is essential for each manufacturer when developing and adopting
appropriate test methods, characterizing particle defect attributes, defining achievable detection capabili-
ties, and assessing the potential impact of particles to the product’s benefit-risk profile. The use of standard
forensic methods of particle characterization (22) can be beneficial to inform the clinical risk assessment
and direct allocation of resources to critical visual inspection and process control strategies. Additionally,
the forensic datasets are important components to identify potential sources of particle ingress or genera-
tion, variability in raw material components, and monitor the stability of manufacturing processes (4).
3.2.1 ISO Test Method 8871-3
ISO 8871-3 Elastomeric parts for parenterals and for devices for pharmaceutical use — Part 3: Determination
of released-particle count (24) provides analytical methods for the extraction of loose particulates from the
surface of elastomeric components used in pharmaceutical packaging applications. The ISO standard is split
into subvisible particle extraction using light extinction (or light obscuration (LO)) and visible particle ex-
traction followed by membrane filtration and microscopic examination (MM) for particle detection. Once
particle extraction is complete, quantification is performed with an optical microscope and a calibrated reticle
at approximately 50x magnification. Particle counts can be conducted either manually or via a validated
automated microscopic method. Both the particle extraction and the counting technique are considered
optimized in evaluating elastomer-associated visible particles. However, the method would require some level
of enhancement for visible particles (i.e., particles >100 µm and fibers >300 µm as defined in this report)
through the design of a reticle capable of differentiating particles from fibers and identifying a shaker for use
in Europe that is comparable to that specified in ISO 8871-3. Additionally, further concern exists regarding
the sensitivity of the method based on the surface area/number of stoppers sampled. Currently, there is no
similar ISO method for particle extraction or characterization for parenteral container inspection.
3.2.2 U.S. Pharmacopeia Methods
USP Chapters <788> and <790> are generally used to provide analytical method guidance for packag-
ing component particle assessment. USP <788> Particulate Matter in Injections (23) provides for two
test methods for the detection of particles ≥ 10 µm in size: LO and MM. The methods do not appear
suitable for elastomeric component particles since surface particle extraction methods are not outlined,
and the sample preparation and counting techniques do not appear applicable for particles >100 µm.
Likewise, the applicability of these methods in the evaluation of glass-related components hold limited
utility for visible particles. While nonfixed particles in glass components might be identified using
these methods, the diversity of particle morphology and container design significantly impact the
sensitivity and applicability of these methods to glass components.
USP <790> Visible Particulates in Injections (6) became official in 2014 Chapter <790>, along with
Chapter <1790> Visual Inspection of Injections (1) established requirements and provides supporting
information to be used along with 100% inspection during the manufacturing process to demonstrate
that the process has produced a batch that is “essentially free” of visible particulates.
6 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 3.2.2-1 provides a comparison of current inspection conditions and acceptance criteria for visible
particles contained in the USP, EP, and JP. The chapters describe the manual inspection environment
(lighting, background, and handling methods) that many component manufacturers have adapted for
the inspection of empty containers and loose components. However, particle detection can also be more
difficult in these components because the particles cannot be put in motion as with particles in a liquid
product and the broad range of potential manufacturing defects generated by glass primary packaging
suppliers. Additionally, these chapters are intended for filled-finished product and do not include defined
test methods with clear requirements and specifications directly applicable to the individual packaging
components used to manufacture injectable products. Therefore, the need for packaging component vi-
sual inspection guidance, which is currently lacking in the pharmacopeias, is critical to help characterize
risk associated with these components and their impact on overall product quality assurance.
Table 3.2.2-1 Inspection Conditions and Acceptance Criteria for Visible Particles Found in the USP, EP, and JP.
Inspection Conditions USP <790> EP 2.9.20 JP 6.06
2,000 – 3,750
Illumination Intensity (lux) 2,000 – 3,750 2,000 – 3,750
8,000 – 10,000*
10 10 10
Inspection Time (sec)
(5 white, 5 black) (5 white, 5 black) (5 white, 5 black)
Backgrounds black and white black and white black and white
“essentially free from
visible particulates”
“clear and practically “free of readily detectable
Acceptance Criteria
ANSI/ASQ Z1.4 particle-free” foreign insoluble matter”
AQL=0.65%
* Higher illumination intensity recommended for plastic containers.
3.2.3 European Pharmacopeia Methods
Two EP chapters govern subvisible and visible particles in sterile injectable products; EP 2.9.19 Parti-
culate contamination: sub-visible particles (25) and EP 2.9.20 Particulate contamination: visible particles
(26), respectively. The chapter on subvisible particles is harmonized with similar chapters found in the
USP and JP, describing the same methods and containing the same acceptance criteria.
Chapter 2.9.20 describes the same inspection conditions as found in the USP and JP but does not
provide a numeric acceptance criterion.
3.2.4 Japanese Pharmacopeia Methods
Like the USP and EP, the JP provides two chapters to address subvisible and visible particles. These are
JP 6.07 Insoluble Particulate Matter Test for Injections (27) for subvisible particles and 6.06 Foreign In-
soluble Matter Test for Injections (28) for visible particles. The subvisible particle test is also harmonized
with the USP and EP while the test for visible particles has harmonized inspection conditions, again
without a numeric acceptance criterion.
3.3 Conclusion
The observations documented in this report are intended to result in a standard test method. Such stan-
dardization is needed to produce reliable and comparable test results. The benefits of such a standard
include clearer communication between supplier and users of pharmaceutical packaging components. It
also permits setting meaningful limits and acceptance criteria for receipt and use of these important pack-
aging components. Such limits would better align with the expectations for the finished products they are
intended to protect and ultimately lead to more reliable supply of particle free sterile medicinal products.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 7

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
