5.0 Glass Container Inspection Method
Today, no alignment exists within the pharmaceutical industry on a method to inspect empty glass
containers. This is of special importance for RTU containers since they will not undergo any further
cleaning procedure(s). Inspection of empty glass containers may be performed by the glass manufac-
turer/converter or by the pharmaceutical company prior to use. It may be performed on all units or a
statistically valid sample collected from a larger batch.
5.1 Inspection of Ready-to-Use Empty Glass Containers
The proposed visual inspection method which follows was based largely on the method and inspection
conditions defined in the EP (26), USP (6), and JP (28) for filled containers. Table 5.1-1 summarizes
the key requirements established to improve the performance of the method employed in the study.
The procedure is a manual inspection method where the quality decision to either accept or reject the
container is made by a trained person. MVI is a probabilistic process where detection rates less than
100% are to be expected (3,29,30). To understand the probabilistic nature of this type of inspection
a comprehensive study was performed using the defined method to inspect defect kits of empty glass
containers seeded with different types of particles of varying size and location on and in the container.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 11

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 5.1-1 Key Attributes of Proposed Inspection Conditions and Method
Attribute Requirement
• Pass a medical eye examination before beginning visual inspection activities. Near vision
acuity should be equivalent or better than 20/20 ft (or 6/6 meters) or equivalent. Inspectors
should be retested and meet this criterion at least every two years.
Inspectors • Use of optical correction such as prescription glasses is optional if needed to achieve normal vision.
• Avoid direct viewing of the light source.
• Take regular breaks to avoid fatigue and eye strain. Do not exceed one hour of continuous
inspection.
• Train inspectors on the specific method and materials used.
Training and • Qualify inspectors with test sets with representative defect examples and good containers.
Qualification • Define and document qualification requirements.
• Evaluate inspector performance at least every two years.
• Perform inspection in a clean and quiet area.
Inspection
• Reduce ambient lighting.
Environment
• The use of gloves and gowning are recommended.
• An inspection workstation which provides a light intensity between 2,000 and 3,750 lux.
Equipment
• Black and white backgrounds.
• Perform inspection without magnification.
• Inspect containers for approximately 5 sec against each background.
Method • Hold containers approximately 30 cm from the eye.
• Hold containers 10-20 cm from the light source.
• Rotate container to examine all visible areas.
This was necessary to better understand the capability of the method for empty containers and to es-
tablish criteria for inspector qualification. Section 5.3 outlines the results of this cross-industry study.
5.1.1 Operator Training for the Enhanced Container Inspection Method
To achieve reliable and consistent results, inspectors must be trained on the inspection method before
performing routine inspection and their inspection performance verified by testing both initially and
then every two years (minimum) thereafter. This requalification interval is less frequent than that
for inspectors assessing filled units but is considered a practical interval since empty containers are
reassessed when filled both by 100% and a subsequent acceptance sampling (AQL) inspection. The
qualification testing should be performed using seeded test kits containing both good (blank) and bad
(defective) samples. Clear acceptance requirements should be defined against which the inspectors
are evaluated. Limits on the number of missed defects and good containers incorrectly rejected (false
rejects) are necessary when setting the acceptance criteria.
5.1.2 Equipment and Setup
The results of manual inspection are highly influenced by the light intensity in the inspection zone.
Light intensity between 2,000-3,750 lux at 10 cm from the light source is recommended based on
current finished product inspection conditions found in the USP, EP, and JP. The light intensity should
be confirmed prior to use and the intensity recorded at the point of inspection.
Container samples should be examined against both black and white backgrounds to maximize the
contrast between the glass and the defect of interest. A matte, nonglossy background is recommended
to avoid interference from glare or reflection.
12 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.1.2-1 shows a typical visual inspection workstation with diffuse top lighting and black and
white backgrounds. A light table may also be used to provide diffuse light upwards to and through the
object under inspection to supplement the diffuse illumination from above. Eight of the eleven com-
panies engaged in the study used the light table in addition to the standard inspection workstation.
Figure 5.1.2-2 shows a container being inspected in the workstation using the recommended method
and conditions. Figure 5.1.2-3 provides additional detail on the location of the container under in-
spection relative to the light source and viewing position of the inspector.
Figure 5.1.2-1 Visual Inspection Workstation
Figure 5.1.2-2 Example Of Container Inspection Using Recommended Method And Relative Placement In The
Inspection Hood
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 13

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.1.2-3 Placement Of Container Within The Inspection Hood During Inspection
The work area should be neatly organized. For example, samples for inspection may be placed on the
left of the inspection area and two empty trays placed on the right: one for passing and one for failing
units. Trays should always be clearly labeled and preferably color coded. Discard all samples good and
bad after the inspection and any follow-up investigation completed.
5.1.3 Magnification Requirements To Inspect Glass Containers
Magnification, other than that for optical correction to normal vision, is prohibited for routine release
inspection. This is recommended to keep alignment with the pharmacopeial inspection conditions. USP
General Chapter <790> (6)] states that inspection should be performed without magnification. How-
ever, USP Information Chapter <1790> (1) adds that while “not recommended for use during routine
inspections, magnification can be helpful for critical examination of a small number of units, as may be
needed during an investigation”. If magnification is used for investigational purposes, strict guidance
should be provided to avoid it becoming an uncontrolled part of the routine inspection process.
5.1.4 Glass Container Inspection Procedure
Detailed instructions for empty glass container inspection can be found in 8.4 Appendix D. Informa-
tion recorded during or after inspection may include details such as the type and location of any par-
ticles observed, and any other defects observed. On completion of the inspection, the data should be
evaluated against the established acceptance criteria to determine the disposition of the batch. During
inspection, the operator should avoid direct viewing of the light source and take regular eye breaks to
avoid eye strain which may adversely influence the results of the inspection. Inspection time should be
based on the parameters defined in the qualification.
14 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.2 Method Qualification Strategy and Detection Capability
To set realistic targets for human inspection performance, the detection capability of the method be-
ing used for inspection must be understood. A significant portion of the work reported here centered
on performing inspections on seeded containers assembled into test kits to better assess the detection
capability of the method described.
For all observations reported in this study, the light intensity was confirmed as ≥3,000 lux at the point
of verification which is at the upper end of the inspection conditions defined in the EP (26), USP (6),
and JP (28), of 2,000-3,750 lux.
Three equivalent test kits were created representing a wide range of visible particles types and sizes
commonly found in glass containers. Specific examples were based on survey results (31) and the ex-
perience of glass team members. Eight different particulate types (glass, metal, cellulose, hair, plastic,
and rubber [black, grey, and orange]), were defined and used when preparing the kits. The kits were
prepared without any visible adhesive which might bias the measured detection rate. Each container
was checked for particles prior to seeding, each unit was seeded with a single particle and then sealed
to prevent further contamination. For these studies, each kit contained 60 each of vials, syringes, and
cartridges, making a total of 180 pieces. The kits were compared and checked against each other to
ensure that they were of similar composition. The locations of seeded particles are shown in Figure
5.2-1 and the type and nominal size of particles are detailed in Table 5.2-1. Only seeded containers
were used in these kits to assess differences in ability to detect particles when compared with others of
varying type and size.
The sample kits were inspected by five pharmaceutical companies and six tubular glass convertors.
Each of the organizations taking part in the study had the kits examined by five inspectors, six times
each for a total of thirty inspections per company. To better blind the inspection results, the inspec-
tions were not performed consecutively. A total of 59,400 independent observations were made. How-
ever, some data points were excluded from the study because they did not meet the stated inspection
requirements (e.g., the inspection time was out of the specified range). Ultimately, 49,360 valid data
points were used to analyze the performance of the inspectors and the inspection method.
Particle size measurement. Because of the unique optical properties and geometric configuration of
both containers and particles, different methods were used to determine the nominal size of seeded
Figure 5.2-1 Locations Where Particles Were Seeded Into Or Onto Containers (Vials, Cartridges, And Syringes) In
Prepared Test Kits
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 15

Table 5.2-1 Summary of Nominal Particle Size by Material
Particle/Fiber Size (µm)
Type Material Color Photo
particles. Table 5.2-2 shows the methods used for the various materials incorporated into the test kits.
These were chosen to best represent how these particles appear to the human eye during inspection.
Length is simply a measure of the distance along the longest axis. Feret Max is the maximum distance between
parallel tangents at opposing particle borders and Rect A, the longer side of a rectangle constructed around the
particle which is in contact with the two points used to define Feret Max as shown in Figure 5.2-2.
Table 5.2-2 Measurement Method Used to Determine Nominal Particle Size
Key Dimension
Particle Type
(Sizing Parameter Used)
Glass Feret Max
Metal Feret Max
Cellulose Length
Hair (Brown) Length
Plastic (From Tub) Rect A
Rubber (Black) Rect A
Rubber (Grey) Rect A
Rubber (Orange) Rect A
16 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85
selcitraP
001 002 003 005 007 008
000,1
Glass Transparent
X X X
Rubber Orange – Cartridges
Black – Syringes X X X X
Gray – Vials (shown)
Metal Silver/Gray
X X X
srebiF
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Cellulose White
X X X X
Plastic White
X X X X
Hair Brown
X X

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.2-2 Examples of Feret Max And Rect A And B Particle Size Measurements.
5.3 Study Design
A total of eleven companies participated in the study: five from the pharmaceutical industry and six
manufactures of the primary packaging materials. Each company used five inspectors for the study,
each inspector performed the inspection six times, producing a total of 59,400 data points. The data
was reviewed and confirmed as valid prior to being used in the statistical analysis.
Based on the inspection results, non-fibrous particles of 125 µm in size had an average PoD of ap-
proximately 70%. The PoD increases to 95% for a particle of 300 µm. Figure 5.3-1 shows inspection
performance for both particles and fibers and confirms past studies with filled containers (2) showing
increasing PoD with increasing particle and fiber size. The diameter of the circles at specific x-y loca-
tions is proportional to the number of data points which occurred at that location. For fibers, the PoD
is 70% for 300 µm fibers and increases to 90% for fibers between 800-1,000 µm in length. This differ-
ence in detectability can be shown to be largely due to the aspect ratio. Fibers such as hair and plastics
(tub residues) were more easily detected while cellulose fibers were harder to detect.
Figure 5.3-1 Probability Of Detection For Particles And Fibers Of Varying Size During Inspection Of Empty Glass
Containers (Circle diameter is proportional to the number of data points falling at a specific x-y location)
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 17

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Analysis of study results further discussed in 8.3 Appendix C also found that variability between in-
spectors from different companies was negligible, suggesting this method should provide robust results
across the industry.
5.3.1 Normalizing the Particle Size
To better understand the difference in detectability between fibers and particles the impact of the as-
pect ratio on detectability (which is the relationship between the width and length of the fiber) must
be considered. To address the impact of the aspect ratio the data was normalized by multiplying the
Key Dimension of each particle by its SF. This conversion was applied to both particles and fibers to
create the approximate area that would be seen by the inspector’s unaided eye.
Normalized Particle Size = Key Dimension × Shape Factor (SF)
Using this transformation, the PoD for fibers and particles is similar to the PoD seen in Figure 5.3.1-1
The combined PoD then becomes 80% for 100 µm particulate and 95% for particulates of 200 µm.
The diameter of the circles at specific x-y locations is proportional to the number of data points which
occurred at that location.
In summary, a core element of the study was the creation of sample kits containing realistic defect ex-
amples where the PoD was not compromised or biased by the sample preparation (e.g., if the glue hold-
ing the particle is visible). By preparing these kits with defects that appear as those found during routine
inspection the performance of the inspector using this method could be verified in a controlled way.
The study produced an extensive database with 49,360 validated data points, thereby providing a high
degree of statistical confidence in the conclusions drawn on inspection performance. This study found
that using the compendial inspection conditions the PoD for visible particles ranged from 70% for
Figure 5.3.1-1 Probability Of Detection For Particles And Fibers Of Varying Size During Inspection Of Empty Glass
Containers With Size Normalized To Apparent Area (Circle diameter is proportional to the number of data points falling at a
specific x-y location)
18 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
125 µm particles to 95% for particles >300 µm. Due to their aspect ratios, fibers are more difficult to
detect and their corresponding PoD are 80% for 300 µm fibers to 90% for fibers >800 µm.
These results align well with detectability studies performed on filled containers following the com-
pendial methods (6,26,28). These earlier studies demonstrated that under controlled conditions, the
smallest size standard sphere that could be reliably detected (i.e., average PoD >70%) was 150 µm.
In conclusion, from this study with empty containers and the previous work on filled containers, this
method can be used successfully for the inspection of unfilled RTU containers by both the pharma-
ceutical manufacturing companies and the glass component suppliers. Inspectors using this method
should be trained and qualified using test kits with well characterized and representative samples that
accurately simulate routine defects and defect free samples. Additional review and discussion of the
data analysis on inspection performance can be found in Section 8.3 Appendix C.
