4.0 Elastomeric Closures Test Method
To standardized a method that will allow both elastomer suppliers and pharmaceutical companies
to have meaningful data where it is reasonable to make comparisons, a new method was developed
leveraging accepted aspects of the existing USP <788> Method 2 (23) and the ISO 8871-3 methods
(24). The new method described in Section 4.1 (the Enhanced Closures Testing Method) is specific to
characterizing the visible particle load present in elastomeric closures and establishes a test to perform
specifically on elastomeric closures after they are collected in their final packaging to ensure test results
are representative of the product as used by pharmaceutical manufacturers.
4.1 Enhanced Closures Testing Method Development
Currently, specific but different guidance requirements exist for visible and subvisible particulates in
parenterals. For final product inspection, the distinction between visible and subvisible is established
by what can be seen by the unaided human eye when performing the compendial method inspection
of approximately 10 sec per container in front of black and white backgrounds under controlled light-
ing. If a particle is observed in a final-filled container by the unaided eye of a qualified inspector, it is
classified as a visible particulate defect and considered against the visible particle requirements such as
those defined in USP <790> (6).
In the case of packaging components for injectable products, suppliers of these components often per-
form an inspection for particulate matter at the time of release. Likewise, pharmaceutical manufactur-
ing companies often perform a particulate test at incoming receipt. The testing of these components
is intended to demonstrate that they meet specification and are appropriate for their intended use. As
with final product testing, component testing should be capable of classifying any particulate on the
components as either visible or subvisible. In cases where the packaging components are inspected by
the unaided human eye for particulate, the same principles for classification apply. Namely, any par-
ticulate observed by the unaided human eye as part of packaging component testing will be considered
visible.
In some cases, testing for particulate in packaging components will use analytical methods that exceed the
ability of the unaided human eye. The most common example of such testing is a method that involves
rinsing packaging components, filtering this rinsate, and then examining the filter under a microscope
to measure and count any observed particulates. Microscopic examination will detect a wide range of
particles including some which are not visible to the unaided human eye (i.e., subvisible) in addition to
particles that are visible to the unaided eye. For this reason, the microscope confounds the ability of the
test method to make the important distinction of visible versus subvisible. This challenge is common to
any analytical or inspection method that exceeds human detection capability. Examples include current
AVI systems, artificial intelligence applications, and numerous chemical and microbial assays.
4.1.1 Size Threshold
To allow for differences between visible and subvisible particles when using instrumental methods
with capability that exceeds the unaided human eye, a size threshold is required to determine a visible
particulate. The particulate size which is visible during inspection in filled product containers is the
basis for the size thresholds. This approach ensures that particulate classification (i.e., visible and sub-
visible) in packaging components will more clearly connect to the regulations for visible and subvisible
particulates in filled product containers.
Multiple studies (2) have been performed on the detectability of particulate matter of various sizes
in the final containers of parenteral products when inspected by qualified inspectors following the
compendial methods (6,26,28). These studies have demonstrated that under controlled conditions,
the smallest size standard sphere that could be reliably detected (i.e., average PoD >70%) is 150 µm
(2). The same studies demonstrated negligible detection of 50 µm particulates and variable detection
for 100 µm particulates.
8 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Based on this understanding of detection as a function of particle size in parenterals, the value of 100
µm was selected as the threshold above which particles would be classified as visible when using an
analytical method that exceeds the capability of the unaided human eye. The 100 µm threshold was
conservatively selected to ensure that most particulate matter, even those with a moderate chance of
being seen by the unaided human eye in a filled container, would be classified as “visible” by the ana-
lytical method using this threshold value. The 100 µm threshold is considered conservative because it
is derived from the best case inspection conditions (i.e., clear solution, clear 10 mL vial, compendial
lighting, background, and inspection time) and because it is lower than the 150 µm value established
as the lower limit where detection in final containers is considered reliable (i.e., average PoD >70%).
When establishing a threshold defining a particle as visible, the particle geometry must also be considered.
The 100 µm threshold was derived from studies of the detectability of standard spheres in liquid filled
containers. Therefore, the 100 µm value is most applicable for an equant particulate which has an approxi-
mate 1:1:1 aspect ratio (length:width:thickness). This is similar to the ratio of a circle when considering the
profile of the particulate in two dimensions. However, fibrous particles can have much higher aspect ratios.
Such fiber-like particles need to be much longer in length as compared to an equivalent spherical diameter
to be reliably detected in final product containers (1). The lower ability to detect a fiber-like particle versus
that of a spherical particle is related to the two-dimensional profile of the two shapes and how this profile
presents to the inspector. For example, a single 100 µm sphere has nearly eight times the two-dimensional
surface area as a 100 µm fiber-like particle with an aspect ratio of 10:1 (length:width).
Based on the reduced detectability of fiber-like particles, a second threshold size to classify a particulate
as visible was established for particulate with fiber-like geometries (i.e., those with a length to width
aspect ratios >5). The size threshold to consider a fiber-like particulate visible was derived by calculat-
ing the length of a fiber with an equivalent two-dimensional surface area as the 150 µm spheres which
were established as the lower limit where detection in final containers is considered reliable. For this
calculation, an aspect ratio of 5 was used as a conservative limit such that higher aspect ratios would
result in the classification of even longer fiber lengths as subvisible. Based on this approach, a particu-
late with fiber-like geometry would need to be greater than 300 µm to be considered visible when
observed using analytical methods more capable than the unaided human eye. Table 4.1.1-1 shows
the two size limits that define a particle classified as visible or subvisible when using analytical methods
to test primary packaging components for particulates.
The threshold values shown in Table 4.1.1-1 apply to the testing of packaging components for partic-
ulates when an analytical method is used that exceeds the capability of the unaided human eye. These
thresholds should not be applied to drug product final-filled container inspection, where the unaided
human eye is the standard method used to assess whether visible particle levels meet the “essentially
free” requirement and inspection performance may vary from the thresholds established here. Specifi-
cally, finished product inspection performance may be affected by the container color and design and
the product type (e.g., solution color, opacity, density). These confounding characteristics are removed
from the test described herein. Additionally, the size thresholds should not be applied to any particu-
late that is detected by the unaided human eye during testing of the packaging components, as the act
of detecting the particulate would be definitive proof that the particulate is visible. That classification
should not be overridden by subsequent analytical characterization.
Table 4.1.1-1 Threshold Value to Use when Classifying Particles as Visible or Subvisible (by methods more sensitive
as compared to the unaided eye)
Aspect Ratio
Category Visible Threshold Subvisible
(length:width)
Particle <5 100 µm <100 µm
Fiber ≥5 300 µm <300 µm
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 9

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4.1.2 Novel Particle Size Measurement Tool
The assessment of particles in elastomer components traditionally involves rinsing the components,
then filtering the rinsate, and finally examining the filter under a microscope. No thresholds to dif-
ferentiate visible from subvisible, as discussed above, have been established. To consistently apply the
principles of the visible particle size thresholds defined in Section 4.1, a novel measurement tool was
developed for use in elastomer particle testing involving microscopic analysis of the filtrate.
Figure 4.1.2-1 depicts a novel reticle design that enables an analyst to readily determine whether
particles observed microscopically on a filter should be considered visible or subvisible. The reticle has
two shapes in the view field: a circle, and a rectangle. The circle is to be sized such that for a given mi-
croscope under the intended magnification, the circle is equivalent to a diameter of 100 µm. Similarly,
the rectangle is 300 µm × 60 µm to address both size and aspect ratio thresholds for fiber-like particles.
The reticle design shown in Figure 4.1.2-1 allows for rapid and consistent application of the particle
size and aspect ratio thresholds established for this test. When an analyst examines the filter through
a microscope, they simply compare any particle observed against the rectangle and circle templates in
the reticle. Any particle that fits entirely within either of the two shapes is considered subvisible and is
not to be counted as visible. Those that extend beyond the boundaries of either template are counted
as visible, and depending on the aspect ratio as a particle or fiber.
4.2 Summary for Performing the Enhanced Closures Testing Method
A summary of the Enhanced Closure Testing Method for counting visible particles on elastomeric clo-
sures follows. Refer to 8.1 Appendix A for a detailed discussion on the development of this method.
A number of parts (normalized for surface area) are placed in an Erlenmeyer Flask, and 50 ml of sur-
factant solution is dispensed and added to the flask. The flask is then placed on an orbital shaker to
agitate the parts and remove visible particles from the surface. After 20 seconds of shaking the flask is
removed from the shaker and the surfactant solution is immediately filtered through a membrane filter
(a gray filter was used to enhance contrast for both light and dark colored particles and fibers). The
rinsing process is repeated and the filter is allowed to dry. Once the filter is dry, any visible particles
present are counted by using a specialized reticle and an optical stereomicroscope.
A thorough discussion of the sample preparation process and the counting methodology used to eva-
luate within and between operator replicate samples can also be found in 8.2 Appendix B.
Rectangle template for fibers:
300 µm x 60 µm
Circle template for particles: 100 µm
Figure 4.1.2-1 Microscope Reticle Design For Elastomer Component Particle Analysis
10 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4.3 Method Qualification Strategy and Lessons Learned
Preliminary studies for attribute agreement revealed that rigorous training and easy-to-follow instruc-
tions reduces the subjectivity of the analyst’s counting technique. counting techniques. Detailed in-
structions and the use of the unique counting reticle described in Section 4.1 are key to this training.
Repeatability of the particle and fiber count data was proven when multiple analysts inspected each
other’s filter samples. The material found to be best suited for training analysts and qualification of the
method was to select stopper populations prior to their pharmaceutical washing step. These stoppers
provided particle counts that were sufficiently high to yield meaningful statistical evaluation.
In attempting to measure repeatability when performing multiple sample extractions from a single
stopper bag or across multiple stopper bags, significant variability was observed. Specific factors con-
tributing to this variability in the particle counts were identified through the multiple design of experi-
ments (DOE) based investigations and subsequent review of the findings with the operators involved.
The inherent lack of homogeneity of particle and fiber deposition on the surface of elastomeric com-
ponents that are packaged within a bag or collectively transported in multiple cartons from the same
batch was one of the underlying root causes for the inconsistent initial results observed early in the
development of this test method. Repetitive handling, sampling, and shipping greatly increases vari-
ability and localization of particles.
Another challenge identified during development and qualification of this method was to determine the
number of stoppers needed for training and qualification. Because it is common for commercial stop-
per batches to have particle counts near zero, these batches are not ideal to train analysts or qualify the
method. There were several attempts made to purposely seed particles into stopper batches, but these
were not successful. Generating appropriate particulate loading through various attempts at artificially
seeding with shredded fragments of rubber and aliquots of a cellulose emulsion proved to be ineffective
due to inconsistent distribution within the bag, which in turn resulted in highly variable recovery.
Additional detail on the development of this method and the evaluation of contributions to method
variability can be found in 8.1 Appendix A.
