1.0 Introduction
Visual inspection of filled injectable products is an important part of the control of the manufacturing
process. It offers a means to improve quality by removing noncompliant units and provides informa-
tion to drive continuous process improvement.
Visual Inspection (VI) may be accomplished in several ways: manually (MVI) with the unaided eye
under controlled conditions of lighting and time; semi-automated visual inspection (SAVI), which
combines 1) automated handling of the containers to be inspected with human vision, and 2) a means
to determine whether an individual unit should be accepted or rejected; and thirdly, automated visual
inspection (AVI), which offers a validatable method using digital cameras to acquire images of the
product and computational tools to analyze those images against preset criteria to determine if the
unit is acceptable. While MVI is the reference method described in all the pharmacopoeias, all three
categories are acceptable with appropriate qualification or validation.
For MVI, the visible range for particles in many filled injectable products is generally agreed to begin
at 100 µm based on studies in clear glass vials (1). However, not all particles of this size can be reliably
detected. Nominal probability of detection (PoD) for 100 µm particles is often 40-50% with PoD
increasing with increasing particle size. Single particles greater than 200 µm in clear solution and in 10
mL clear vials typically achieve a PoD >95% (2).
To reliably meet visible particle acceptance criterion for filled products, careful control of the compo-
nents used in the process is required. Criteria must generally be tighter than that of the finished prod-
uct to compensate for the cumulative effects of multiple components (e.g., container and elastomeric
seal), potential sources from the formulation and filling equipment, and the manufacturing environ-
ment. Today, most components are not subjected to tighter requirements as part of their incoming
inspection and acceptance for use. However, specifications that meet stricter requirements are most
critical for ready-to-sterilize (RTS) and ready-to-use (RTU) components since they do not undergo
further particle removal steps.
1.1 Purpose
This technical report addresses test and inspection methods for visible particles in primary packaging
components for injectable products specifically glass vials and syringes, and the elastomeric closures
used to seal them. This document is most relevant for RTS and RTU components since these are not
subjected to a further cleaning process immediately before use. These studies and methods were de-
veloped as part of a larger initiative to eliminate visible particles in injectable products. An overview
of this initiative was published (3) previously, and a detailed analysis of particle entry points to the
manufacturing process was subsequently published (4).
1.2 Scope
The use of particle, particulate, and particulate matter all have the same meaning when used within
this report. They are used in various global standards and compendia with equivalent meaning. In gen-
eral, this term applies to foreign material which is unintended and either removable from the surface
of a primary packaging component or freely moving within a filled and sealed pharmaceutical dosage
form.
The test and inspection methods discussed within this report are the first step in a standard setting
process. Once test and inspection methods are available, accepted, and implemented, they can be used
to assess process capability and establish meaningful process control limits. Without reliable measure-
ments, reliable control limits are not possible.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 1

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2.0 Glossary and Abbreviations
Definitions have been provided to help clarify the concepts discussed in this technical report. While
some of these definitions vary among companies, the definitions described below are consistent for use
within this document.
Area Particulate
Measured surface area of a flat projection of a See Particle.
particle.
Perimeter
Aspect Ratio Measured length of the outer edges of a particle.
The length of a particle or fiber divided by its width.
Probability of detection (PoD)
Extrinsic Particle or Fiber The likelihood that a given particle will be seen
Foreign material that comes from outside the and removed with a specific inspection method
primary process. Often these are from the manu- and under specific conditions. Usually expressed
facturing environment or incomplete cleaning of as a percentage (0-100%) but may also be ex-
components. They are uncontrolled. pressed as a probability (0-1).
Feret Min and Max Rect A
Feret Min is the minimum distance between par- The longest side length when a rectangle is con-
allel tangents at opposing particle borders. Feret structed around the particle.
Max is the maximum distance between parallel
tangents at opposing particle borders. Ready-to-sterilize (RTS)
Washed components supplied in a package suit-
Intrinsic Particle able for sterilization prior to use with sterile in-
A particle that comes from within the primary jectable products.
process. These are qualified product contact ma-
terials and are often associated with the primary Ready-to-use (RTU)
packaging components. They are unplanned but Washed and sterilized components supplied in a
not unexpected. package suitable for transfer into an aseptic pro-
cessing area and used with sterile injectable prod-
Length ucts without further processing.
The measure of the distance along its longest axis.
Shape factor (SF)/Circularity
Light obscuration (LO) Provides information on the roundness of a par-
Analytical technique measuring the size and quan- ticle. The SF value is between 0 and 1, where 1,
tity of subvisible particles. represents a circle. A is the area of the particle
and p is the perimeter.
Membrane/microscopy (MM)
Analytical technique to collect particles from a Subvisible particle
liquid sample on a membrane filter followed by A particle with a size <100 µm in diameter.
manual examination (sizing and counting) with
a microscope. Visible fiber
A fiber-like particle with an aspect ratio ≥5 and a
Particle length >300 µm.
Foreign material which is unintended and either
removable from the surface of a primary packag- Visible particle
ing component or freely moving within a filled A particle with an aspect ratio of <5 and a length
and sealed pharmaceutical dosage form. The term >100 µm.
particle is used interchangeably with “particulate”
and “particulate matter” without any intended
difference in meaning.
2 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2.1 Abbreviations
AQL Acceptable Quality Limit min Minutes
AVI Automated Visual Inspection MM Membrane/Microscopy
cGMP Current Good Manufacturing Practices MVI Manual Visual Inspection
DOE Design Of Experiments NMT Not More Than
EP European Pharmacopeia or Pharm PMF Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Forum
Europa PoD Probability Of Detection
FDA United States Food and Drug RPM Revolutions Per Minute
Administration RTS Ready-To-Sterilize
IM Intramuscular RTU Ready-To-Use
ISO International Organization for SAVI Semi-Automated Visual Inspection
Standardization sec Seconds
IV Intravenous SF Shape Factor
JP Japanese Pharmacopeia TR Technical Report
LED Light Emitting Diode USP United States Pharmacopeia
LO Light Obscuration VI Visual Inspection
