Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Technical Report No. 85
Enhanced Test Methods for Visible Particle Detection and
Enumeration on Elastomeric Closures and Glass Containers

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Enhanced Test Methods for Visible Particle Detection and Enumeration on
Elastomeric Closures and Glass Containers Team
Authors
Core Team
Tia Bush, Amgen (Chair) Anthony Perry, Schott
John Ayres, MD, Pharma Safety Solutions John Shabushnig, Ph.D., Insight Pharma
Consulting
Cecile Begat, Bayer
Xu Song, MEng, Astra Zeneca
Antonio Burazer, Takeda
Hervé Soukiassian, MEng, BD
Fran DeGrazio, West Pharmaceutical Services
Andrew Spasoff, MS, Astra Zeneca
Carol Flynn, MEng, Corning
Amy Stanton, Amgen
Abizer Harianawala, Stevanato Group
Dorothee Streich, Ph.D., Bayer
Paul Kinsey, GSK
Rick Watson, Merck
Jahanvi Miller, MBA, PDA
Elastomer Subteam
Ravi Patel, West Pharmaceutical Services Gert Gregoire, MBA, Datwyler
(Co-Chair)
Lucia Ino, West Pharmaceutical Services
John Rech, West Pharmaceutical Services
Denise Schnaufer, Merck
(Co-Chair)
Larry Staub, MS, Quality Advisor
Andrea DeSalvia, Aptar
Julie Suman, Next Breath
Wadi Farach, MEng, Amgen
Rick Watson, Merck
Glass Subteam
Hervé Soukiassian, MEng, BD (Co-Chair) Martina Marchioro, Stevanato Group
Paul Kinsey, GSK (Co-Chair) Didier Morel, BD
Alfred Breunig, Nipro Pharma Packaging Anthony Perry, Schott
Benjamin Coutan, MBA, Gerresheimer Volker Rupertus, Schott AG
Wadi Farach, MEng, Amgen Daniele Zuccato, Schott AG
Carol Flynn, MEng, Corning Incorporated
Contributors
Jean Bernard Theo, BMS Abriana Rozentsvayg, MS, Pfizer
Buffy Hudson-Curtis, PhD, GSK Christian Schwarz, Amgen
Swen Maas, Material Analytischer Service Linda Wildling, PhD, Takeda
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Forum (PMF) for their encouragement
and support in development of these studies. We wish to further thank the following companies for
their participation in the studies documented herein: Amgen Inc., Aptar, Bayer AG, BD, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Corning Inc, Datwyler, Gerresheimer AG, GlaxoSmithKline, Material Analytischer Service,
Nipro Pharma Packaging, Stevanato Group, Schott, Takeda, and West Pharmaceutical Services.

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Enhanced Test Methods for
Visible Particle Detection
and Enumeration on
Elastomeric Closures and
Glass Containers
Technical Report No. 85
ISBN: 978-1-945584-26-8
© 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.
All rights reserved.
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 200
Bethesda, MD20814 USA
Tel: 1(301) 656-5900
Fax: 1(301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table of Contents
1.0 INTRODUCTION ...............................................1 5.0 GLASS CONTAINER INSPECTION METHOD.........11
1.1 Purpose ................................................................1 5.1 Inspection of Ready-to-Use Empty Glass
1.2 Scope ...................................................................1 Containers .........................................................11
5.1.1 Operator Training for the Enhanced
Container Inspection Method .........................12
2.0 GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS .......................2
5.1.2 Equipment and Setup ....................................12
2.1 Abbreviations .......................................................3
5.1.3 Magnification Requirements To Inspect Glass
Containers ......................................................14
3.0 CURRENT STATE OF VISUAL INSPECTION FOR
5.1.4 Glass Container Inspection Procedure ............14
PARTICLES.......................................................3
5.2 Method Qualification Strategy and Detection ....15
3.1 Patient Risk Assessment .......................................4 5.3 Study Design ......................................................17
3.2 Existing Test Methods and Limitations .................5 5.3.1 Normalizing the Particle Size .........................18
3.2.1 ISO Test Method 8871-3 ..................................6
6.0 CONCLUSION .................................................19
3.2.2 U.S. Pharmacopeia Methods ............................6
3.2.3 European Pharmacopeia Methods ...................7
7.0 REFERENCES ..................................................20
3.2.4 Japanese Pharmacopeia Methods ....................7
3.3 Conclusion ...........................................................7
8.0 APPENDICES ..................................................21
4.0 ELASTOMERIC CLOSURES TEST METHOD ............8 8.1 Appendix A. Additional Information on Enhanced
Closures Testing Method Development ....................21
4.1 Enhanced Closures Testing Method Development 8
8.2 Appendix B. Method: Determination of Visible
4.1.1 Size Threshold ..................................................8
Particles and Fibers on Elastomeric Components by
4.1.2 Novel Particle Size Measurement Tool ............10
Membrane Filtration and Microscopic Examination 34
4.2 Summary for Performing the Enhanced Closures 8.3 Appendix C. Additional Information on Empty
Testing Method ..................................................10 Glass Inspection Capability Studies ....................36
4.3 Method Qualification Strategy and Lessons 8.4 Appendix D. Method: Visual Inspection of Empty
Learned ..............................................................11 Glass Containers .................................................44
FIGURES AND TABLES INDEX
Figure 3.0-1 FDA Recall Notices For Injectable Products, Figure 5.1.2-3 Placement Of Container Within The
Years 2010-2019 ..........................................3 Inspection Hood During Inspection ............14
Figure 3.0-2 FDA Recall Notices For Particles In Injectable Figure 5.2-1 Locations Where Particles Were Seeded Into
Products, Years 2010-2019 ...........................4 Or Onto Containers (Vials, Cartridges, And
Syringes) In Prepared Test Kits ...................15
Table 3.2.2-1 Inspection Conditions and Acceptance
Criteria for Visible Particles Found in the USP, Table 5.2-1 Summary of Nominal Particle Size by
EP, and JP. .....................................................7 Material .....................................................16
Table 4.1.1-1 Threshold Value to Use when Classifying Particles Table 5.2-2 Measurement Method Used to Determine
as Visible or Subvisible (by methods more Nominal Particle Size .................................16
sensitive as compared to the unaided eye) .........9
Figure 5.2-2 Examples of Feret Max And Rect A And B
Figure 4.1.2-1 Microscope Reticle Design For Elastomer Particle Size Measurements .......................17
Component Particle Analysis .....................10
Figure 5.3-1 Probability Of Detection For Particles And
Table 5.1-1 Key Attributes of Proposed Inspection
Fibers Of Varying Size During Inspection Of
Conditions and Method .............................12
Empty Glass Containers ..............................17
Figure 5.1.2-1 Visual Inspection Workstation ....................13
Figure 5.3.1-1 Probability Of Detection For Particles And
Figure 5.1.2-2 Example Of Container Inspection Using Fibers Of Varying Size During Inspection
Recommended Method And Relative Of Empty Glass Containers With Size
Placement In The Inspection Hood .............13 Normalized To Apparent Area.....................18

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure A1 Process Map of the Pilot (method Figure A18 Comparison of inspection performance by both
development) and Qualification Strategy ..22 supplier and operator for fibers >300 µm .....32
Figure A2 Method Qualification Sample Generation Figure A19 Box plot of performance by supplier for
Stratification ...........................................23 fibers >300 µm .......................................33
Figure A3 Process Map of Final Method Qualification
Table B1 Orbital Shaker RPM Ranges......................34
Study .......................................................24
Figure B1 Flowchart showing the use of the
Figure A4 Interval plot of Supplier 1 results for
specified reticle to determine status of
particles >100 µm for each operator .......25
any observed particles on the filter ..........37
Figure A5 Interval plot of replicate inspection results
Table C1 Summary of Nominal Particle Size by
for Supplier 1, Operators 1 vs 3 and Operator
Material ...................................................38
2 vs 3, for particles >100 µm ...................25
Figure A6 Interval plot of Supplier 1 results for Figure C1 Shape factor vs size for the particles and
particles >300 µm for each operator .......26 fibers seeded into test vials ......................38
Figure A7 Interval plot of replicate inspection results Figure C2 Graphic comparison of test kit
for Supplier 1, Operators 1 vs 3 & Operators composition (kits A, B, and C) ..................39
2 vs 3, for fibers >300 µm ........................26
Figure C3 Distribution of time required to complete
Figure A8 Interval plot of Supplier 2 results for inspection of test kit ................................40
particles >100 µm for each operator .......27
Figure C4 Particle inspection results with inspectors
Figure A9 Interval plot of Supplier 2 group
having prior experience with empty
performance for particles >100 µm.........27
containers (Yes) and those without such
Figure A10 Interval plot of Supplier 2 results for fibers experience (No) .......................................40
>300 µm for each operator .....................28
Figure C5 Fiber inspection results with inspectors
Figure A11 Interval plot of Supplier 2 group
having both prior experience (Yes) with
performance for fibers >300 µm .............28
empty containers and those without such
Figure A12 Interval plot of Supplier 3 results for experience (No) .......................................41
particles >100 µm for each operator .......29
Figure C6 Probability of detection for particles of
Figure A13 Interval plot of Supplier 3 group
differing type and size .............................41
performance for particles >100 µm.........29
Figure C7 Probability of detection for fibers of
Figure A14 Interval plot of Supplier 3 results for fibers
differing type and size .............................42
>300 µm for each operator .....................30
Figure C8 Probability of detection for particles in
Figure A 15 Interval plot of Supplier 3 group
various container types and sizes .............42
performance for fibers >300 µm .............30
Figure C9 Probability of detection for fibers in various
Figure A16 Comparison of inspection performance by
both supplier and operator for particles container types and sizes .........................43
>100 µm .................................................31 Figure C10 Boruta Plot of inspection study results
Figure A17 Box plot of performance by supplier for demonstrating factors significant to reliable
particles >100 µm ...................................32 inspection performance ...........................43

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
1.0 Introduction
Visual inspection of filled injectable products is an important part of the control of the manufacturing
process. It offers a means to improve quality by removing noncompliant units and provides informa-
tion to drive continuous process improvement.
Visual Inspection (VI) may be accomplished in several ways: manually (MVI) with the unaided eye
under controlled conditions of lighting and time; semi-automated visual inspection (SAVI), which
combines 1) automated handling of the containers to be inspected with human vision, and 2) a means
to determine whether an individual unit should be accepted or rejected; and thirdly, automated visual
inspection (AVI), which offers a validatable method using digital cameras to acquire images of the
product and computational tools to analyze those images against preset criteria to determine if the
unit is acceptable. While MVI is the reference method described in all the pharmacopoeias, all three
categories are acceptable with appropriate qualification or validation.
For MVI, the visible range for particles in many filled injectable products is generally agreed to begin
at 100 µm based on studies in clear glass vials (1). However, not all particles of this size can be reliably
detected. Nominal probability of detection (PoD) for 100 µm particles is often 40-50% with PoD
increasing with increasing particle size. Single particles greater than 200 µm in clear solution and in 10
mL clear vials typically achieve a PoD >95% (2).
To reliably meet visible particle acceptance criterion for filled products, careful control of the compo-
nents used in the process is required. Criteria must generally be tighter than that of the finished prod-
uct to compensate for the cumulative effects of multiple components (e.g., container and elastomeric
seal), potential sources from the formulation and filling equipment, and the manufacturing environ-
ment. Today, most components are not subjected to tighter requirements as part of their incoming
inspection and acceptance for use. However, specifications that meet stricter requirements are most
critical for ready-to-sterilize (RTS) and ready-to-use (RTU) components since they do not undergo
further particle removal steps.
1.1 Purpose
This technical report addresses test and inspection methods for visible particles in primary packaging
components for injectable products specifically glass vials and syringes, and the elastomeric closures
used to seal them. This document is most relevant for RTS and RTU components since these are not
subjected to a further cleaning process immediately before use. These studies and methods were de-
veloped as part of a larger initiative to eliminate visible particles in injectable products. An overview
of this initiative was published (3) previously, and a detailed analysis of particle entry points to the
manufacturing process was subsequently published (4).
1.2 Scope
The use of particle, particulate, and particulate matter all have the same meaning when used within
this report. They are used in various global standards and compendia with equivalent meaning. In gen-
eral, this term applies to foreign material which is unintended and either removable from the surface
of a primary packaging component or freely moving within a filled and sealed pharmaceutical dosage
form.
The test and inspection methods discussed within this report are the first step in a standard setting
process. Once test and inspection methods are available, accepted, and implemented, they can be used
to assess process capability and establish meaningful process control limits. Without reliable measure-
ments, reliable control limits are not possible.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 1

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2.0 Glossary and Abbreviations
Definitions have been provided to help clarify the concepts discussed in this technical report. While
some of these definitions vary among companies, the definitions described below are consistent for use
within this document.
Area Particulate
Measured surface area of a flat projection of a See Particle.
particle.
Perimeter
Aspect Ratio Measured length of the outer edges of a particle.
The length of a particle or fiber divided by its width.
Probability of detection (PoD)
Extrinsic Particle or Fiber The likelihood that a given particle will be seen
Foreign material that comes from outside the and removed with a specific inspection method
primary process. Often these are from the manu- and under specific conditions. Usually expressed
facturing environment or incomplete cleaning of as a percentage (0-100%) but may also be ex-
components. They are uncontrolled. pressed as a probability (0-1).
Feret Min and Max Rect A
Feret Min is the minimum distance between par- The longest side length when a rectangle is con-
allel tangents at opposing particle borders. Feret structed around the particle.
Max is the maximum distance between parallel
tangents at opposing particle borders. Ready-to-sterilize (RTS)
Washed components supplied in a package suit-
Intrinsic Particle able for sterilization prior to use with sterile in-
A particle that comes from within the primary jectable products.
process. These are qualified product contact ma-
terials and are often associated with the primary Ready-to-use (RTU)
packaging components. They are unplanned but Washed and sterilized components supplied in a
not unexpected. package suitable for transfer into an aseptic pro-
cessing area and used with sterile injectable prod-
Length ucts without further processing.
The measure of the distance along its longest axis.
Shape factor (SF)/Circularity
Light obscuration (LO) Provides information on the roundness of a par-
Analytical technique measuring the size and quan- ticle. The SF value is between 0 and 1, where 1,
tity of subvisible particles. represents a circle. A is the area of the particle
and p is the perimeter.
Membrane/microscopy (MM)
Analytical technique to collect particles from a Subvisible particle
liquid sample on a membrane filter followed by A particle with a size <100 µm in diameter.
manual examination (sizing and counting) with
a microscope. Visible fiber
A fiber-like particle with an aspect ratio ≥5 and a
Particle length >300 µm.
Foreign material which is unintended and either
removable from the surface of a primary packag- Visible particle
ing component or freely moving within a filled A particle with an aspect ratio of <5 and a length
and sealed pharmaceutical dosage form. The term >100 µm.
particle is used interchangeably with “particulate”
and “particulate matter” without any intended
difference in meaning.
2 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2.1 Abbreviations
AQL Acceptable Quality Limit min Minutes
AVI Automated Visual Inspection MM Membrane/Microscopy
cGMP Current Good Manufacturing Practices MVI Manual Visual Inspection
DOE Design Of Experiments NMT Not More Than
EP European Pharmacopeia or Pharm PMF Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Forum
Europa PoD Probability Of Detection
FDA United States Food and Drug RPM Revolutions Per Minute
Administration RTS Ready-To-Sterilize
IM Intramuscular RTU Ready-To-Use
ISO International Organization for SAVI Semi-Automated Visual Inspection
Standardization sec Seconds
IV Intravenous SF Shape Factor
JP Japanese Pharmacopeia TR Technical Report
LED Light Emitting Diode USP United States Pharmacopeia
LO Light Obscuration VI Visual Inspection
3.0 Current State of Visual Inspection for Particles
A review of recalls of injectable products over the last ten years provides a useful measure of the current
state of manufacturing and particle control. Figure 3.0-1 shows this information for product regulated
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The major contributors to these recalls are lack of
sterility/sterility assurance and particles.
Particle recalls alone in Figure 3.0-2 shows a notable upward trend in 2013 with a peak in 2014. This
was driven by an increased occurrence of both glass and metal particles. This resulted in greater aware-
ness by both manufacturers and regulators and contributed to the higher number of particle recalls in
following years. This situation was exacerbated by the nonspecific requirements for particles found in
the global pharmacopeias but improved with the official publication of USP <790> in 2014 (6). At
present, annual recalls for particles have returned to historical levels, but still account for a significant
amount of product removed from the market and does not consider lots rejected while still within the
control of the manufacturer.
Figure 3.0-1 FDA Recall Notices For Injectable Products, Years 2010-2019 (5)
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 3

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 3.0-2 FDA Recall Notices For Particles In Injectable Products, Years 2010-2019 (5)
3.1 Patient Risk Assessment
All parenteral drug preparations contain particulate matter. Particles ultimately administered to a pa-
tient may originate from the primary packaging components or may enter through the manufacturing
process and during administration from the syringe or infusion set apparatus. Therefore, the potential
patient particulate exposure burden derives from the sum of these sources.
The clinical implications of visible particulate matter in injectables have been reviewed in several recent
publications (7,8). Historically the presence of unintended visible particulate matter has been regarded
as a quality defect which can impact safety resulting in additional batch-related actions, including
batch reinspection, rejection, or recall. Visible product defects such as cracked or leaking containers or
product discoloration often point to a product quality and possible safety issue. While the presence of
a rare or isolated visible particle induces a similar instinctive response, the potential safety implication
requires a comprehensive and contextually-based evaluation.
Patient exposure to particles occurs across a size continuum from submicron to millimeters, while risk
assessments are generally conducted on particles reported as visible or subvisible components and not
the aggregated risk of both subgroups. Assessing the potential risk that patient exposure to particles
might present requires identifying the source of the particle; determining particle-specific attributes
such as size, number, and composition; and ascertaining the intended use including the route and
frequency of administration and relevant patient population characteristics (9). Any impact to the
final product’s benefit-risk profile that might result from the presence of particulate matter arises from
the combination of these elements and calculated once the reference product and characteristics of the
intended recipient are known.
In all instances of injections, the size of the particle is a restricting attribute. The particle must be small
enough (or nonrigid) to pass through the bore of the needle (i.e., the particle must be less than the
internal diameter of the needle in at least two dimensions). Detection probability increases with size
such that larger particles are more likely to be identified with a detection probability (under ideal condi-
tions) typically exceeding 95% for particles that are 200 µm and larger (2). Consequently, the product
is either rejected during manufacture or found during dose preparation and discarded. There have been
no reports identifying patient harm from randomly administered visible particulate matter in pharma-
ceutical preparations (8). Therefore, particles that are ultimately injected will be at or below the limit
of detection of the qualified manufacturing environment with most of those particles being subvisible.
In most instances, the greatest risk to patients receiving injectable medicines is related to a lack of prod-
uct sterility. For this reason alone, a robust inspection program is not sufficient; but rather, a broad
4 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
range of other visible attributes is assessed along with laboratory testing of microbiological, chemical,
and physical parameters. These are based on statistical sampling plans to assess the risk of elevated
bioburden or other related harms in the batch. The risks to product sterility may be mitigated through
processing decisions such as qualified component and product terminal sterilization processes (e.g.,
moist or dry heat, irradiation, or gaseous or vapor treatments). While the presence of a single particle is
unlikely to provide a sufficient substrate to support microbiologic proliferation, multiple units identi-
fied with extrinsic particles should raise an alarm since the source is likely from a nonsterile environ-
ment. Appropriately qualified depyrogenation and autoclaving processes preclude the introduction of
bioburden through primary packaging components.
Inert particles such as those from elastomers or glass generally pose little concern when introduced into
a patient’s subcutaneous tissue or muscle because they are typically sterile or sanitized. However, the
particles could potentially stimulate a local immunologic reaction consisting of macrophages and for-
eign body giant cells at the interface of the particulate material (e.g., a granuloma), but it is likely that
such a reaction would remain asymptomatic (10). More commonly, complications from subcutaneous
and intramuscular medications arise from the irritating properties of the drug product and are often
drug-specific but generally have a minimal impact (11).
Intravenous (IV) infusion of particles may induce phlebitis due to the particles causing direct traumatic
irritation to the vein or from chemical damage by undissolved particles (12). Recent observational studies
have also described instances in select patient cohorts where morbidity has been reduced through the use
of infusion filters, suggesting that particles in the infusate were responsible for the difference in outcomes
(13). Other studies have failed to corroborate these findings in additional patient populations (14).
A particle introduced intravenously that exceeds the internal diameter of a pulmonary capillary (7–12
µm) will lodge in that capillary or a more proximal pulmonary arteriole. While clinical outcomes are
generally benign, such matter introduced into the systemic circulation might stimulate a local immuno-
logic reaction (e.g., a granuloma) in the lung (15). These isolated, small parenchymal lesions generally
remain asymptomatic. In addition, as demonstrated in animal studies, the massive infusion of particu-
lates has been accompanied by histologic evidence of injury to pulmonary capillary endothelial cells (16),
microscopic thrombi in the pulmonary capillaries (17), pulmonary microscopic granulomata (18), and
hepatic inflammatory effects (19). An important distinction to note is that most of the studies above
infused massive amounts of subvisible particles. While an all-inclusive review of the clinical implications
of particulate infusions is beyond the intended scope of this technical report, the potential exists for the
intravascular infusion of particulate matter to cause pathophysiologic injury depending upon the size and
quantity of the particles, and, therefore, should be included as an element in any clinical risk assessment.
In summary, particulate matter will be present in every injectable dose. The risk of visible particles in
injections to a patient is low from products manufactured and inspected under appropriately qualified
current Good Manufacturing Practices conditions (20,21). Their origin, composition, size, numbers,
and characteristics of the intended patient population are all important factors to weigh when assessing
the clinical import from exposure.
3.2 Existing Test Methods and Limitations
Visual inspection of primary packaging components prior to use is hindered by four factors: the lack
of a standardized industry inspection method for particle detection; the diversity of potential particle
defects introduced through the manufacturing process; decreased visual detection capabilities on iso-
lated or empty components; and the probabilistic nature of particle detection (3). Visual inspection
of the packaging components is generally conducted by sampling and not inspection of every piece
(100% inspection), thereby limiting the information necessary to construct an adequate library of the
type and number of particles the process produces. Detection of particles by MVI, SAVI, or AVI is a
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 5

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
cumulative function of the particles’ visible attributes including particle size, shape, color, density, and
reflectivity. Particle detection can also be more difficult in the empty components because the particles
cannot be put in motion as with particles in a liquid product (22).
The absence of standardized methods or visible particle acceptance criteria leaves it to each supplier and
pharmaceutical manufacturer to establish these requirements for each product supplied. While regula-
tory guidance documents and industry publications may provide useful perspectives, the absence of a
clearly articulated standard results in manufacturers subsequently adopting a hybrid approach using
various portions of the published pharmacopeial (6,23) and International Standards Organization
(ISO) methods (24). Identifying the limitations of test methods adapted for the evaluation of primary
packaging components provides the opportunity to develop component-specific methods that would
serve as a common standard for supplier-customer quality consideration.
Understanding the particle attributes is essential for each manufacturer when developing and adopting
appropriate test methods, characterizing particle defect attributes, defining achievable detection capabili-
ties, and assessing the potential impact of particles to the product’s benefit-risk profile. The use of standard
forensic methods of particle characterization (22) can be beneficial to inform the clinical risk assessment
and direct allocation of resources to critical visual inspection and process control strategies. Additionally,
the forensic datasets are important components to identify potential sources of particle ingress or genera-
tion, variability in raw material components, and monitor the stability of manufacturing processes (4).
3.2.1 ISO Test Method 8871-3
ISO 8871-3 Elastomeric parts for parenterals and for devices for pharmaceutical use — Part 3: Determination
of released-particle count (24) provides analytical methods for the extraction of loose particulates from the
surface of elastomeric components used in pharmaceutical packaging applications. The ISO standard is split
into subvisible particle extraction using light extinction (or light obscuration (LO)) and visible particle ex-
traction followed by membrane filtration and microscopic examination (MM) for particle detection. Once
particle extraction is complete, quantification is performed with an optical microscope and a calibrated reticle
at approximately 50x magnification. Particle counts can be conducted either manually or via a validated
automated microscopic method. Both the particle extraction and the counting technique are considered
optimized in evaluating elastomer-associated visible particles. However, the method would require some level
of enhancement for visible particles (i.e., particles >100 µm and fibers >300 µm as defined in this report)
through the design of a reticle capable of differentiating particles from fibers and identifying a shaker for use
in Europe that is comparable to that specified in ISO 8871-3. Additionally, further concern exists regarding
the sensitivity of the method based on the surface area/number of stoppers sampled. Currently, there is no
similar ISO method for particle extraction or characterization for parenteral container inspection.
3.2.2 U.S. Pharmacopeia Methods
USP Chapters <788> and <790> are generally used to provide analytical method guidance for packag-
ing component particle assessment. USP <788> Particulate Matter in Injections (23) provides for two
test methods for the detection of particles ≥ 10 µm in size: LO and MM. The methods do not appear
suitable for elastomeric component particles since surface particle extraction methods are not outlined,
and the sample preparation and counting techniques do not appear applicable for particles >100 µm.
Likewise, the applicability of these methods in the evaluation of glass-related components hold limited
utility for visible particles. While nonfixed particles in glass components might be identified using
these methods, the diversity of particle morphology and container design significantly impact the
sensitivity and applicability of these methods to glass components.
USP <790> Visible Particulates in Injections (6) became official in 2014 Chapter <790>, along with
Chapter <1790> Visual Inspection of Injections (1) established requirements and provides supporting
information to be used along with 100% inspection during the manufacturing process to demonstrate
that the process has produced a batch that is “essentially free” of visible particulates.
6 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 3.2.2-1 provides a comparison of current inspection conditions and acceptance criteria for visible
particles contained in the USP, EP, and JP. The chapters describe the manual inspection environment
(lighting, background, and handling methods) that many component manufacturers have adapted for
the inspection of empty containers and loose components. However, particle detection can also be more
difficult in these components because the particles cannot be put in motion as with particles in a liquid
product and the broad range of potential manufacturing defects generated by glass primary packaging
suppliers. Additionally, these chapters are intended for filled-finished product and do not include defined
test methods with clear requirements and specifications directly applicable to the individual packaging
components used to manufacture injectable products. Therefore, the need for packaging component vi-
sual inspection guidance, which is currently lacking in the pharmacopeias, is critical to help characterize
risk associated with these components and their impact on overall product quality assurance.
Table 3.2.2-1 Inspection Conditions and Acceptance Criteria for Visible Particles Found in the USP, EP, and JP.
Inspection Conditions USP <790> EP 2.9.20 JP 6.06
2,000 – 3,750
Illumination Intensity (lux) 2,000 – 3,750 2,000 – 3,750
8,000 – 10,000*
10 10 10
Inspection Time (sec)
(5 white, 5 black) (5 white, 5 black) (5 white, 5 black)
Backgrounds black and white black and white black and white
“essentially free from
visible particulates”
“clear and practically “free of readily detectable
Acceptance Criteria
ANSI/ASQ Z1.4 particle-free” foreign insoluble matter”
AQL=0.65%
* Higher illumination intensity recommended for plastic containers.
3.2.3 European Pharmacopeia Methods
Two EP chapters govern subvisible and visible particles in sterile injectable products; EP 2.9.19 Parti-
culate contamination: sub-visible particles (25) and EP 2.9.20 Particulate contamination: visible particles
(26), respectively. The chapter on subvisible particles is harmonized with similar chapters found in the
USP and JP, describing the same methods and containing the same acceptance criteria.
Chapter 2.9.20 describes the same inspection conditions as found in the USP and JP but does not
provide a numeric acceptance criterion.
3.2.4 Japanese Pharmacopeia Methods
Like the USP and EP, the JP provides two chapters to address subvisible and visible particles. These are
JP 6.07 Insoluble Particulate Matter Test for Injections (27) for subvisible particles and 6.06 Foreign In-
soluble Matter Test for Injections (28) for visible particles. The subvisible particle test is also harmonized
with the USP and EP while the test for visible particles has harmonized inspection conditions, again
without a numeric acceptance criterion.
3.3 Conclusion
The observations documented in this report are intended to result in a standard test method. Such stan-
dardization is needed to produce reliable and comparable test results. The benefits of such a standard
include clearer communication between supplier and users of pharmaceutical packaging components. It
also permits setting meaningful limits and acceptance criteria for receipt and use of these important pack-
aging components. Such limits would better align with the expectations for the finished products they are
intended to protect and ultimately lead to more reliable supply of particle free sterile medicinal products.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 7

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4.0 Elastomeric Closures Test Method
To standardized a method that will allow both elastomer suppliers and pharmaceutical companies
to have meaningful data where it is reasonable to make comparisons, a new method was developed
leveraging accepted aspects of the existing USP <788> Method 2 (23) and the ISO 8871-3 methods
(24). The new method described in Section 4.1 (the Enhanced Closures Testing Method) is specific to
characterizing the visible particle load present in elastomeric closures and establishes a test to perform
specifically on elastomeric closures after they are collected in their final packaging to ensure test results
are representative of the product as used by pharmaceutical manufacturers.
4.1 Enhanced Closures Testing Method Development
Currently, specific but different guidance requirements exist for visible and subvisible particulates in
parenterals. For final product inspection, the distinction between visible and subvisible is established
by what can be seen by the unaided human eye when performing the compendial method inspection
of approximately 10 sec per container in front of black and white backgrounds under controlled light-
ing. If a particle is observed in a final-filled container by the unaided eye of a qualified inspector, it is
classified as a visible particulate defect and considered against the visible particle requirements such as
those defined in USP <790> (6).
In the case of packaging components for injectable products, suppliers of these components often per-
form an inspection for particulate matter at the time of release. Likewise, pharmaceutical manufactur-
ing companies often perform a particulate test at incoming receipt. The testing of these components
is intended to demonstrate that they meet specification and are appropriate for their intended use. As
with final product testing, component testing should be capable of classifying any particulate on the
components as either visible or subvisible. In cases where the packaging components are inspected by
the unaided human eye for particulate, the same principles for classification apply. Namely, any par-
ticulate observed by the unaided human eye as part of packaging component testing will be considered
visible.
In some cases, testing for particulate in packaging components will use analytical methods that exceed the
ability of the unaided human eye. The most common example of such testing is a method that involves
rinsing packaging components, filtering this rinsate, and then examining the filter under a microscope
to measure and count any observed particulates. Microscopic examination will detect a wide range of
particles including some which are not visible to the unaided human eye (i.e., subvisible) in addition to
particles that are visible to the unaided eye. For this reason, the microscope confounds the ability of the
test method to make the important distinction of visible versus subvisible. This challenge is common to
any analytical or inspection method that exceeds human detection capability. Examples include current
AVI systems, artificial intelligence applications, and numerous chemical and microbial assays.
4.1.1 Size Threshold
To allow for differences between visible and subvisible particles when using instrumental methods
with capability that exceeds the unaided human eye, a size threshold is required to determine a visible
particulate. The particulate size which is visible during inspection in filled product containers is the
basis for the size thresholds. This approach ensures that particulate classification (i.e., visible and sub-
visible) in packaging components will more clearly connect to the regulations for visible and subvisible
particulates in filled product containers.
Multiple studies (2) have been performed on the detectability of particulate matter of various sizes
in the final containers of parenteral products when inspected by qualified inspectors following the
compendial methods (6,26,28). These studies have demonstrated that under controlled conditions,
the smallest size standard sphere that could be reliably detected (i.e., average PoD >70%) is 150 µm
(2). The same studies demonstrated negligible detection of 50 µm particulates and variable detection
for 100 µm particulates.
8 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Based on this understanding of detection as a function of particle size in parenterals, the value of 100
µm was selected as the threshold above which particles would be classified as visible when using an
analytical method that exceeds the capability of the unaided human eye. The 100 µm threshold was
conservatively selected to ensure that most particulate matter, even those with a moderate chance of
being seen by the unaided human eye in a filled container, would be classified as “visible” by the ana-
lytical method using this threshold value. The 100 µm threshold is considered conservative because it
is derived from the best case inspection conditions (i.e., clear solution, clear 10 mL vial, compendial
lighting, background, and inspection time) and because it is lower than the 150 µm value established
as the lower limit where detection in final containers is considered reliable (i.e., average PoD >70%).
When establishing a threshold defining a particle as visible, the particle geometry must also be considered.
The 100 µm threshold was derived from studies of the detectability of standard spheres in liquid filled
containers. Therefore, the 100 µm value is most applicable for an equant particulate which has an approxi-
mate 1:1:1 aspect ratio (length:width:thickness). This is similar to the ratio of a circle when considering the
profile of the particulate in two dimensions. However, fibrous particles can have much higher aspect ratios.
Such fiber-like particles need to be much longer in length as compared to an equivalent spherical diameter
to be reliably detected in final product containers (1). The lower ability to detect a fiber-like particle versus
that of a spherical particle is related to the two-dimensional profile of the two shapes and how this profile
presents to the inspector. For example, a single 100 µm sphere has nearly eight times the two-dimensional
surface area as a 100 µm fiber-like particle with an aspect ratio of 10:1 (length:width).
Based on the reduced detectability of fiber-like particles, a second threshold size to classify a particulate
as visible was established for particulate with fiber-like geometries (i.e., those with a length to width
aspect ratios >5). The size threshold to consider a fiber-like particulate visible was derived by calculat-
ing the length of a fiber with an equivalent two-dimensional surface area as the 150 µm spheres which
were established as the lower limit where detection in final containers is considered reliable. For this
calculation, an aspect ratio of 5 was used as a conservative limit such that higher aspect ratios would
result in the classification of even longer fiber lengths as subvisible. Based on this approach, a particu-
late with fiber-like geometry would need to be greater than 300 µm to be considered visible when
observed using analytical methods more capable than the unaided human eye. Table 4.1.1-1 shows
the two size limits that define a particle classified as visible or subvisible when using analytical methods
to test primary packaging components for particulates.
The threshold values shown in Table 4.1.1-1 apply to the testing of packaging components for partic-
ulates when an analytical method is used that exceeds the capability of the unaided human eye. These
thresholds should not be applied to drug product final-filled container inspection, where the unaided
human eye is the standard method used to assess whether visible particle levels meet the “essentially
free” requirement and inspection performance may vary from the thresholds established here. Specifi-
cally, finished product inspection performance may be affected by the container color and design and
the product type (e.g., solution color, opacity, density). These confounding characteristics are removed
from the test described herein. Additionally, the size thresholds should not be applied to any particu-
late that is detected by the unaided human eye during testing of the packaging components, as the act
of detecting the particulate would be definitive proof that the particulate is visible. That classification
should not be overridden by subsequent analytical characterization.
Table 4.1.1-1 Threshold Value to Use when Classifying Particles as Visible or Subvisible (by methods more sensitive
as compared to the unaided eye)
Aspect Ratio
Category Visible Threshold Subvisible
(length:width)
Particle <5 100 µm <100 µm
Fiber ≥5 300 µm <300 µm
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 9

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4.1.2 Novel Particle Size Measurement Tool
The assessment of particles in elastomer components traditionally involves rinsing the components,
then filtering the rinsate, and finally examining the filter under a microscope. No thresholds to dif-
ferentiate visible from subvisible, as discussed above, have been established. To consistently apply the
principles of the visible particle size thresholds defined in Section 4.1, a novel measurement tool was
developed for use in elastomer particle testing involving microscopic analysis of the filtrate.
Figure 4.1.2-1 depicts a novel reticle design that enables an analyst to readily determine whether
particles observed microscopically on a filter should be considered visible or subvisible. The reticle has
two shapes in the view field: a circle, and a rectangle. The circle is to be sized such that for a given mi-
croscope under the intended magnification, the circle is equivalent to a diameter of 100 µm. Similarly,
the rectangle is 300 µm × 60 µm to address both size and aspect ratio thresholds for fiber-like particles.
The reticle design shown in Figure 4.1.2-1 allows for rapid and consistent application of the particle
size and aspect ratio thresholds established for this test. When an analyst examines the filter through
a microscope, they simply compare any particle observed against the rectangle and circle templates in
the reticle. Any particle that fits entirely within either of the two shapes is considered subvisible and is
not to be counted as visible. Those that extend beyond the boundaries of either template are counted
as visible, and depending on the aspect ratio as a particle or fiber.
4.2 Summary for Performing the Enhanced Closures Testing Method
A summary of the Enhanced Closure Testing Method for counting visible particles on elastomeric clo-
sures follows. Refer to 8.1 Appendix A for a detailed discussion on the development of this method.
A number of parts (normalized for surface area) are placed in an Erlenmeyer Flask, and 50 ml of sur-
factant solution is dispensed and added to the flask. The flask is then placed on an orbital shaker to
agitate the parts and remove visible particles from the surface. After 20 seconds of shaking the flask is
removed from the shaker and the surfactant solution is immediately filtered through a membrane filter
(a gray filter was used to enhance contrast for both light and dark colored particles and fibers). The
rinsing process is repeated and the filter is allowed to dry. Once the filter is dry, any visible particles
present are counted by using a specialized reticle and an optical stereomicroscope.
A thorough discussion of the sample preparation process and the counting methodology used to eva-
luate within and between operator replicate samples can also be found in 8.2 Appendix B.
Rectangle template for fibers:
300 µm x 60 µm
Circle template for particles: 100 µm
Figure 4.1.2-1 Microscope Reticle Design For Elastomer Component Particle Analysis
10 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
4.3 Method Qualification Strategy and Lessons Learned
Preliminary studies for attribute agreement revealed that rigorous training and easy-to-follow instruc-
tions reduces the subjectivity of the analyst’s counting technique. counting techniques. Detailed in-
structions and the use of the unique counting reticle described in Section 4.1 are key to this training.
Repeatability of the particle and fiber count data was proven when multiple analysts inspected each
other’s filter samples. The material found to be best suited for training analysts and qualification of the
method was to select stopper populations prior to their pharmaceutical washing step. These stoppers
provided particle counts that were sufficiently high to yield meaningful statistical evaluation.
In attempting to measure repeatability when performing multiple sample extractions from a single
stopper bag or across multiple stopper bags, significant variability was observed. Specific factors con-
tributing to this variability in the particle counts were identified through the multiple design of experi-
ments (DOE) based investigations and subsequent review of the findings with the operators involved.
The inherent lack of homogeneity of particle and fiber deposition on the surface of elastomeric com-
ponents that are packaged within a bag or collectively transported in multiple cartons from the same
batch was one of the underlying root causes for the inconsistent initial results observed early in the
development of this test method. Repetitive handling, sampling, and shipping greatly increases vari-
ability and localization of particles.
Another challenge identified during development and qualification of this method was to determine the
number of stoppers needed for training and qualification. Because it is common for commercial stop-
per batches to have particle counts near zero, these batches are not ideal to train analysts or qualify the
method. There were several attempts made to purposely seed particles into stopper batches, but these
were not successful. Generating appropriate particulate loading through various attempts at artificially
seeding with shredded fragments of rubber and aliquots of a cellulose emulsion proved to be ineffective
due to inconsistent distribution within the bag, which in turn resulted in highly variable recovery.
Additional detail on the development of this method and the evaluation of contributions to method
variability can be found in 8.1 Appendix A.
5.0 Glass Container Inspection Method
Today, no alignment exists within the pharmaceutical industry on a method to inspect empty glass
containers. This is of special importance for RTU containers since they will not undergo any further
cleaning procedure(s). Inspection of empty glass containers may be performed by the glass manufac-
turer/converter or by the pharmaceutical company prior to use. It may be performed on all units or a
statistically valid sample collected from a larger batch.
5.1 Inspection of Ready-to-Use Empty Glass Containers
The proposed visual inspection method which follows was based largely on the method and inspection
conditions defined in the EP (26), USP (6), and JP (28) for filled containers. Table 5.1-1 summarizes
the key requirements established to improve the performance of the method employed in the study.
The procedure is a manual inspection method where the quality decision to either accept or reject the
container is made by a trained person. MVI is a probabilistic process where detection rates less than
100% are to be expected (3,29,30). To understand the probabilistic nature of this type of inspection
a comprehensive study was performed using the defined method to inspect defect kits of empty glass
containers seeded with different types of particles of varying size and location on and in the container.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 11

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Table 5.1-1 Key Attributes of Proposed Inspection Conditions and Method
Attribute Requirement
• Pass a medical eye examination before beginning visual inspection activities. Near vision
acuity should be equivalent or better than 20/20 ft (or 6/6 meters) or equivalent. Inspectors
should be retested and meet this criterion at least every two years.
Inspectors • Use of optical correction such as prescription glasses is optional if needed to achieve normal vision.
• Avoid direct viewing of the light source.
• Take regular breaks to avoid fatigue and eye strain. Do not exceed one hour of continuous
inspection.
• Train inspectors on the specific method and materials used.
Training and • Qualify inspectors with test sets with representative defect examples and good containers.
Qualification • Define and document qualification requirements.
• Evaluate inspector performance at least every two years.
• Perform inspection in a clean and quiet area.
Inspection
• Reduce ambient lighting.
Environment
• The use of gloves and gowning are recommended.
• An inspection workstation which provides a light intensity between 2,000 and 3,750 lux.
Equipment
• Black and white backgrounds.
• Perform inspection without magnification.
• Inspect containers for approximately 5 sec against each background.
Method • Hold containers approximately 30 cm from the eye.
• Hold containers 10-20 cm from the light source.
• Rotate container to examine all visible areas.
This was necessary to better understand the capability of the method for empty containers and to es-
tablish criteria for inspector qualification. Section 5.3 outlines the results of this cross-industry study.
5.1.1 Operator Training for the Enhanced Container Inspection Method
To achieve reliable and consistent results, inspectors must be trained on the inspection method before
performing routine inspection and their inspection performance verified by testing both initially and
then every two years (minimum) thereafter. This requalification interval is less frequent than that
for inspectors assessing filled units but is considered a practical interval since empty containers are
reassessed when filled both by 100% and a subsequent acceptance sampling (AQL) inspection. The
qualification testing should be performed using seeded test kits containing both good (blank) and bad
(defective) samples. Clear acceptance requirements should be defined against which the inspectors
are evaluated. Limits on the number of missed defects and good containers incorrectly rejected (false
rejects) are necessary when setting the acceptance criteria.
5.1.2 Equipment and Setup
The results of manual inspection are highly influenced by the light intensity in the inspection zone.
Light intensity between 2,000-3,750 lux at 10 cm from the light source is recommended based on
current finished product inspection conditions found in the USP, EP, and JP. The light intensity should
be confirmed prior to use and the intensity recorded at the point of inspection.
Container samples should be examined against both black and white backgrounds to maximize the
contrast between the glass and the defect of interest. A matte, nonglossy background is recommended
to avoid interference from glare or reflection.
12 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.1.2-1 shows a typical visual inspection workstation with diffuse top lighting and black and
white backgrounds. A light table may also be used to provide diffuse light upwards to and through the
object under inspection to supplement the diffuse illumination from above. Eight of the eleven com-
panies engaged in the study used the light table in addition to the standard inspection workstation.
Figure 5.1.2-2 shows a container being inspected in the workstation using the recommended method
and conditions. Figure 5.1.2-3 provides additional detail on the location of the container under in-
spection relative to the light source and viewing position of the inspector.
Figure 5.1.2-1 Visual Inspection Workstation
Figure 5.1.2-2 Example Of Container Inspection Using Recommended Method And Relative Placement In The
Inspection Hood
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 13

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.1.2-3 Placement Of Container Within The Inspection Hood During Inspection
The work area should be neatly organized. For example, samples for inspection may be placed on the
left of the inspection area and two empty trays placed on the right: one for passing and one for failing
units. Trays should always be clearly labeled and preferably color coded. Discard all samples good and
bad after the inspection and any follow-up investigation completed.
5.1.3 Magnification Requirements To Inspect Glass Containers
Magnification, other than that for optical correction to normal vision, is prohibited for routine release
inspection. This is recommended to keep alignment with the pharmacopeial inspection conditions. USP
General Chapter <790> (6)] states that inspection should be performed without magnification. How-
ever, USP Information Chapter <1790> (1) adds that while “not recommended for use during routine
inspections, magnification can be helpful for critical examination of a small number of units, as may be
needed during an investigation”. If magnification is used for investigational purposes, strict guidance
should be provided to avoid it becoming an uncontrolled part of the routine inspection process.
5.1.4 Glass Container Inspection Procedure
Detailed instructions for empty glass container inspection can be found in 8.4 Appendix D. Informa-
tion recorded during or after inspection may include details such as the type and location of any par-
ticles observed, and any other defects observed. On completion of the inspection, the data should be
evaluated against the established acceptance criteria to determine the disposition of the batch. During
inspection, the operator should avoid direct viewing of the light source and take regular eye breaks to
avoid eye strain which may adversely influence the results of the inspection. Inspection time should be
based on the parameters defined in the qualification.
14 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
5.2 Method Qualification Strategy and Detection Capability
To set realistic targets for human inspection performance, the detection capability of the method be-
ing used for inspection must be understood. A significant portion of the work reported here centered
on performing inspections on seeded containers assembled into test kits to better assess the detection
capability of the method described.
For all observations reported in this study, the light intensity was confirmed as ≥3,000 lux at the point
of verification which is at the upper end of the inspection conditions defined in the EP (26), USP (6),
and JP (28), of 2,000-3,750 lux.
Three equivalent test kits were created representing a wide range of visible particles types and sizes
commonly found in glass containers. Specific examples were based on survey results (31) and the ex-
perience of glass team members. Eight different particulate types (glass, metal, cellulose, hair, plastic,
and rubber [black, grey, and orange]), were defined and used when preparing the kits. The kits were
prepared without any visible adhesive which might bias the measured detection rate. Each container
was checked for particles prior to seeding, each unit was seeded with a single particle and then sealed
to prevent further contamination. For these studies, each kit contained 60 each of vials, syringes, and
cartridges, making a total of 180 pieces. The kits were compared and checked against each other to
ensure that they were of similar composition. The locations of seeded particles are shown in Figure
5.2-1 and the type and nominal size of particles are detailed in Table 5.2-1. Only seeded containers
were used in these kits to assess differences in ability to detect particles when compared with others of
varying type and size.
The sample kits were inspected by five pharmaceutical companies and six tubular glass convertors.
Each of the organizations taking part in the study had the kits examined by five inspectors, six times
each for a total of thirty inspections per company. To better blind the inspection results, the inspec-
tions were not performed consecutively. A total of 59,400 independent observations were made. How-
ever, some data points were excluded from the study because they did not meet the stated inspection
requirements (e.g., the inspection time was out of the specified range). Ultimately, 49,360 valid data
points were used to analyze the performance of the inspectors and the inspection method.
Particle size measurement. Because of the unique optical properties and geometric configuration of
both containers and particles, different methods were used to determine the nominal size of seeded
Figure 5.2-1 Locations Where Particles Were Seeded Into Or Onto Containers (Vials, Cartridges, And Syringes) In
Prepared Test Kits
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 15

Table 5.2-1 Summary of Nominal Particle Size by Material
Particle/Fiber Size (µm)
Type Material Color Photo
particles. Table 5.2-2 shows the methods used for the various materials incorporated into the test kits.
These were chosen to best represent how these particles appear to the human eye during inspection.
Length is simply a measure of the distance along the longest axis. Feret Max is the maximum distance between
parallel tangents at opposing particle borders and Rect A, the longer side of a rectangle constructed around the
particle which is in contact with the two points used to define Feret Max as shown in Figure 5.2-2.
Table 5.2-2 Measurement Method Used to Determine Nominal Particle Size
Key Dimension
Particle Type
(Sizing Parameter Used)
Glass Feret Max
Metal Feret Max
Cellulose Length
Hair (Brown) Length
Plastic (From Tub) Rect A
Rubber (Black) Rect A
Rubber (Grey) Rect A
Rubber (Orange) Rect A
16 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85
selcitraP
001 002 003 005 007 008
000,1
Glass Transparent
X X X
Rubber Orange – Cartridges
Black – Syringes X X X X
Gray – Vials (shown)
Metal Silver/Gray
X X X
srebiF
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Cellulose White
X X X X
Plastic White
X X X X
Hair Brown
X X

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 5.2-2 Examples of Feret Max And Rect A And B Particle Size Measurements.
5.3 Study Design
A total of eleven companies participated in the study: five from the pharmaceutical industry and six
manufactures of the primary packaging materials. Each company used five inspectors for the study,
each inspector performed the inspection six times, producing a total of 59,400 data points. The data
was reviewed and confirmed as valid prior to being used in the statistical analysis.
Based on the inspection results, non-fibrous particles of 125 µm in size had an average PoD of ap-
proximately 70%. The PoD increases to 95% for a particle of 300 µm. Figure 5.3-1 shows inspection
performance for both particles and fibers and confirms past studies with filled containers (2) showing
increasing PoD with increasing particle and fiber size. The diameter of the circles at specific x-y loca-
tions is proportional to the number of data points which occurred at that location. For fibers, the PoD
is 70% for 300 µm fibers and increases to 90% for fibers between 800-1,000 µm in length. This differ-
ence in detectability can be shown to be largely due to the aspect ratio. Fibers such as hair and plastics
(tub residues) were more easily detected while cellulose fibers were harder to detect.
Figure 5.3-1 Probability Of Detection For Particles And Fibers Of Varying Size During Inspection Of Empty Glass
Containers (Circle diameter is proportional to the number of data points falling at a specific x-y location)
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 17

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Analysis of study results further discussed in 8.3 Appendix C also found that variability between in-
spectors from different companies was negligible, suggesting this method should provide robust results
across the industry.
5.3.1 Normalizing the Particle Size
To better understand the difference in detectability between fibers and particles the impact of the as-
pect ratio on detectability (which is the relationship between the width and length of the fiber) must
be considered. To address the impact of the aspect ratio the data was normalized by multiplying the
Key Dimension of each particle by its SF. This conversion was applied to both particles and fibers to
create the approximate area that would be seen by the inspector’s unaided eye.
Normalized Particle Size = Key Dimension × Shape Factor (SF)
Using this transformation, the PoD for fibers and particles is similar to the PoD seen in Figure 5.3.1-1
The combined PoD then becomes 80% for 100 µm particulate and 95% for particulates of 200 µm.
The diameter of the circles at specific x-y locations is proportional to the number of data points which
occurred at that location.
In summary, a core element of the study was the creation of sample kits containing realistic defect ex-
amples where the PoD was not compromised or biased by the sample preparation (e.g., if the glue hold-
ing the particle is visible). By preparing these kits with defects that appear as those found during routine
inspection the performance of the inspector using this method could be verified in a controlled way.
The study produced an extensive database with 49,360 validated data points, thereby providing a high
degree of statistical confidence in the conclusions drawn on inspection performance. This study found
that using the compendial inspection conditions the PoD for visible particles ranged from 70% for
Figure 5.3.1-1 Probability Of Detection For Particles And Fibers Of Varying Size During Inspection Of Empty Glass
Containers With Size Normalized To Apparent Area (Circle diameter is proportional to the number of data points falling at a
specific x-y location)
18 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
125 µm particles to 95% for particles >300 µm. Due to their aspect ratios, fibers are more difficult to
detect and their corresponding PoD are 80% for 300 µm fibers to 90% for fibers >800 µm.
These results align well with detectability studies performed on filled containers following the com-
pendial methods (6,26,28). These earlier studies demonstrated that under controlled conditions, the
smallest size standard sphere that could be reliably detected (i.e., average PoD >70%) was 150 µm.
In conclusion, from this study with empty containers and the previous work on filled containers, this
method can be used successfully for the inspection of unfilled RTU containers by both the pharma-
ceutical manufacturing companies and the glass component suppliers. Inspectors using this method
should be trained and qualified using test kits with well characterized and representative samples that
accurately simulate routine defects and defect free samples. Additional review and discussion of the
data analysis on inspection performance can be found in Section 8.3 Appendix C.
6.0 Conclusion
Visual inspection continues to be an important step in the manufacture and delivery of safe and ef-
fective injectable medicines. Current inspection methods, manual and machine assisted, can provide
reliable monitoring and control of the visual characteristics of injectable products, including visible
particles. The work described in this technical report is intended to further the development of meth-
ods to increase reliable supply and reduced rejection of injectable drug products. Reliable detection
and control of visible particles in and on the components used to contain these products is essential
to meeting this goal.
This technical report provides an improved method to assess visible particle burden on elastomeric clo-
sures. This method uses much that is known and available but provides standardization of key param-
eters including extraction, agitation, and size thresholds (100 µm for particles and 300 µm for fibers)
to aid in consistent enumeration. This is expected to assist both the manufacturers of such closures and
the pharmaceutical companies who use them in packaging their drug products. A standard method to
assess visible particles will hopefully lead to a practical working standard which incorporates risk-based
limits suitable for the intended application.
This report also describes a study to better assess the ability to inspect empty glass containers. While
several studies have looked at PoD in finished, filled containers, little has been done with empty con-
tainers to-date. This study shows similar inspection performance between empty and filled containers
and supports the use of standard compendial visual inspection conditions to perform inspection of
empty glass containers. An average PoD of 70% was achieved for 125 µm particles and
300 µm fibers. These agree with and support the thresholds chosen for the Enhanced Closure Testing
Method. Further analysis of the study data shows that PoD of particles and fibers can be related to each
other through assessment of the apparent visible area.
Continued advancement in visual inspection and particle control will require broad industry support.
Ongoing engagement with additional companies and regulatory organizations would further the work
that was described herein and lead to acceptance of common methods and acceptance limits for visible
particles on or in primary packaging components.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 19

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
7.0 References
1. U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. Informa- 10. Miliauskas, J.; Mukherjee, T.; Dixon, B.;
tion Chapter <1790> Visual Inspection Postimmunization (Vaccination) Injection-
of Injections. In USP 42–NF 37, USP: Site Reactions: A Report of Four Cases
Rockville, Md., 2019. and Review of the Literature. Am. J. Surg.
2. Shabushnig, J.; Melchore, J.; Geiger, M.; Pathol. 1993, 17 (5), 516 –524.
Chrai, S.; Gerger, M.; A Proposed Work- 11. Greenblatt, D.; Divoll-Allen,
ing Standard for Validation of Particulate M.; Intramuscular Injection-Site
Inspection in Sterile Solutions. Presented at Complications. JAMA. 1978.
the 1995 PDA Annual Meeting. Philadel- 240 (6), 542-44. DOI:10.1001/
phia, PA.; 1995. jama.1978.03290060044011. Published
3. Johns, J.; Golfetto, P.; Bush, T.; Fantozzi, Online: August 11, 1978. https://jama-
G.; Shabushnig, J.; Perry, A.; DeGrazio, network.com/journals/jama/article-ab-
F.; Streich, D.; Miller, J.; Soukiassian, H.; stract/360782.
Stanton, A.; Watson, R.; Achieving “Zero” 12. Allcutt, D.; Lort, D.; McCollum, C.; Final
Defects for Visible Particles in Injectables. In-line Filtration for Intravenous Infusions:
PDA J. Pharm. Sci. and Technol. Nov 2018, A Prospective Hospital Study. 1983, Br. J.
72 (6), 640-650. Surg. 70, 111–113.
4. Anger, S.; Begat, C.; Crnko, V.; Fantozzi, 13. Boehne, M.; Jack, T.; Köditz,
G.; Farach, W.; Fitzpatrick, S.; Gallagher, H.;Seidemann, K.; Schmidt, F.; Abura,
B.; Huelsmann, S.; Kinsey, P.; Langlade, M.;Bertram, H.; Sasse, M.; In-line filtra-
V.; Lefevre, G.; Legendre, E.; McLean, K.; tion minimizes organ dysfunction: New
Miller, J.; Patel, R.; Perry, A.; Soukiassian, aspects from a Prospective, Randomized,
H; Stanton, A; Streich, D; Timmons, C; Controlled Trial. BMC Pediatr. 2013, 21.
Vaneylen, D; van Hoose, T; Wildling, L; Published February 6, 2013. https://doi.
Windover, M.; Points to Consider: Best org/10.1186/1471-2431-13-21.
Practices to Identify Particle Entry Routes 14. Niel-Weise, B.; Stijnen, T.; van den Broek,
along the Manufacturing Process for Paren- P.; Should in-line filters be used in pe-
teral Formulations. PDA J. Pharm. Sci. and ripheral intravenous catheters to prevent
Technol. Nov 2019, 73 (6), 635-647. infusion-related phlebitis? A systematic
5. Shabushnig, J.; from data obtained from review of randomized controlled trials.
the FDA Recalls, Market Withdrawals, & Anesthesia and Analgesia. 2010, 110(6):
Safety Alerts Database, https://www.fda. 1624-1629.
gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safe- 15. Puntis, J.; Wilkins, K.; Ball, P.; Rush-
ty-alerts. Accessed February 1, 2020. ton, D.; Booth, I.; Hazards of Parenteral
6. U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention. General Treatment: Do Particles Count? Arch. Dis.
Chapter <790> Visual Particulates in Injec- Child. 1992, 67 (12), 1475–1477.
tions. In USP 42–NF 37, USP: Rockville, 16. Liu, J.; Su, Z.; Ding, W.; Quantitation of
Md., 2019 . Particulate Microemboli during Cardiopul-
7. Langille, S.; Particulate Matter in Inject- monary Bypass: Experimental and Clinical
able Drug Products. J. Pharm. Sci. Technol. Studies. Ann. Thorac. Sur. 1992, 54 (6),
2013, 67, 186-200. 1196-2002.
8. Bukofzer, S.; Ayres, J.; Chavez, A.; Devera, 17. Walpot, H.; Franke, R.; Burchard, W.;
A.; Miller, J.; Ross, D.; Shabushnig, J.; Var- Agternkamp, C.; Muller, F.; Mittermayer,
go, S.; Watson, H.; Watson. R.; Industry C.; Kalff, G.; Particulate Contamination
Perspectives on the Medical Risk of Visible of Infusion Solutions and Drug Additives
Particles in Injectable Drug Products. J. in the Framework of Long-Term Intensive
Pharm. Sci. Technol. 2015, 69, 123-139. Therapy. An Animal Model. [German]
9. Ayres, J.; Conducting Clinical Risk As- Anaesthesist. 1989, 38 (11), 617-621.
sessments for Visible Particulate Mat- 18. Jones M, Warren J; Monocyte Chemoat-
ter in Parenteral Preparations. PDA J tractant Protein 1 in a Rat Model of
Pharm Sci Technol. 2018, 72(6):626-639. Pulmonary Granulomatosis. Laboratory
DOI:10.5731/pdajpst.2018.008615 Investigation. 1992, 66 (4), 498-503.
20 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
19. Bautista, A.; Schuler, A.; Spolarics, Z.; 26. European Pharmacopeia (Ph. Eur.), 10th
Spitzer, J.; In Vivo Latex Phagocytosis Edition. Chapter 2.9.20. Particulate Con-
Primes the Kupffer Cells and Hepatic Neu- tamination: Visible Particles, Council of
trophils to Generate Superoxide Anion. J. Europe : Strasbourg, France, 2019.
Leukocyte Biol. 1992, 51 (1), 39-45. 27. Japanese Pharmacopeia (Ph. Jap.), Chapter
20. U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 21 6.07. Insoluble Particulate Matter Test for
CFR Part 210–Current Good Manufactur- Injections, 17th Edition [English], Japan
ing Practice in Manufacturing, Processing, Ministry of Health Labour and Welfare,
Packaging, or Holding of Drugs–General. 2006.
U.S. Department of Health and Human 28. Japanese Pharmacopeia (Ph. Jap.),
Services. Government Publishing Office: Chapter 6.06. Foreign Insoluble Matter
Washington, D.C., 2017. Test for Injections, 17th Edition [English],
21. U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 21 Japan Ministry of Health Labour and Wel-
CFR Part 211–Current Good Manufactur- fare, 2006
ing Practice for Finished Pharmaceuticals. 29. Knapp, J.; Kushner, H.; Generalized
U.S. Department of Health and Human Methodology for Evaluation of Parenteral
Services. Government Publishing Office: Inspection Procedures. J. Parent. Sci and
Washington, D.C., 2017. Technol. 1980, 34 (1), 14-61.
22. Aldrich, S.D.; Cherris, R.T.; Shabushnig, 30. Knapp, J.; Kushner, H.; Implementation
J.G.; Visual Inspection and Particulate and Automation of a Particle Detection
Control. DHI Publishing, LLC. River System for Parenteral Products. J. Parent.
Grove, IL, 2016. Sci and Technol. 1980, 34 (5), 369-393.
23. U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention General 31. Shabushnig, J.; PDA Survey: 2014 Vi-
Chapter <788> Particulate Matter in Injec- sual Inspection. Parenteral Drug Associa-
tions, USP 42-NF37, USP: Rockville, Md, tion (PDA), Bethesda, Md., 2015. DOI:
2019. 10.18637/jss.v036.i11. Published Online:
24. International Organization for Standard- Sept 16, 2010. https://www.jstatsoft.org/
ization. ISO 8871-3: 2003 Elastomeric article/view/v036i11
parts for parenterals and for devices for 32. International Organization for Standard-
pharmaceutical use – Part 3: Determi- ization. ISO 3696:1987, Water for analyti-
nation of released particle count; ISO. cal use— Specification and Test Methods;
Geneva, Switzerland, 2003. ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 1987.
25. European Pharmacopeia (Ph. Eur.), 10th 33. Kursa, M.; Rudnicki, W.; Feature Selec-
Edition. Chapter 2.9.19. Particulate Con- tion with the Boruta Package. J Statistical
tamination: Sub-visible Particles, Council Software, 2010, 36 (11).
of Europe : Strasbourg, France, 2019.
8.0 Appendices
8.1 Appendix A. Additional Information on Enhanced Closures Testing
Method Development
Test methods that yield variable data with great certainty, such as dimensional measurements or po-
tency, can be simply qualified or validated. However, human performance, such as visual inspection, is
not directly measurable or validated. As such, the strategy for qualifying a methodology based on at-
tribute data required an initial verification of the sample preparation process and the counting method
that would ultimately be used to evaluate the comparability of within operator replicates or between
operators and cohorts of samples. To accomplish this, the evaluation and testing strategy was separated
into two phases, pilot (method development) and qualification. These are outlined in Figure A1.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 21

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Provide
Clarification
No
Attribute Sufficient
Method Qualification
Agreement Execute Dry Run comparability
initiated
Analysis between SME’s?
Pilot
Yes
Qualification
Testing completed
Test method Sample sets
Sufficient of sample sets Prepare seeded
released for Yes shipped to each
Comparability? delivered to samples
publication Supplier
Supplier B, C
No
Define actions
Determine
required correct/
cause for lack of
address identified
comparability
root cause(s).
Figure A1 Process Map of the Pilot (method development) and Qualification Strategy
The results from the pilot phase highlighted the necessity of seeding samples prior to distribution and
evaluation by the three participating suppliers. Therefore, the formal qualification study was stratified
as outlined in Figure A2. Three seeding groups were created by adding particles of elastomeric material
and dissolved fiber. Although the fibers were added using a defined volume of a prepared aqueous mix-
ture, the particle generation process employed a novel technique of creating fragments of elastomeric
material and manual deposition onto the surface of each stopper sample contained in the sample bags.
The resulting groups of sample bags were then provided to all three suppliers with the goal of minimi-
zing the impact of variability of the three seeding groups.
Statistical analysis of the resulting particulate count data revealed that the use of a nonstandard sam-
ple extraction and transfer process (due to the inherent nature of the elastic particulate matter being
extracted) of the seeded particles and fibers may have contributed to unintended consequences for the
counting process. Inconsistencies in the seeding process and the possible impact of forces exerted upon
the sample bags during transit seemed to be contributing factors that ultimately yielded the failing
results observed. Significantly, counting results from all operators were repeatible when cross compari-
sons were performed between operators.
An extensive investigation was performed to quantitatively evaluate the impact of the multiple sources
of varibility that were contributing to the intial results and define viable means of mitigation. Based
on learnings from the previous studies, the team chose to discontinue the use of artificially seeded par-
ticles and opted, instead, to use stoppers that were not processed in a pharmaceutical washer in which
a higher native particle burden was exhibited. Accordingly, a final conclusive study was designed and
executed to both evaluate the impact of transportation on the range of particles and fibers observed
and to serve as the basis for recommending the specific method described in this report. To limit
22 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Stopper Samples split
into 3 Seeding Groups
Particles generated Particles generated Particles generated
and fiber aliquot and fiber aliquot and fiber aliquot
prepared prepared prepared
Seeding Seeding Seeding
Group-1 Group-2 Group-3
Supplier-1 Supplier-2 Supplier-3
Sample Bags Sample Bags Sample Bags
Figure A2 Method Qualification Sample Generation Stratification
the impact of nonhomgeniety in particle deposition when multiple smaller sample sets are created
and then divided into one or more cohorts, a single bag of unseeded, non-washed stoppers was used
between all three suppliers in series. Although multiple operators performed the replicate extractions,
all individuals sampled from the previously mentioned single bag. The process map for this study is
illustrated in Figure A3 below.
Overall Study Results
The particle and fiber count data from each supplier was statistically evaluated for reproducibility
between operators and suppliers (using an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) hypothesis test) and re-
peatability of counting output between operators using a paired t-test when evaluating the same filter
samples. Handling and time difference between inspections were minimized in all cases. An evaluation
of the comparability of method results for a group of inspectors was completed for Supplier 1 and the
results are shown in Figure A4 through Figure A6.
Figure A4 shows the results for the particles >100 µm. Comparability of extraction was proven between
three operators with ANOVA p-value = 0.590. As shown in Figure A5, reproducibility of the count-
ing method for particles >100 µm was proven between three operators with paired t-test with resulting
p-values of 0.078 – 0.761. The calculated p-value from the ANOVA results for fibers >300 µm did not
reveal comparability of extraction between the three operators for Supplier 1, and the confidence inter-
val for the fiber results extended into negative values in Figure A6. Nonetheless, reproducible results
were achieved as demonstrated by the outcome of paired t-tests between Operator 1 vs Operator 3 and
Operator 2 vs Operator 3 shown in Figure A7.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 23

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure A3 Process Map of Final Method Qualification Study
24 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 25
mu001>selcitraP
The pooled standard deviation is used to calculate the intervals.
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Inspecting Analyst Op-1 Op-2 Op-3 Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
Extracted by Op-1 Op-2
mu001>selcitraP
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Analysis of Variance
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-Value P-Value
Extraction by _2 2 4.167 2.083 0.56 0.590
Error 9 33.500 3.722
Total 11 37.667
Figure A4 Interval plot of Supplier 1 results for particles >100 µm for each operator
Individual standard deviations are used to calculate the intervals.
Paired T-test for Op 1 vs Op3 Paired T-test for Op 2 vs Op 3
Test Test
Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0 Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0
0 0
Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0 Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0
1 1
T-Value P-Value T-Value P-Value
0.33 0.761 -2.63 0.078
Figure A5 Interval plot of replicate inspection results for Supplier 1, Operators 1 vs 3 and Operator 2 vs 3, for particles
>100 µm

A similar evaluation of the comparability of method results for a group of inspectors for Supplier 2 was
also completed and the results are shown in Figure A8 through Figure A10. Figures A8 and A9 show
results for the particles >100 µm and Figure A10 through Figure A11 show results for fibers >300 µm.
Although calculated p-values from the ANOVA results would appear to indicate comparability of extrac-
tion between the three operators, these results are not feasible since the 95% confidence intervals extend
to negative counts. The reproducibility of the counting method for particles >100µm (shown in A9) was
demonstrated between the three operators producing paired t-test with resulting p-values of 0.444-0.903.
Figure A11 shows the results for the fibers >300 µm. Reproducibility of the counting method was dem-
onstrated between all three operators with paired t-test results yielding a p-value =1.000.
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
26 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85
mu003>srebiF
The pooled standard deviation is used to calculate the intervals.
5
4
3
2
1
0
Inspecting Analyst Op-1 Op-2 Op-3 Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
Extraction by Op-1 Op-2
mu003>srebiF
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Analysis of Variance
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-Value P-Value
Extraction by _5 2 19.50 9.750 6.05 0.022
Error 9 14.50 1.611
Total 11 34.00
Figure A6 Interval plot of Supplier 1 results for particles >300 µm for each operator
Individual standard deviations are used to calculate the intervals.
Paired T-test for Op 1 vs Op3 Paired T-test for Op 2 vs Op 3
Test Test
Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0 Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0
0 0
Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0 Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0
1 1
T-Value P-Value T-Value P-Value
0.00 1.000 1.00 0.391
Figure A7 Interval plot of replicate inspection results for Supplier 1, Operators 1 vs 3 & Operators 2 vs 3, for fibers >300 µm

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
Inspecting Operator Op-1 Op-2 Op-3 Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
Extracting Operator Op-2 Op-3
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 27
mu001>
selcitraP
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
Figure A8 Interval plot of Supplier 2 results for particles >100 µm for each operator
Individual standard deviations are used to calculate the intervals.
mu001>
selcitraP
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
The pooled standard deviation is used to calculate the intervals.
Analysis of Variance
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-Value P-Value
Inspecting Operator 2 6.500 3.250 0.57 0.587
Error 9 51.750 5.750
Total 11 58.250
Paired T-test for Op 1 vs Op2 Paired T-test for Op 1 vs Op 3
Test Test
Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0 Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0
0 0
Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0 Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0
1 1
T-Value P-Value T-Value P-Value
0.13 0.903 0.88 0.444
Figure A9 Interval plot of Supplier 2 group performance for particles >100 µm

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
28 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85
mu003
>
rebiF
The pooled standard deviation is used to calculate the intervals.
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
Inspecting Operator Op-1 Op-2 Op-3 Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
Extracting Operator Op-2 Op-3
mu003
>
rebiF
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Analysis of Variance
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-Value P-Value
Inspecting Operator 2 18.50 9.250 1.91 0.203
Error 9 43.50 4.833
Total 11 62.00
Figure A10 Interval plot of Supplier 2 results for fibers >300 µm for each operator
Individual standard deviations are used to calculate the intervals.
Paired T-test for Op 1 vs Op2 Paired T-test for Op 1 vs Op 3
Test Test
Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0 Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0
0 0
Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0 Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0
1 1
T-Value P-Value T-Value P-Value
0.00 1.000 0.00 1.000
Figure A11 Interval plot of Supplier 2 group performance for fibers >300 µm

Finally, a further evaluation of results from inspectors at Supplier 3 is shown in Figure A12 through
Figure A15. Figure A12 and Figure A13 show the results for the particles >100 µm. Although cal-
culated p-values would appear to indicate comparability of extraction between three operators with
ANOVA, these results are again not feasible since the 95% CI’s extend to negative counts. The repro-
ducibility of the counting method was confirmed between the three operators using a paired t-test
resulting in p-values of 0.391-0.604. Figure A14 and Figure A15 show the results for the fibers >300
µm. Comparability of extraction was not confirmed between the three operators with a resulting
ANOVA p-value of 0.006. Reproducibility of the counting method was, however, proven between
these three operators using a paired t-test with resulting p-values of 0.391-1.000.
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 29
mu001>
selcitraP
The pooled standard deviation is used to calculate the intervals.
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
Operator Op-1 Op-2 Op-3 Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
Extracted by Op-2 Op-3
mu001>
selcitraP
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Analysis of Variance
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-Value P-Value
Inspecting Operator 2 10.17 5.083 1.73 0.232
Error 9 26.50 2.944
Total 11 36.67
Figure A12 Interval plot of Supplier 3 results for particles >100 µm for each operator
Individual standard deviations are used to calculate the intervals.
Paired T-test for Op 1 vs Op2 Paired T-test for Op 1 vs Op 3
Test Test
Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0 Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0
0 0
Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0 Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0
1 1
T-Value P-Value T-Value P-Value
-1.00 0.391 -0.58 0.604
Figure A13 Interval plot of Supplier 3 group performance for particles >100 µm

11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
30 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85
mu003>srebiF
The pooled standard deviation is used to calculate the intervals.
Analysis of Variance
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-Value P-Value
Inspecting Operator 2 57.17 28.523 9.71 0.006
Error 9 26.50 2.944
Total 11 83.67
Figure A14 Interval plot of Supplier 3 results for fibers >300 µm for each operator
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Operator Op-1 Op-2 Op-3 Op-1 Op-2 Op-3
Extracted by Op-2 Op-3
Paired T-test for Op 1 vs Op2 Paired T-test for Op 1 vs Op 3
Test Test
Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0 Null hypothesis H: µ_difference = 0
0 0
Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0 Alternative hypothesis H: µ_difference ≠ 0
1 1
T-Value P-Value T-Value P-Value
0.00 1.000 1.00 0.391
Figure A 15 Interval plot of Supplier 3 group performance for fibers >300 µm
mu003>srebiF
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Individual standard deviations are used to calculate the intervals.

An evaluation of the comparability of method results across the three separate suppliers where testing
was performed is shown in Figures A16 through A19. Figure A16 and Figure A17 show the results
for particles >100 µm. When the individual operators’ results are aggregated into supplier groups the
values fail to prove comparability with a resulting p-value of 0.022. Figure A16 and Figure A17 show
the results for fibers >300 µm. The same scenario as that observed for particles holds true for fibers
where the values fail to prove comparability with a resulting p-value of 0.000.
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Supplier-2-
S
O
u
p
p
1 plier-2-
S
O
u
p
p
2 plier-2- O
Su
p
p
3 plier-3-
S
O
u
p
p
1 plier-3-
S
O
u
p
p
2 plier-3- O
Su
p
p
3 plier-1-
S
O
u
p
p
1 plier-1- O
Su
p
p
2 plier-1- Op3
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 31
mu001>
selcitraP
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
One-way ANOVA: Particles > 100 µm versus Supplier
Method
Null hypothesis All means are equal
Alternative hypothesis Not all means are equal
Significance level =0.05
α
Equal variances were assumed for the analysis
Factor Information
Factor Levels Values
Supplier 3 Aptar, Datwyler, West
Analysis of Variance
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-Value P-Value
Inspecting Operator 2 30.17 15.083 4.27 0.022
Error 33 116.58 3.533
Total 35 146.75
Figure A16 Comparison of inspection performance by both supplier and operator for particles >100 µm

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Supplier-2 Supplier-3 Supplier-1
32 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85
mu001>
selcitraP
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Supplier-2-
S
O
u
p
p
1 plier-2-
S
O
u
p
p
2 plier-2- O
Su
p
p
3 plier-3-
S
O
u
p
p
1 plier-3-
S
O
u
p
p
2 plier-3- O
Su
p
p
3 plier-1-
S
O
u
p
p
1 plier-1- O
Su
p
p
2 plier-1- Op3
mu003>srebiF
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Model Summary Means
S R-sq R-sq(adj) R-sq(pred) Supplier_1 N Mean StDev 95% CI
1.87958 20.56% 15.74% 5.46% Supplier_1 12 3.833 1.403 (2.729, 4.937)
Supplier_2 12 2.250 2.301 (1.146, 3.354)
Supplier_3 12 1.667 1.826 (0.563, 2.771)
Pooled StDev = 1.87958
Figure A17 Box plot of performance by supplier for particles >100 µm
One-way ANOVA: Fibers > 300 µm versus Supplier
Method Factor Information
Null hypothesis All means are equal Factor Levels Values
Alternative hypothesis Not all means are equal
Supplier 3 Aptar, Datwyler, West
Significance level =0.05
α
Equal variances were assumed for the analysis
Analysis of Variance
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-Value P-Value
Inspecting Operator 2 158.2 79.083 15.86 0.000
Error 33 164.6 4.967
Total 35 322.8
Figure A18 Comparison of inspection performance by both supplier and operator for fibers >300 µm

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Supplier-2 Supplier-3 Supplier-1
Conclusion. The original strategy for confirming the robustness of the test method for extracting and
counting the particulate present on the resulting membrane filter was intended to demonstrate quan-
titatively the repeatability and reproducibility of both components of the test method. Preliminary
studies for attribute agreement revealed that rigorous training and easy to follow instructions are key
to reducing the subjectivity of the analyst’s counting techniques. Once this foundation of objectivity
was formed for operators, the validity of their results was not in question. Repeatability of the particle
and fiber count data was confirmed not only when extracted samples were independently reinspected,
but also when all operators inspected each other’s filter samples. This is evident in the hypothesis test
results (well above a p-value of 0.05) that were obtained throughout the studies and the multiple
qualification cohorts. On the other hand, reproducibility of output data with replicate extractions or
between each operator’s sample sets was not easily demonstrated.
Through multiple investigatory design-of-experiments and review of the findings with the operators
involved, specific factors that contributed to providing what was initially thought to be inexplicable
variability in the particle counts were identified. The inherent lack of homogeneity of particle and fiber
deposition on the surface of elastomeric components that are packaged within a bag or collectively
transported in multiple cartons from the same batch was one of the underlying root causes for the
inconsistencies of the initial data gathered. As a result, managing sample bag to sample bag variability
proved to be one of the largest factors in obtaining sufficiently low CV values. Repetitive handling,
sampling, and shipping greatly increases variability and localization of particles within the bags.
Results from the final transportation and qualification study demonstrated that seeding particles was
not necessary to generate counts that are sufficiently high to yield meaningful statistical evaluation if
unwashed samples are used instead of RTS product.
Although several studies revealed relatively good comparability within replicate extractions for indi-
vidual operators within a supplier’s testing team, consistent agreement within the range of values for
particles or fibers was not demonstrated across all organizations. Counting technique for particles and
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 33
mu003>srebiF
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Model Summary Means
S R-sq R-sq(adj) R-sq(pred) Supplier_1 N Mean StDev 95% CI
2.23324 49.01% 45.92% 39.31% Supplier_1 12 1.083 1.311 (-0.228, 2.395)
Supplier_2 12 3.000 2.374 (1.688, 4.312)
Supplier_3 12 6.167 2.758 (4.855, 7.478)
Pooled StDev = 2.23324
Figure A19 Box plot of performance by supplier for fibers >300 µm

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
fibers applied to sets of replicate extractions yielded good comparability between local operators for all
three suppliers. This comparability between local operators for all three suppliers demonstrates that the
newly developed method is a robust and repeatable procedure.
8.2 Appendix B. Method: Determination of Visible Particles and Fibers on
Elastomeric Components by Membrane Filtration and Microscopic
Examination
Introduction. The purpose of this method is to provide a procedure to quantify the number of visible
particles present on elastomeric closures used for injectable pharmaceutical products. The procedure
describes how the elastomeric closures are to be sampled from the fully assembled package, then rinsed
to release any particles present, and subsequently sized and counted using a stereomicroscope.
Scope. This method is applicable to all RTU and RTS elastomeric closures but only applies to visible
particles. The method requires that such closures be tested from fully assembled final packaging to
reflect how they are received and used by the pharmaceutical manufacturer.
Fiber-like particles (i.e., length to width aspect ratio of ≥5) have significantly less surface area than a
sphere of equivalent diameter to the fiber length. This results in significantly less detection capability for
a 100 µm long fiber as compared to 100 µm diameter sphere. To ensure this analytical method is detect-
ing visible particles only, fiber-like particles have been given a larger visible size threshold of 300 µm.
Equipment and materials.
Bolded items below are considered essential for executing the method.
1. Laminar flow cabinet meeting the requirements of ISO Class 7 or better
2. Dispensing pressure vessel
3. Filter jet dispenser
4. Jet spray nozzle
5. Analytical petri slide
6. Analytical filter holder
7. Grey membrane filter for counting, gridded, 25 mm, 0.8um porosity
8. Membrane filter for jet pistol, 25 mm
9. Orbital shaker with a 12 mm arm length or equivalent. The suitable RPMs for orbital
shaker arm lengths are show in Table B1 below. The RPM ranges are adjusted to ensure
comparable performance between shakers of different arm lengths.
10. Timer traceable to an internal standard
11. Wide-mouth Erlenmeyer flask, 300 mL
12. Graduated cylinder, class A to deliver, 50 mL
13. Stereomicroscope capable of approximately 50x magnification
14. Use Reticle, Klarmann part number KR-32972-1 at 50x magnification (or equivalent).
15. Calibrated stage micrometer to verify reticle size at magnification used
Table B1 Orbital Shaker RPM Ranges
Allowable RPM Range
Orbital Arm Length
Low High
10 mm 355 380
12 mm 300 325
25 mm 200 225
34 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Equivalent equipment and materials are acceptable but must be demonstrated to be suitable for the
intended use. Equipment must be qualified and calibrated prior to use.
Reagents
1. Surfactant, Polysorbate 80, reagent grade
2. Water, purified grade 1 or 2 as specified in ISO 3696 (32) and filtered through a terminal filter
with NMT 1 um pore size.
Preparation for the test. Ensure that the environment in which the test is to be carried out is free
from extraneous particles which could cause interference. This involves wearing suitable garments
such as synthetic, low particle-shedding frocks, hair nets and beard guards and gloves within a suitable
laminar flow cabinet. Tools and equipment must be cleaned before use by rinsing thoroughly with
water (as defined above as Reagent 2). The exterior of sample bags should be cleaned prior to being
introduced into the cleaned test environment. Cleanroom certified wipes should be used to clean the
bags by wiping in overlapping straight lines, away from the operator.
Preparation and dispensing of 0.03% Polysorbate 80 solution. Dissolve 3g of Polysorbate 80
in 10L of water. Alternative volumes may be prepared for use by keeping this ratio constant. Prepared
solution should be dispensed under pressure to permit in-line filtration with a filter with a pore size
of NMT 1 µm.
Blank testing. Blanks should be tested before and after a sample series. Blanks must meet acceptance
criteria prior to testing samples. If blank analysis after sample series do not meet acceptance criteria,
sample results are considered invalid.
The use of the terms clean or cleaned below refer to tools that have been rinsed with clean and filtered
water before use.
Blank testing procedure
1. Using cleaned forceps, rinse gridded, then un-gridded side of filter for 20 sec per side and place
on filter holder.
2. Place clean funnel on filter holder.
3. Fill 50 mL of Polysorbate 80 solution (as defined as Reagent 1 above) in a clean graduated cylinder.
4. Pour the 50 mL of Polysorbate 80 solution into a clean Erlenmeyer flask or accurately add 50 mL
of Polysorbate 80 solution directly to the Erlenmeyer flask through dosing.
5. Shake the flask on the orbital shaker at the appropriate rpm (see Table B1) for 20 sec.
6. Decant the solution from the flask into the funnel.
7. Repeat steps 3-6.
8. Rinse the inside of the Erlenmeyer flask thoroughly and pour Polysorbate 80 rinse into the funnel.
9. Rinse the inside of the funnel thoroughly.
10. Remove the funnel and with clean forceps, place the filter in a clean petri slide.
11. Label the petri slide appropriately.
12. Dry the filter by placing it in the laminar air stream with lid ajar at least until the filters have
dried.
Blank testing acceptance criterion. Blanks are acceptable if no particles or fibers >100 µm are
observed under the specified microscopic examination conditions.
Sample testing procedure. The use of the terms clean or cleaned below refer to tools that have been
rinsed with clean and filtered water prior to use.
1. Using cleaned forceps, rinse unprinted, then printed side of filter for 20 sec per side and place on
filter holder.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 35

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
2. Place clean funnel on filter holder.
3. Open the sample bag carefully and transfer 100 cm2 of parts to a clean Erlenmeyer flask.
4. Fill 50 mL of Polysorbate 80 solution into a graduated cylinder.
5. Pour the 50 mL of Polysorbate 80 solution into a clean Erlenmeyer flask or accurately add 50 mL
of Polysorbate 80 solution directly to the Erlenmeyer flask through dosing.
6. Shake the flask on the orbital shaker at the appropriate RPM for 20 sec.
7. Decant the solution from the flask into the funnel.
8. Repeat steps 4-7.
9. Discard stoppers.
10. Rinse the inside of the Erlenmeyer flask thoroughly with water (as defined above as Reagent 2)
and pour rinsate into the funnel.
11. Rinse the inside of the funnel thoroughly with water (as defined above as Reagent 2).
12. Remove the funnel and with clean forceps, place the filter in a clean petri slide.
13. Dry the filter by placing in the laminar air stream with lid ajar at least until the filters have dried.
Filter Evaluation. The calibration of the stereomicroscope should be verified daily prior to use us-
ing a micrometer that is calibrated at the operational magnification. Use suitable, direct illumination
(e.g., from a goose-neck lamp, light emitting diode [LED] light source recommended) with angles
set between 0 and 10° from the vertical viewing axis. The magnification used for examining the filters
should be approximately 50x. Once the lighting conditions are set, the same conditions should be
used throughout the analysis. The focus can be adjusted throughout the analysis to keep the particles
in focus.
Particles must exceed the borders of the templates in the reticle and meet the established aspect ratio
requirements to be counted.
• Particles: >100 µm in length (to be determined using the circle template)
• Fibers: >300 µm in length (to be determined using the rectangle template)
The reticle described in Section 4.1 and shown in Figure B1 must be used to accurately classify any
observed particles as visible or subvisible for either particle or fiber-like form. The following diagram
provides instruction for use of the reticle.
Calculations. Use the following equation to calculate the number of visible particles per 10 cm2 for
both particles and fibers.
visible particles visible particles counted on filter × 10
=
10 cm2 number of parts used × surface area per part
visible fibers visible fibers counted on filter × 10
=
10 cm2 number of parts used × surface area per part
Reporting. Report the number of visible particles/10cm2 and visible fibers/10cm2
8.3 Appendix C. Additional Information on Empty Glass Inspection
Capability Studies
Study Test Kits
The glass container inspection study required the test kits to be of sufficient quality so as not to bias
the study results. This was achieved through the following steps.
36 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Use defined
magnification and Use red circle to Particle contained
Filter Sample
reticle to locate Fiber Like? No inspect inside circle (not Yes Do not count
Mounted
particulate on touching red border?
filter
Yes
Use red box to
inspect
No
Count and categorize
Fiber contained
into two groups; Fibers
inside box (not
No and Particles. Repeat Report test results
touching red
for all other particles
border)?
present on filter
Yes
Do not count
Figure B1 Flowchart showing the use of the specified reticle to determine status of any observed particles on the filter
37 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Table C1 Summary of Nominal Particle Size by Material
Particle/Fiber Size (µm)
Type Material Color Photo
38 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85
selcitraP
001 002 003 005 007 008
000,1
Glass Transparent
X X X
Rubber Orange – Cartridges
Black – Syringes X X X X
Gray – Vials (shown)
Metal Silver/Gray
X X X
srebiF
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Cellulose White
X X X X
Plastic White
X X X X
Hair Brown
X X
Figure C1 Shape factor vs size for the particles and fibers seeded into test vials

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure C2 Graphic comparison of test kit composition (kits A, B, and C)
The containers were washed and seeded with a particle of known size and type. Each particle was
digitally photographed and measured before being glued with a highly transparent, UV-cured glue.
Each container was then sealed to prevent further particle contamination. Three equivalent kits were
produced and used for this study to ensure that the results were not influenced by the composition
of a specific kit. A critical analysis of the composition of each kit was performed before use. Table C1
shows the intended particle types and size ranges while Figure C1 shows the actual results. Figure C2
provides a graphic comparison of the composition of the kits (A, B, and C) that were prepared and
used in the study showing both SF and size of the particles and fibers seeded into test containers. The
circled outliers were removed from the study kits to assure conformance with the intended kit design.
Data Collection
Study Data. A total of eleven companies participated in the study: five from the pharmaceutical in-
dustry and six manufactures of the primary packaging materials. Each company used five inspectors
for the study; each inspector performed the inspection six times, producing a total of 59,400 data
points. The data were reviewed and confirmed as valid prior to being used in the statistical analysis.
Inspection Rate. Sufficient time must be allowed for a thorough inspection of each container. The
EP (26), USP (6), and JP (28) each specify a reference time of inspection per container of ten 10 sec;
five sec each against black and white backgrounds. Before executing the study, an estimate was made
for inspection of the complete test of 60 containers using the minimum inspection time defined by the
compendia. The estimated target time to complete the inspection of the kit, allowing for the necessary
container handling and inspection was determined to be 10-20 min.
On completion of the study, an analysis was performed to establish inspection time boundaries based on
actual time used and parameters for determining invalid and missing data. The lower limit was set at 9 min
while the upper limit was calculated as the median plus 1.66 standard deviations, resulting in an upper limit
of 31min. Results obtained outside of this range were not considered valid and were not used in the analysis.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 39

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure C3 shows that about 86% of the test runs were considered valid for the analysis based on in-
spection time. Data were also excluded if a container was broken or unavailable for inspection. This
resulted in 49,360 of the 59,400 data points being used for subsequent analysis.
Main influences on probability of detection
Operator Experience. The inspectors participating in this study had differing levels of glass inspection
experience. For pharmaceutical manufacturers, the inspectors typically inspect filled containers, whereas
those at the suppliers primarily focus on empty containers. Overall, however, the results from both groups
of inspectors were found to be comparable. See Figure C4 for particle inspection results and Figure C5 for
results for fibers. Larger circles indicate a greater number of observations with the same value.
Figure C3 Distribution of time required to complete inspection of test kit
Figure C4 Particle inspection results with inspectors having prior experience with empty containers (Yes) and those
without such experience (No). Circle diameter is proportional to the number of data points falling at a specific x-y location.
40 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure C5 Fiber inspection results with inspectors having both prior experience (Yes) with empty containers and those
without such experience (No). Circle diameter is proportional to the number of data points falling at a specific x-y location.
Particle/Fiber type. The material composition of the particle had a significant influence on the PoD
observed. Glass, metal, and grey rubber particles (100 to 200 µm) were found to have a lower PoD
than orange or black rubber particles of similar size as shown in Figure C6.
Figure C6 Probability of detection for particles of differing type and size. Circle diameter is proportional to the number
of data points falling at a specific x-y location.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 41

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
This becomes more pronounced with fibers, where cellulose fibers have a statistically lower PoD than
that for brown hair or white plastic as shown in Figure C7. Optical contrast is necessary for reliable
detection and greatly impacts the resulting PoD.
Container Size/Type. Figure C8 for particles and Figure C9 for fibers show the influence of con-
tainer size and type on inspection results. The vials used in the study were 30 ml and had a surface area
approximately three times larger than either the 1 mL syringes or 3 mL cartridges used. This resulted
in a decrease in the inspection time per unit surface area when examining containers of larger size and
suggests a reason for lower detection rates in the vials used for this study.
Figure C7 Probability of detection for fibers of differing type and size. Circle diameter is proportional to the number of
data points falling at a specific x-y location.
Figure C8 Probability of detection for particles in various container types and sizes. Circle diameter is proportional to
the number of data points falling at a specific x-y location.
42 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure C9 Probability of detection for fibers in various container types and sizes. Circle diameter is proportional to the
number of data points falling at a specific x-y location.
Main Effects. Using the Boruta method (33) the data were analyzed for the significance that each
variable has on the resulting PoD. This method is based on a machine learning technique called Ran-
dom Forest. Random Forest computes the importance of predictor variables vs a response variable. It
repeats this process and generates a distribution of importance for each predictor variable. It then sorts
the predictor variables based on their importance and statistically compares them to random (shadow)
variables to categorize them as:
• Rejected: variable has significantly less predictive importance than random variables.
• Confirmed: variable has significantly more predictive importance.
• Tentative: variable cannot be categorized as either rejected or confirmed when computation stops.
Figure C10 Boruta Plot of inspection study results demonstrating factors significant to reliable inspection performance.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 43

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
As a result, important variables are those that can play a significant role in predicting the response vari-
able. This is similar to significant predictors in Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) but fails to satisfy usual
assumptions of parametric models.
Conclusion
Based on statistical analysis of the valid data from the empty container inspection study, the main
variables influencing the PoD were determined to be particle size, inspector, container, and particulate
type. Further, particle size is a significant factor as well, with lower PoD observed for smaller particles.
Material providing poorer contrast against the backgrounds produced lower PoD values. This was
more significant when examining fibers where cellulose had a statistically lower PoD than brown hair
and plastic. These results are consistent with previous visual inspection studies with filled containers.
Finally, the container size influenced the PoD, with larger containers (with a greater surface area) effec-
tively reducing the time per unit surface area available to inspect the product and resulting in reduced
detection rates for smaller particles.
8.4 Appendix D. Method: Visual Inspection of Empty Glass Containers
Introduction. The purpose of this method is to provide a procedure to identify and quantify the
number of visible particles present on empty glass containers used for injectable pharmaceutical prod-
ucts. The procedure describes the inspection conditions and how the containers should be presented
to the inspector.
Scope. This method is applicable to all empty glass containers. Inspection times may need to be in-
creased for larger (>100mL) containers.
Equipment and materials.
1. Inspection cabinet with matte black and white backgrounds with diffuse lighting of 2,000-
3,750 lux at the point of inspection.
Glass container inspection procedure.
1. Remove a container from the uninspected tray.
2. Hold the sample approximately 10 cm directly below the lamp at a distance approximately 30
cm from the inspector’s eyes.
3. Inspect the sample for 5-10 sec against the black background. Rotate and invert the container to
ensure all areas are examined adjusting your grip on the container as needed.
4. Inspect the sample for 5-10 sec against the white background. Rotate and invert the container to
ensure all areas are examined adjusting your grip on the container as needed.
5. Place each piece examined into the either the reject tray or passing tray as required.
6. Complete any necessary records documenting the inspection of each piece before moving to the
next inspection.
The time spent per container may be controlled using a pacing device. Recording the time spent in-
specting each batch and then calculating the nominal inspection rate is a reliable method to confirm
that the rate of inspection was maintained within the defined limits.
Information recorded during or after inspection may include details such as the type and location of
any particles observed, and any other defects observed. On completion of the inspection, the data
should be evaluated against the established acceptance criteria to determine the disposition of the
batch. During inspection, the operator should avoid direct viewing of the light source and take regular
eye breaks to avoid eye strain which may adversely influence the results of the inspection.
44 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. Technical Report No. 85

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Terms of Usage for PDA Electronic Publications (Technical Reports, Books, etc.)
An Authorized User of this electronic publication is the purchaser.
Authorized Users are permitted to do the following:
• Search and view the content of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Download the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Print the PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an Authorized User
• Make a reasonable number of photocopies of a printed PDA Electronic Publication for the individual use of an
Authorized User
Authorized Users are not permitted to do the following:
• Allow anyone other than an Authorized User to use or access the PDA Electronic Publication
• Display or otherwise make any information from the PDA Electronic Publication available to anyone other
than an Authorized User
• Post the PDA Electronic Publication or portions of the PDA Electronic Publication on websites, either available
on the Internet or an Intranet, or in any form of online publications without a license from PDA, Inc.
• Transmit electronically, via e-mail or any other file transfer protocols, any portion of the PDA Electronic
Publication
• Create a searchable archive of any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Use robots or intelligent agents to access, search and/or systematically download any portion of the PDA
Electronic Publication
• Sell, re-sell, rent, lease, license, sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer the use of the PDA Electronic Publication
or its content
• Use or copy the PDA Electronic Publication for document delivery, fee-for-service use, or bulk reproduction or
distribution of materials in any form, or any substantially similar commercial purpose
• Alter, modify, repackage or adapt any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication
• Make any edits or derivative works with respect to any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication including any
text or graphics
• Delete or remove in any form or format, including on a printed article or photocopy, any copyright information
or notice contained in the PDA Electronic Publication
• Combine any portion of the PDA Electronic Publication with any other material
To License or purchase Reprints
• Licensing: Site licenses and licenses to distribute PDA Electronic Publication can be obtained for a fee.
To learn more about licensing options and rates, please contact:
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900,
ext. 133. Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway,
Suite 150, Bethesda, MD 20814.
• Reprints: Reprints of PDA Electronic Publication can be purchased for a fee.
To order reprints, please contact:
Janny Chua, Publications Manager, +1 (301) 656-5900, ext. 133.
Written correspondence can be sent to: PDA, Inc. Attn: Janny Chua, 4350 East West Highway, Suite 150,
Bethesda, MD 20814.
Technical Report No. 85 © 2021 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 45

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Enhanced Test Methods for Visible Particle Detection and Enumeration on Elastomeric
Closures and Glass Containers
About PDA Technical Reports
PDA Technical Reports are global consensus documents, prepared by member-driven Task Forces (listed on inside
front cover) comprised of content experts, including scientists and engineers working in the pharmaceutical/bio-
pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities and academia. While in development, PDA Technical Reports are
subjected to a global review of PDA members and other topic-specific experts, often including regulatory officials.
Comments from the global review are then considered by the authoring Task Force during the preparation of the
final working draft. The level of expertise of the Task Force and those participating in the global review ensure a
broad perspective reflecting best thinking and practices currently available.
The final working draft is next reviewed by the PDA Advisory Board or Boards that sanctioned the project. PDA’s
Advisory Boards are: Science Advisory Board, Biotechnology Advisory Board, and Regulatory Affairs and Quality
Advisory Board. Following this stage of review, the PDA Board of Directors conducts the final review and deter-
mines whether to publish or not publish the document as an official PDA Technical Report.
While PDA goes to great lengths to ensure each Technical Report is of the highest quality, all readers are encouraged
to contact PDA about any scientific, technical, or regulatory inaccuracies, discrepancies, or mistakes that might be
found in any of the documents. Readers can email PDA at: TRfeedback@pda.org.
Sanctioning Advisory Board: SAB PDA Officers and Directors
Phil DeSantis, DeSantis Consulting Associates (Chair) Officers
Greg Bassett, Amgen (Vice Chair)
Chair: Jette Christensen, Novo Nordisk
Masahiro Akimoto, OTSUKA
Chair-Elect: Sue Schniepp, Regulatory Compliance
John Ayres, MD, Consultant
Associates Inc.
Ed Balkovic, PhD, MicroBio Technical Support
Treasurer: Melissa Seymour, Biogen, Inc.
Marcia Baroni, Emergent BioSolutions Inc
Secretary: Emma Ramnarine, Genentech/Roche
Rebecca Brewer, Quality Executive Partners
Imm. Past Chair: Rebecca Devine, PhD, Regulatory
Tom Damratoski, Bristol Myers Squibb
Consultant
Rhonda Ezell, Vitruvias Therapeutics
President: Richard Johnson
Guenther Gapp, Gapp Quality GmbH
Mauro Giusti, MS, Eli Lilly Directors
Marc Glogovsky, MS, Valsource, LLC
Barbara M. Allen, PhD, Eli Lilly and Company
Gabriele Gori, MS, GlaxoSmithKline
Michael Blackton, Adaptimmune, LLC
Dennis Guilfoyle, PhD, Johnson & Johnson
Bettine Boltres, PhD, West Pharmaceutical Services
Ghada Haddad, PhD, Merck
Kenneth Hinds, PhD, Johnson & Johnson Tia Bush, Amgen, Inc.
Ken-ichi Izutsu, PhD, National Institute of Health Javier Camposano, Celltrion
Sciences Ghada Haddad, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Gitte Letting, Novo Nordisk Joyce Hansen, Johnson & Johnson
Ivy Louis, VIENNI TRAINING & CONSULTING, LLP
Stephan Krause, PhD, AstraZeneca Biologics
Stefan Merkle, PhD, Janssen
Mary Oates, Emergent Bioscience
Mike Sadowski, Baxter
Mathias Romacker, Pfizer (ret.)
Matthew Schmidt, MS, Merck
Siegfried Schmitt, PhD, Parexel International Corp. Anil Sawant, PhD, Merck & Co./Merck Sharp & Dohme
Kristin Valente, PhD, Merck Osamu Shirokizawa, LifeScientia
PDA Publication Production and Editing
Jahanvi Miller, MBA, Assistant Director, Scientific Affairs
Glenn Wright, VP, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
Walter Morris, Senior Director of Publishing and Press Relations
Katja Yount, Publication Designer
Marilyn Foster, Technical Editor/Writer

Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/TWi Pharmaceuticals Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Bethesda Towers
4350 East West Highway
Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Tel: +1 (301) 656-5900
Fax: +1 (301) 986-0296
E-mail: info@pda.org
Web site: www.pda.org