

=== PAGE 15 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Current work related to the cell and gene therapy industry generally uses materials that are classified as Risk
Group 1 or Risk Group 2 and are rarely in the higher classification (e.g., 3 or 4).
Discussing the BSL requirements with the applicable regulatory bodies as early as possible is recommended
to ensure regulatory concerns are addressed in the facility design stage.
Rationale
Process and product knowledge are important factors to enable the application of science and a risk-based
approach to determine what controls to apply to the manufacturing facility.
14 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 16 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Topic 2. Facilities
Q 2.1. How do you design facility process flow to minimize extraneous contamination
and cross-contamination and prevent errors in an ATMP facility?
Recommendation
Facility design plays an essential role in minimizing contamination, cross-contamination, and prevention of
errors. For this purpose, the possible risk factors that can lead to contamination and cross-contamination
should be evaluated and defined in the CCS document.
Contamination and cross-contamination occur through several different vectors, which include but are not
limited to:
Physical
1. Contaminated packaging or containers – For example, a packaging format of any raw or starting
materials used in the process that cannot be adequately decontaminated upon transfer for use.
2. Mechanical transfers – For example, spillages of materials, through improperly sealed transfer
devices, or through risks such as the “ring of concern,” which is an area on a rapid transfer port that
cannot be adequately disinfected and may be exposed during transfer procedures if not addressed.
3. Personnel – For example, contamination of clothing from non-process-dedicated clothing regimes.
4. Waste processes.
5. Airborne sources – For example, Aerosols, failure of air-handling units in the Grade A
environment, or volatile constituents of contaminated waste.
In order to minimize these risks, a containment strategy should be developed from the inside-out (from
critical operations to less-critical operations) based on a risk assessment. The containment strategy and CCS
should identify any critical manufacturing processes, paying particular attention to higher-risk operations.
Based on the risk related to the primary protection and containment measures, a secondary means of
protection and containment should be planned, such as the personnel air lock (PAL) and material air lock
(MAL) pressure cascades (e.g., from production room to air lock and from air lock to the corridor) (see
Figure 4.3-1). Personnel, product, sample, and waste paths should also be considered to avoid possible
contamination in other areas and to minimize the risk of cross-contamination.
Important Considerations
1. Is the overall process closed, such as a closed process in a BSC or an open process in a closed
isolator? Does it remain closed throughout the whole procedure? If not, can a fully closed process
be integrated?
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 15

=== PAGE 17 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
a. Any process which can be performed closed should be designed and executed closed to
minimize the risks associated with open processes.
b. Items required within the Grade A space (e.g., tools, equipment) should be sterilized. When
sterilization is not possible, the requirement for the continued use of that item should be
evaluated and, when deemed necessary, the highest possible level of surface disinfection
should be pursued with appropriate controls and monitoring and justified within the CCS to
ensure risk to the process is minimized.
c. Intrinsic sterile connectors should be used, when possible, to avoid multiple aseptic
connections.
2. How are transfers in and out of the BSC or isolator performed? Do they have closed transfers via
rapid transfer ports (RTP) or within a MAL where an automated surface decontamination is
executed?
3. Isolators or BSCs should use appropriate technologies like RTPs for transferring sterilized or
disinfected material to reduce the risk of physical transfer of contaminants.
4. How is the pharmaceutical product handled inside the BSC or isolator? Does the handling pose a
risk of contamination and, if so, how can this risk be eliminated?
a. First-air protection of any open-handled processes inside the BSC or isolator.
b. Greatest possible separation of personnel from the process through the use of barriers and
sterile implements.
5. Can the packaging material for the pharmaceutical product be externally contaminated before
leaving the isolator? If so, what engineering controls could be used to eliminate this contamination?
a. The use of air locks compatible with vapor phase hydrogen peroxide (VPHP) or other
appropriate decontamination/inactivation should be used, if possible. Otherwise, an RTP or
other closed containment system should be used to transfer the material to a safe area where
the decontamination/ inactivation takes place.
6. What are the methods to manage pharmaceutical-product residues or waste (e.g., liquid waste, solid
waste)?
a. For processes requiring removal of waste during the operation, the waste should be handled
in a contained manner, through a separate pathway from product or product samples, so
that it does not become a source of contamination.
b. If the product exit is not separate from the waste exit, the removal-of-waste operation
should be performed in a contained manner at a dedicated time separate from the product
manufacture.
7. How will the processing area be cleaned to eliminate the risk of cross-contamination?
a. Any inactivation step of residual pharmaceutical product should be performed before
cleaning.
8. Are single use closed systems used? How are cross-contamination risks considered?
a. Contamination can occur at the interfaces of closed single-use systems, such as single-use
bioreactors or single-use bags, both during the process (e.g., during additions or sampling)
and when they are dismantled if the systems and their interfaces are not designed
appropriately.
b. The tightness/integrity should be tested and validated for the single-use system. This
includes both vendor certifications and potentially in-house testing when that testing can be
performed in a manner that is safe for the process, operator, and environment.
16 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 18 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
9. How will process leaks and spills be handled and addressed?
a. Consider the containment measures to be taken to stop and prevent the spread of the
leak/spill contamination. Ensure that there is adequate protection for air returns that are
near the affected leak/spill area.
b. Establish the necessary and appropriate inactivation/decontamination steps which do not
put product or packaging at risk and create tools that help operators determine what steps
should be performed as soon as the leak/spill occurs and what can wait until after
processing has concluded. (See Item 6.)
c. Consider the necessary handling of any process equipment, containers, or packaging that
may have become contaminated on the outside. (See Item 4.)
d. Establish waste-handling procedures for any materials that were used to contain, inactivate,
or clean up the leak/spill. (See Item 5.)
e. Establish procedures for personnel involved in the remediation of the leak/spill to ensure
gloves or gowning that may have been impacted by the leak/spill or the clean-up are
prevented from any additional spread of contamination (e.g., the requirement to change
affected gowning).
f. Establish deviation and investigation procedures to assess the product/process during which
the leak/spill occurred.
Additionally, to reduce the risk of intrinsic particulate contamination and maintain low mold in support
areas, such as supply and return corridors, kitting of consumables should be performed in, at minimum, an
ISO-8 cleanroom or controlled non-classified area to prevent introduction of particulate matter from the
warehouse. Warehouses should be maintained free of cardboard and paperboard by transferring materials
into totes prior to storage. This lower-particulate warehouse for materials destined for Grade B cell-
processing suites should be separated from the main warehouse where non-product-contact items are stored
separately by rollup doors, ideally with air-wash curtains.
All of these points and the risks they involve should be considered in a CCS document in relation to cross-
contamination.
Rationale
An appropriate closed process, with a cleaning and inactivation strategy, minimizes the chance of
extraneous contamination and cross-contamination of the product and contamination of surrounding areas
and personnel. Furthermore, the risk of possible cross-contamination from the tertiary to the remainder of
the facility will also be minimized. Well-documented procedures and training will also contribute to the
prevention of cross-contamination.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 17

=== PAGE 19 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 2.2. What should be considered for open and closed systems to achieve the required
product and operator protection for ATMPs?
Recommendation
The use of closed systems offers distinct advantages. They are often used to scale out processes, once the
process has been developed, and can often be performed appropriately within either a BSC or an isolator
(although an isolator offers greater protection in the event of improper handling, spills, or leaks). The
integrity of the closed system ensures a sterile environment. Hybrid or open processes within a closed
isolator offer protection of both the product and the operator, providing the process steps and manipulations
are performed correctly. Open processes within an open BSC require further implementation of mitigation
measures to ensure no extraneous contamination or cross-contamination occurs.
Open System
An open system is one where the material is exposed to the manufacturing environment for even a short
time. Due to this exposure, the environment is required to be of Grade A cleanliness. The manufacturing
environment is a total sum of the events that occur during the process and any particulate or bioburden,
pyrogenic, or viral contamination present in the area has the potential to contaminate the product. Therefore,
each and every action using an open system has the potential to be the vector that carries the contamination.
This is why the environmental controls and monitoring, movement of the operators, effectiveness of
material transfers, and sanitization steps are of key importance.
Open systems are often used for early-phase/proof-of-concept trials when the required manipulations are
still being defined and refined.
Closed System
A closed system is hermetically sealed from the manufacturing environment inside which the product
pathway is considered sterile. Examples include single-use systems that have been gamma-irradiated that
use intrinsic sterile connectors.
Systems are only considered closed when they have been integrity-tested and have been demonstrated to be
hermetically sealed. Fully closed systems can be deployed and used in a Grade C environment if adequate
control measures are implemented to avoid the risk of contamination.
Hybrid System
Hybrid processes, such as those requiring an open addition into a closed system, or that are open during
initial assembly but are closed thereafter, are required to be performed within a Grade A cleanroom with
Grade B background if using a BSC, or within Grade D background when using a closed isolator
(depending on the CCS requirements). The increased cleanliness requirement for the surrounding
environment is due to the fact that hybrid processes may create the opportunity for exposure of the product
pathway to the environment.
18 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 20 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 2.3. What is common practice related to the pressure concepts for maintaining
classification and containment for ATMPs?
Recommendation
Regulations and Interpretations
The leading regulatory standards for aseptic manufacturing include:
• FDA Guidance for Industry: Sterile Drug Products Produced by Aseptic Processing–Current Good
Manufacturing Practice
• European Union (EU) Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products, EudraLex – Volume 4
– EU Guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products for Human and
Veterinary Use
These guidances clearly state that pressure differentials for supporting clean areas must be maintained in
order to keep sterile processing areas clean: that is, free from any contaminant (viable or nonviable).
Background Environment
Aseptic core operations in isolators or in BSCs are conducted in Grade A areas and, therefore, require
pressure cascades to the background environment. In the case of a BSC, the surrounding external
environment is a minimum of Grade B. For an isolator operation, the external environment is a minimum of
Grade C for open isolators when they are connected with small openings for a semi-continuous or
continuous material transfer in/out (Figure 2.3-1), or Grade D for a closed isolator (Figure 2.3-2, Figure
4.2-1, and Figure 4.2-3).
Cleanrooms are designed to maintain positive pressure, preventing "unclean" (contaminated) air from
flowing inside. The idea is to ensure that filtered air always flows from the cleanest to less-clean spaces (i.e.,
a pressure cascade). EU GMP Annex 1 states that a positive pressure differential of a minimum of
10 Pascals should be maintained between each adjacent space (1). In a multichambered cleanroom, for
example, the cleanest room is kept at the highest pressure. Pressure levels are set so that the cleanest air
flows into spaces with less-clean air (e.g., air locks that act as a bubble or as a sink). Thus, multiple pressure
levels may need to be maintained. For potent products or for viral vectors, the pressure concept should be
adapted to prevent spreading and cross-contamination into surrounding areas by using negative and positive
adjacent areas. .
The BSC is an open system, therefore the pressure differential cannot be regulated in the same way as an
isolator. Instead, the surrounding environment is controlled with respect to the air locks and corridors but
also to prevent contamination in the BSC Grade A area. The airflow between the corridor, air locks, and
manufacturing area could be designed according to the examples shown in Figure 2.3-3. Figure 4.3-1
contrasts a BSC cleanroom to a closed-isolator cleanroom, which includes containment as part of its design.
MALs, in particular, and PALs should be designed with interlocks that prohibit opening both doors at once.
They should also have an integrated timer that enforces the required time in seconds to ensure that at least
four to five (4-5) room air-changes occur within the MAL to reduce particles introduced into the higher-
classified side as well as to control contamination.
Cleanroom suites should be designed for vapor-phase hydrogen peroxide (VPHP) or chlorine dioxide (ClO )
2
compatibility. For product changeover (different vectors) and for replication-competent virus (RCV) to non-
RCV as well as improving EM performance, whole-suite fumigation should be carried out periodically.
RCV is a crucial safety concern, especially in gene therapy, which often uses modified viruses as vectors to
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 19

=== PAGE 21 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
deliver therapeutic genes into cells. These vectors are engineered to be replication-defective (unable to
reproduce on their own), but there is a risk that the virus could revert to a RCV during the manufacturing
process due to recombination events. If this happens, the RCV could replicate uncontrollably in the patient's
body, potentially causing serious health problems.
Figure 2.3-1 Open Isolator for Aseptic Filling with Continuous Transfer of Primary Packaging
(e.g., vials in and out)
Figure 2.3-2 Example of a Closed Isolator Used for Cell and Gene Manufacturing (i.e., with no
small openings)
20 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 22 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Figure 2.3-3 Sample Air-flow Diagrams: (left) Biosafety Cabinet with Grade B Surrounding
Area; (right) Closed Isolator with Grade D Surrounding Area
Note: Design depends on the product and local regulations.
Rationale
Maintaining differential pressures (i.e., pressure cascades) is important to providing the highest protection to
the product. The highest pressure should always be present in the most critical area and then flow to the less-
critical areas, for example, from the isolator or BSC to the room. Air locks can be designed to have a higher
pressure than both the room and the corridor to avoid contamination in the corridor, when concerned about
containment of the process.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 21

=== PAGE 23 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 2.4. What should be considered when designing cleanrooms, HVAC, air locks, and
corridors for handling products such as viral vectors in an ATMP facility?
Recommendation
When designing a production site for ATMPs, a variety of factors should be considered, including, but not
limited to the required process, protection of the product, prevention of cross-contamination, and protection
of operators. The potency of the manufactured product and the inherent risk associated with manufacturing
components (e.g., viral vectors) should be considered. Good engineering design practices also consider such
lifecycle factors as initial installation, operation, maintenance/calibration, and eventual replacement and
retirement strategies. In addition to including them in the engineering design features within the facility,
these factors should also be part of a comprehensive CCS for operations, monitoring, and maintenance of
the facility. The majority of these elements are not only requirements for ATMP production, but they are
also applicable to traditional biotechnology or traditional cleanroom operations. Some essential elements
include:
Design
• Fulfilling a minimum of a Grade D background (closed isolator) or Grade B background (BSC)
with appropriate graded air locks for material and personnel.
• Designing all cleanrooms to be easily cleaned and disinfected; however, as some of the ATMPs
require BSL-1 or higher for manufacturing, the rooms design should take into consideration the
specific procedures for cleaning and/or inactivation required by the specific BSL.
• Designing all equipment and room features to be hygienic and engineered to withstand cleaning and
disinfecting/inactivation agents used in the facility. For this reason, cleaning, sanitizing, and
inactivation procedures and chemical compatibility should be considered early in the design of the
manufacturing facility.
• Installing appropriate methods (e.g., autoclaves), based on the required BSL, to
deactivate/decontaminate waste or leftover raw materials/products before leaving the area adjacent
to the filling cleanroom.
• Consider locating emergency response equipment (e.g., emergency shower, eye shower) outside the
cleanroom, according to the required potency or BSL, while ensuring there are no open drains
located within the classified environments.
HVAC
• Designing the HVAC system to be appropriate for the product potency and/or the required BSL.
• Using high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration to obtain the required cleanroom
classification.
• Designing the air supply for each space to promote appropriate air pressure differentials between
rooms of varying classification or based on required operations (e.g., for maintenance of cleanliness
or containment).
• Designing the installation and replacement of HEPA filters so they can be easily maintained in a
way that minimizes cross-contamination and permits periodic integrity testing.
Air Locks
• Positioning air locks to separate spaces of different classifications and/or to avoid spreading
contaminants in adjacent areas such as corridors. Designing PALs and changing rooms so that the
exiting operators do not contaminate the entering operators (i.e., providing separate routes of entry
and exit).
22 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 24 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
• Separating MALs from PALs.
• Designing MALs to allow for decontamination procedures within their environment to permit the
movement of materials from a lower grade to the higher grade, or between a process space and a
general use space of the same classification.
• Restricting personnel from crossing through a MAL to enter the processing cleanrooms or corridors.
Instead, consider designing a procedure for personnel to deliver material to one side of the air lock
and then, after decontamination, to retrieve that material from the other side of the air lock.
• Allowing waste materials to pass through MALs/PALs when clean materials or personnel are not
present.
• Separating the waste flow from personnel and material in/out, based on the potency and BSL
requirements of the products.
Corridors
• Plotting personnel, material, samples, and waste flows throughout the facility to ensure that
corridors and common spaces are designed to promote unidirectional flow where possible (e.g.,
cleanest to “dirtiest”) and to avoid risks associated with intersecting flow paths that might permit
cross-contamination of products or contamination of product or personnel with waste. (See Figure
2.3-3.)
• Designing the facility to employ clean corridors with positive pressure from the corridor to the
MAL and PAL or the MAL and PAL with positive pressure to the corridor (e.g., air locks as
bubbles) if the product is highly potent or if multiproduct manufacture will occur in the same
facility, (e.g., air locks as sinks) based on the CCS. (See Figure 2.3-3 and Figure 4.3-1.)
Rationale
The design considerations of the facility for the manufacture of ATMPs require careful in-depth
understanding of the intended processes and the personnel, materials, waste, and sample flows that pertain
to those processes. The adjacent rooms, corridors, air locks, and HVAC all play a part in ensuring the
product is free from contamination or cross-contamination from other processes and provide for the safety
of the operators. Additional safety requirements might be needed based on the determinations from a risk
assessment and should be captured within the CCS.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 23