

=== PAGE 25 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Q 2.5. What environmental risk factors are to be considered outside of the
manufacturing facility (e.g., neighborhood of the manufacturing facility, hospital, clinic,
home setting) when working with highly potent or genetically modified organisms?
Recommendation
Highly potent materials and GMOs are considered major environmental risk factors in facility design since
there are often additional local regulatory requirements to prevent unwanted release of such materials to the
environment. The organization should consult local regulatory requirements, including assessing the
biological materials handled in the facility against such regulations, including GMOs where appropriate.
In addition, the organization should work with the facility that is the point of administration to the patient
(e.g., hospital) to determine any containment control requirements (e.g., administration precautions, patient
waste, hospital waste). A discussion with the local regulatory authorities is recommended since ATMP
technology is developing rapidly, and novel technology may result in novel products with novel risks.
Research laboratories are familiar with the use of novel technology, and biosafety risk is typically managed
through the oversight of an Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC). The use of ATMPs with biosafety
concerns in healthcare settings has resulted in the extension of the IBC’s role into patient administration
settings, which is not within the traditional purview of conventional IBCs.
With regards to the risk associated with the use of highly potent or gene therapy products in a healthcare
facility, a contact precaution over a 30-day period post-product administration, including waste handling, is
recommended. Similarly, when the patient has returned home, their families are recommended to take
similar precautions for the identical duration (6). Disinfection and cleaning procedures, including the
relevant disinfectant contact time, must be shown to be appropriate for the organisms and/or materials
involved in the ATMP within the post-administration setting (e.g., the home).
One particular risk associated with the use of ATMPs in healthcare settings is related to the ability to ensure
an appropriate level of handling competency. Healthcare settings tend to include the use of floating staff
where the personnel assigned are not always involved in one particular activity. Furthermore, the training of
healthcare personnel (e.g., physician, nurse) is managed differently than for production workers; for
example, the use of a learning management system may not be common in a healthcare setting and,
therefore, tracking specific training competency may be difficult.
Rationale
Safety concerns for highly potent materials or GMOs must be addressed regardless of the setting in order to
protect patients, healthcare workers, home caregivers, and others who may come into contact with the
patient. The evolving nature of ATMPs means that the systems designed to control these extended risks are
not fully mature. Therefore, it is incumbent upon the manufacturer to provide appropriate guidance for the
necessary controls.
24 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 26 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
Topic 3. Utilities
Q 3.1. Are there any specific requirements for designing utilities in an ATMP facility?
Recommendation
There are no specific design requirements for utilities used for the manufacture of ATMPs compared to
traditional small-molecule or large-molecule manufacture. However, specific requirements pertaining to
containment and BSL facilities may apply according to local and international regulations. EU GMP
Annex 1 and other suggested readings provide recommendations of utilities for product contact. Although
the design requirements are generally consistent with other types of manufacture, the following good
principles apply to clean utilities:
1. Gaseous disinfection system
a. A risk-based commissioning approach for gaseous disinfection systems should be applied.
b. Airtightness of the space needs to be demonstrated if gaseous disinfection is designed into
an ATMP facility to decontaminate the facility/rooms. All surfaces and/or penetrations
(e.g., sensors, electrical sockets) and openings that cannot be sealed in routine operation
(e.g., the gap around the door, leak-tight isolation dampers in the HVAC duct) should be
adequately sealed to prevent the escape of the decontaminating agent(s). .
c. The performance of the gaseous-disinfection system should be demonstrated through
validation and appropriate Environmental Monitoring Performance Qualification.
d. The residual level of disinfectant post-disinfection process should be validated using trace-
limit-detection methods to demonstrate that the residuals are removed to levels that will
have no adverse impact on the manufactured pharmaceutical product.
e. Pipes should be marked with gas identity signs and should indicate the flow direction.
2. Carbon dioxide generation and distribution system
a. Any carbon dioxide (CO ) distribution lines installed should be tested to confirm that the
2
microbial and particulate levels are suitable for the intended use. The quality classification
of the distribution line generally depends on the intended use (e.g., the classification of the
air space within the equipment for which the CO is used).
2
b. The design of the distribution system should consider the pressure requirements of the
intended use including any possible future expansion needs. Appropriate pressure
regulation should be included in the design if equipment with different pressure
requirements is connected to the distribution system.
c. The design should include the necessary controls to provide a continuous supply of CO gas
2
(e.g., source tank switchover) at the appropriate flow rate (e.g., pressure design to achieve
flow rate) and such features should be commissioned and/or qualified.
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 25

=== PAGE 27 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
d. Branched-distribution system designs serving different processes or different equipment
within the process should consider how cross-contamination risk through the piping can be
prevented.
e. Pipes must be marked with CO signs and should indicate the flow direction.
2
f. An oxygen (O ) sensor with visual and audible alarm should be installed in an appropriate
2
location to notify personnel in the room, or those intending to enter, that a low-oxygen
condition exists and that they should exit (or not enter) the space. Personnel entering the
room should also be equipped with personal O sensors. A buddy system and/or man-down
2
alarms should also be considered.
g. A risk-based approach should be used for the qualification.
3. Purified water generation and distribution system
a. Any purified water generation and distribution system should be qualified and
commissioned for the intended use. Routine sampling of both the generation and
distribution system should be conducted to ensure the ongoing quality of the purified water.
b. The use of purified water in cleaning activities should consider the impact of water quality
on any surface-disinfectant preparation and on the ability to maintain room classification, or
WFI should be considered as an alternative.
c. The design and maintenance (e.g., temperature, flow rate, routine disinfection) of the
distribution system should ensure no biofilm formation.
d. Distribution systems serving different processes or different equipment within the process
should ensure that the process, including the cleaning process, operates at a lower pressure
than the purified distribution system to prevent a cross-contamination risk through the
piping, or the valve design should prevent any possible mixing (e.g., double-block and
bleed).
e. Pipes must be marked with “Purified Water” signs and should indicate the flow direction.
4. Water for injection generation and distribution system
a. Any WFI generation and distribution system should be qualified and validated to
consistently produce water meeting the specification as it is intended to be used. Sampling
locations close to the intended points of use should be defined according to the CCS.
Routine sampling of both the generation and distribution system should be conducted to
ensure the ongoing quality of the WFI.
b. WFI should be produced by distillation or by a purification process that is equivalent to
distillation if WFI is used for direct product-contact purposes.
c. The design and maintenance (e.g., temperature, flow rate, routine disinfection) of the
distribution system should ensure no biofilm formation.
d. Distribution systems serving different processes or different equipment within the process
should ensure that the process, including the cleaning process, operates at a lower pressure
than the WFI distribution system to prevent cross-contamination risk through the piping, or
the valve design should prevent any possible mixing (e.g., double block and bleed).
e. Pipes must be marked with “WFI” signs and should indicate the flow direction.
5. Liquid nitrogen generation and distribution system
a. Installation of a liquid nitrogen (LN ) generation and distribution system should consider
2
the asphyxiation risk. A room O -level monitoring system with visual and audible alarms
2
should be available, and personnel should also be equipped with O personal-monitoring
2
instruments. Personnel in the room, or intending to enter the room, should be trained to exit
(or not enter) the room when the alarm is active. A buddy system and/or man-down alarms
26 Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc.

=== PAGE 28 ===
Licensed to Kuo, Li-Hung/Amaran Biotechnology, Inc.: Copying and Distribution Prohibited.
should also be considered. Means to detect and isolate any leak in the system should be
available, including the availability of personal protective equipment (PPE) for routine use
and emergency-rescue purposes.
b. LN is extremely cold and contact to bare skin causes severe frostbite. To mitigate this risk,
2
signage should be posted throughout the space where LN is in use that reminds operators
2
of the appropriate PPE to don when handling materials immersed in LN or when opening
2
the equipment. In addition, PPE-donning stations should be prominently positioned within
the floor plan. First-aid stations should also be available in the floor plan for accidental
exposures.
c. The materials that require storage in LN (ultra-low temperature storage) are commonly the
2
most critical materials in the process (e.g., cell or viral banks). Therefore, it is common in
designs to consider the inclusion of back-up equipment (e.g., LN freezers) in case of
2
equipment failure. The back-up equipment should be qualified for use and subject to
routine maintenance so it is ready for deployment should the primary equipment or primary
equipment’s controllers fail. This approach will require additional footprint and capital
expenditure at the time of facility design, as well as appropriate piping and valving to
supply LN to both the primary and the back-up systems.
2
d. Piping for distributing LN should be adequately insulated both due to the cold-burn risk
2
and to avoid condensation on external surfaces.
e. Pipes should be marked with “LN ” signs and should indicate the flow direction.
2
f. Due to the risk of testing LN and its stability, LN quality through the distribution system
2 2
is typically confirmed by the use of a Certificate of Compliance or Certificate of Analysis
provided by LN supplier.
2
g. Design should include controls to provide continuous supply of LN as required (e.g.,
2
source-tank switchover), and such features should be commissioned and/or qualified
accordingly.
6. Nitrogen
a. Any nitrogen (N ) distribution line installed should be classified. The classification of the
2
distribution line generally depends on the intended use (e.g., classified environment within
the equipment where the N is used, criticality of the material in contact with the N gas).
2 2
Examples of N use include, but are not limited to, N overlay in the product container head
2 2
space and N overlaying in the bulk-material containers (i.e., displacement of oxygen to
2
reduce oxidation of materials and/or maintain the stability of raw materials).
b. Installation of an N generation and distribution system should consider the asphyxiation
2
risk. An O -level monitoring system room with visual and audible alarms should be
2
available, and personnel should also be equipped with O personal-monitoring instruments.
2
Personnel in the room, or intending to enter the room, should be trained to exit (or not
enter) the room when the alarm is active. A buddy system and/or man-down alarms should
also be considered. The means to detect and isolate any leak in the system should be
available, including the availability of PPE for emergency-rescue purposes.
c. Appropriately qualified source and terminal sterile filtration should be considered if N is
2
used for product-contact purposes.
d. Distribution systems serving different processes or different equipment within the process
should ensure that the design prevents the risk of cross-contamination.
e. Pipes must be marked with “N ” signs and should indicate the flow direction.
2
Points to Consider No. 14 © 2025 Parenteral Drug Association, Inc. 27