VIII. TIME LIMITATIONS 
 
 
21 CFR 211.111 states that “When appropriate, time limits for the completion of each phase of production shall be 
established to assure the quality of the drug product.  Deviation from established time limits may be acceptable if such 
deviation does not compromise the quality of the drug product.  Such deviation shall be justified and documented.” 
 
 
When appropriate, time limits must be established for each phase of aseptic processing 
(§ 211.111).  Time limits should include, for example, the period between the start of bulk 
product compounding and its sterilization, filtration processes, product exposure while on the 
processing line, and storage of sterilized equipment, containers and closures.  The time limits 
established for the various production phases should be supported by data.  Bioburden and 
endotoxin load should be assessed when establishing time limits for stages such as the 
formulation processing stage. 
 
The total time for product filtration should be limited to an established maximum to prevent 
microorganisms from penetrating the filter.  Such a time limit should also prevent a significant 
increase in upstream bioburden and endotoxin load.  Because they can provide a substrate for 
microbial attachment, maximum use times for those filters used upstream for solution 
clarification or particle removal should also be established and justified. 
 
 
IX. 
VALIDATION OF ASEPTIC PROCESSING AND STERILIZATION  
 
 
21 CFR 211.63, 211.65, and 211.67 address, respectively, “Equipment design, size, and location,” “Equipment construction,” 
and “Equipment cleaning and maintenance.”   
 
21 CFR 211.84(c) states, in part, that “Samples shall be collected in accordance with the following procedures: * * * (3) 
Sterile equipment and aseptic sampling techniques shall be used when necessary.” 
 
21 CFR 211.100(a) states, in part, that “There shall be written procedures for production and process control designed to 
assure that the drug products have the identity, strength, quality, and purity they purport or are represented to possess.  Such 
procedures shall include all requirements in this subpart * * *.” 
 
21 CFR 211.113(b) states that “Appropriate written procedures, designed to prevent microbiological contamination of drug 
products purporting to be sterile, shall be established and followed.  Such procedures shall include validation of any 
sterilization process.” 
 
This section primarily discusses routine qualification and validation study recommendations.  
Change control procedures are addressed only briefly, but are an important part of the quality 
systems established by a firm.  A change in facility, equipment, process, or test method should be 
evaluated through the written change control program, triggering an evaluation of the need for 
revalidation or requalification.   
 
A.  
Process Simulations 
 
 
20


--- PAGE 25 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
To ensure the sterility of products purporting to be sterile, sterilization, aseptic filling and closing 
operations must be adequately validated (§ 211.113).  The goal of even the most effective 
sterilization processes can be defeated if the sterilized elements of a product (the drug 
formulation, the container, and the closure) are brought together under conditions that 
contaminate any of those elements.   
 
An aseptic processing operation should be validated using a microbiological growth medium in 
place of the product.  This process simulation, also known as a media fill, normally includes 
exposing the microbiological growth medium to product contact surfaces of equipment, 
container closure systems, critical environments, and process manipulations to closely simulate 
the same exposure that the product itself will undergo.  The sealed containers filled with the 
medium are then incubated to detect microbial contamination.  Results are then interpreted to 
assess the potential for a unit of drug product to become contaminated during actual operations 
(e.g., start-up, sterile ingredient additions, aseptic connections, filling, closing).  Environmental 
monitoring data from the process simulation can also provide useful information for the 
processing line evaluation.   
 
1. 
 Study Design  
 
A media fill program should incorporate the contamination risk factors that occur on a 
production line, and accurately assesses the state of process control.  Media fill studies should 
closely simulate aseptic manufacturing operations incorporating, as appropriate, worst-case 
activities and conditions that provide a challenge to aseptic operations.  FDA recommends that 
the media fill program address applicable issues such as: 
 
• Factors associated with the longest permitted run on the processing line that can pose 
contamination risk (e.g., operator fatigue) 
• Representative number, type, and complexity of normal interventions that occur with 
each run, as well as nonroutine interventions and events (e.g., maintenance, 
stoppages, equipment adjustments) 
• Lyophilization, when applicable  
• Aseptic assembly of equipment (e.g., at start-up, during processing) 
• Number of personnel and their activities  
• Representative number of aseptic additions (e.g., charging containers and closures as 
well as sterile ingredients) or transfers 
• Shift changes, breaks, and gown changes (when applicable)  
• Type of aseptic equipment disconnections/connections 
• Aseptic sample collections 
• Line speed and configuration 
• Weight checks  
• Container closure systems (e.g., sizes, type, compatibility with equipment) 
 
21


--- PAGE 26 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
• Specific provisions in written procedures relating to aseptic processing (e.g., 
conditions permitted before line clearance is mandated)   
 
A written batch record, documenting production conditions and simulated activities, should be 
prepared for each media fill run.  The same vigilance should be observed in both media fill and 
routine production runs.  The firm’s rationale for the conditions and activities simulated during 
the media fill should be clearly defined.  Media fills should not be used to justify practices that 
pose unnecessary contamination risks. 
 
2. 
Frequency and Number of Runs   
 
When a processing line is initially qualified, individual media fills should be repeated enough 
times to ensure that results are consistent and meaningful.  This approach is important because a 
single run can be inconclusive, while multiple runs with divergent results signal a process that is 
not in control.  We recommend that at least three consecutive separate successful runs be 
performed during initial line qualification.  Subsequently, routine semi-annual qualification 
conducted for each processing line will evaluate the state of control of the aseptic process.  
Activities and interventions representative of each shift, and shift changeover, should be 
incorporated into the design of the semi-annual qualification program.  For example, the 
evaluation of a production shift should address its unique time-related and operational features.13  
All personnel who are authorized to enter the aseptic processing room during manufacturing, 
including technicians and maintenance personnel, should participate in a media fill at least once 
a year.  Participation should be consistent with the nature of each operator’s duties during routine 
production.   
 
Each change to a product or line change should be evaluated using a written change control 
system.  Any changes or events that have the potential to affect the ability of the aseptic process 
to exclude contamination from the sterilized product should be assessed through additional 
media fills.  For example, facility and equipment modifications, line configuration changes, 
significant changes in personnel, anomalies in environmental testing results, container closure 
system changes, extended shutdowns, or end product sterility testing showing contaminated 
products may be cause for revalidation of the system.   
 
When data from a media fill indicate the process may not be in control, an investigation should 
be conducted to determine the origin of the contamination and the scope of the problem.  Once 
corrections are instituted, process simulation run(s) should be performed to confirm that 
deficiencies have been corrected and the process has returned to a state of control.   When an 
investigation fails to reach well-supported, substantive conclusions as to the cause of the media 
fill failure, three consecutive successful runs in tandem with increased scrutiny of the production 
process may be warranted.    
 
3. 
Duration of Runs   
 
 
13 One example might be the movement of personnel into and out of the aseptic processing and gowning change 
rooms during a shift change. 
 
22


--- PAGE 27 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
The duration of aseptic processing operations is a major consideration in media fill design.  
Although the most accurate simulation model would be the full batch size and duration because 
it most closely simulates the actual production operations, other appropriate models can be 
justified.  The duration of the media fill run should be determined by the time it takes to 
incorporate manipulations and interventions, as well as appropriate consideration of the duration 
of the actual aseptic processing operation.  Interventions that commonly occur should be 
routinely simulated, while those occurring rarely can be simulated periodically. 
 
While conventional manufacturing lines are usually automated, operated at relatively high 
speeds, and designed to limit operator intervention, some processes still include considerable 
operator involvement.  When aseptic processing employs manual filling or closing, or extensive 
manual manipulations, the duration of the process simulation should generally be no less than the 
length of the actual manufacturing process to best simulate contamination risks posed by 
operators. 
 
For lyophilization operations, FDA recommends that unsealed containers be exposed to partial 
evacuation of the chamber in a manner that simulates the process.  Vials should not be frozen, 
and precautions should be taken that ensure that the medium remains in an aerobic state to avoid 
potentially inhibiting the growth of microorganisms. 
 
4. 
Size of Runs  
 
The simulation run sizes should be adequate to mimic commercial production conditions and 
accurately assess the potential for commercial batch contamination.  The number of units filled 
during the process simulation should be based on contamination risk for a given process and 
sufficient to accurately simulate activities that are representative of the manufacturing process.  
A generally acceptable starting point for run size is in the range of 5,000 to 10,000 units.  For 
operations with production sizes under 5,000, the number of media filled units should at least 
equal the maximum batch size made on the processing line (Ref. 8). 
 
When the possibility of contamination is higher based on the process design (e.g., manually 
intensive filling lines), a larger number of units, generally at or approaching the full production 
batch size, should be used.  In contrast, a process conducted in an isolator (see Appendix 1) can 
have a low risk of contamination because of the lack of direct human intervention and can be 
simulated with a lower number of units as a proportion of the overall operation.  
 
Media fill size is an especially important consideration because some batches are produced over 
multiple shifts or yield an unusually large number of units.  These factors should be carefully 
evaluated when designing the simulation to adequately encompass conditions and any potential 
risks associated with the larger operation.   
 
5. 
Line Speed  
 
The media fill program should adequately address the range of line speeds employed during 
production.  Each media fill run should evaluate a single line speed, and the speed chosen should 
be justified.  For example, use of high line speed is often most appropriate in the evaluation of 
manufacturing processes characterized by frequent interventions or a significant degree of 
 
23


--- PAGE 28 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
manual manipulation.  Use of slow line speed is generally appropriate for evaluating 
manufacturing processes with prolonged exposure of the sterile drug product and 
containers/closures in the aseptic area. 
 
6. 
Environmental Conditions  
 
Media fills should be adequately representative of the conditions under which actual 
manufacturing operations are conducted.  An inaccurate assessment (making the process appear 
cleaner than it actually is) can result from conducting a media fill under extraordinary air 
particulate and microbial quality, or under production controls and precautions taken in 
preparation for the media fill.  To the extent standard operating procedures permit stressful 
conditions (e.g., maximum number of personnel present and elevated activity level), it is 
important that media fills include analogous challenges to support the validity of these studies.  
Stressful conditions do not include artificially created environmental extremes, such as 
reconfiguration of HVAC systems to operate at worst-case limits. 
 
7. 
 Media  
 
In general, a microbiological growth medium, such as soybean casein digest medium, should be 
used.  Use of anaerobic growth media (e.g., fluid thioglycollate medium) should be considered in 
special circumstances.  The media selected should be demonstrated to promote growth of gram-
positive and gram-negative bacteria, and yeast and mold (e.g., USP indicator organisms).  The 
QC laboratory should determine if USP indicator organisms sufficiently represent production-
related isolates.  Environmental monitoring and sterility test isolates can be substituted (as 
appropriate) or added to the growth promotion challenge.  Growth promotion units should be 
inoculated with a <100 CFU challenge.  If the growth promotion testing fails, the origin of any 
contamination found during the simulation should nonetheless be investigated and the media fill 
promptly repeated.14  
 
The production process should be accurately simulated using media and conditions that optimize 
detection of any microbiological contamination.  Each unit should be filled with an appropriate 
quantity and type of microbial growth medium to contact the inner container closure surfaces 
(when the unit is inverted or thoroughly swirled) and permit visual detection of microbial 
growth.   
 
Some drug manufacturers have expressed concern over the possible contamination of the facility 
and equipment with nutrient media during media fill runs.  However, if the medium is handled 
properly and is promptly followed by the cleaning, sanitizing, and, where necessary, sterilization 
of equipment, subsequently processed products are not likely to be compromised.   
 
8. 
Incubation and Examination of Media-Filled Units  
 
Media units should be incubated under conditions adequate to detect microorganisms that might 
otherwise be difficult to culture.  Incubation conditions should be established in accord with the 
following general guidelines:   
 
 
14 The cause of the growth promotion failure should also be investigated. 
 
24


--- PAGE 29 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
• Incubation temperature should be suitable for recovery of bioburden and environmental 
isolates and should at no time be outside the range of 20-35oC.  Incubation temperature 
should be maintained within +2.5oC of the target temperature.   
 
• Incubation time should not be less than 14 days.  If two temperatures are used for the 
incubation of the media filled units, the units should be incubated for at least 7 days at 
each temperature (starting with the lower temperature). 
 
Each media-filled unit should be examined for contamination by personnel with appropriate 
education, training, and experience in inspecting media fill units for microbiological 
contamination.  If QC personnel do not perform the inspection, there should be QC unit 
oversight throughout any such examination.  All suspect units identified during the examination 
should be brought to the immediate attention of the QC microbiologist.  To allow for visual 
detection of microbial growth, we recommend substituting clear containers (with otherwise 
identical physical properties) for amber or other opaque containers.  If appropriate, other 
methods can also be considered to ensure visual detection.   
 
When a firm performs a final product inspection of units immediately following the media fill 
run, all integral units should proceed to incubation.  Units found to have defects not related to 
integrity (e.g., cosmetic defect) should be incubated; units that lack integrity should be rejected.  
Erroneously rejected units should be returned promptly for incubation with the media fill lot. 
 
After incubation is underway, any unit found to be damaged should be included in the data for 
the media fill run, because the units can be representative of drug product released to the market.  
Any decision to exclude such incubated units (i.e., non-integral) from the final run tally should 
be fully justified and the deviation explained in the media fill report.  If a correlation emerges 
between difficult to detect damage and microbial contamination, a thorough investigation should 
be conducted to determine its cause (see Section VI.B).  
 
Written procedures regarding aseptic interventions should be clear and specific (e.g., intervention 
type; quantity of units removed), providing for consistent production practices and assessment of 
these practices during media fills.  If written procedures and batch documentation are adequate to 
describe an associated clearance, the intervention units removed during media fills do not need to 
be incubated.15  Where procedures lack specificity, there would be insufficient justification for 
exclusion of units removed during an intervention from incubation.  For example, if a production 
procedure requires removal of 10 units after an intervention at the stoppering station infeed, 
batch records (i.e., for production and media fills) should clearly document conformance with 
this procedure.  In no case should more units be removed during a media fill intervention than 
would be cleared during a production run. 
 
The ability of a media fill run to detect potential contamination from a given simulated activity 
should not be compromised by a large-scale line clearance.  We recommend incorporating 
                                                 
15 To assess contamination risks during initial aseptic setup (before fill), valuable information can be obtained by 
incubating all such units that may be normally removed.  These units are typically incubated separately, and would 
not necessarily be included in the acceptance criteria for the media fill. 
 
 
25


--- PAGE 30 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
appropriate study provisions to avoid and address a large line clearance that results in the 
removal of a unit possibly contaminated during an unrelated event or intervention. 
 
Appropriate criteria should be established for yield16 and accountability (reconciliation of filled 
units).  Media fill record reconciliation documentation should include a full accounting and 
description of units rejected from a batch. 
 
9. 
Interpretation of Test Results   
 
The process simulation run should be observed by the QC Unit, and contaminated units should 
be reconcilable with the approximate time and the activity being simulated during the media fill.  
Video recording of a media fill may serve as a useful aide in identifying personnel practices that 
could negatively affect the aseptic process. 
 
Any contaminated unit should be considered objectionable and investigated.  The 
microorganisms should be identified to species level.  The investigation should survey the 
possible causes of contamination.  In addition, any failure investigation should assess the impact 
on commercial drugs produced on the line since the last media fill.  
 
Whenever contamination exists in a media fill run, it should be considered indicative of a 
potential sterility assurance problem, regardless of run size.  The number of contaminated units 
should not be expected to increase in a directly proportional manner with the number of vials in 
the media fill run.  Test results should reliably and reproducibly show that the units produced by 
an aseptic processing operation are sterile.  Modern aseptic processing operations in suitably 
designed facilities have demonstrated a capability of meeting contamination levels approaching 
zero (Ref. 8, 9) and should normally yield no media fill contamination.  Recommended criteria 
for assessing state of aseptic line control are as follows: 
 
• When filling fewer than 5000 units, no contaminated units should be detected. 
-- One (1) contaminated unit is considered cause for revalidation, following an 
investigation. 
 
• When filling from 5,000 to 10,000 units: 
-- One (1) contaminated unit should result in an investigation, including consideration of 
a repeat media fill. 
-- Two (2) contaminated units are considered cause for revalidation, following 
investigation. 
 
• When filling more than 10,000 units:  
-- One (1) contaminated unit should result in an investigation. 
-- Two (2) contaminated units are considered cause for revalidation, following 
investigation.  
 
For any run size, intermittent incidents of microbial contamination in media filled runs can be 
indicative of a persistent low-level contamination problem that should be investigated.  
 
16Total units incubated/total number of units filled. 
 
26


--- PAGE 31 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
Accordingly, recurring incidents of contaminated units in media fills for an individual line, 
regardless of acceptance criteria, would be a signal of an adverse trend on the aseptic processing 
line that should lead to problem identification, correction, and revalidation.   
 
A firm's use of media fill acceptance criteria allowing infrequent contamination does not mean 
that a distributed lot of drug product purporting to be sterile may contain a nonsterile unit.  The 
purpose of an aseptic process is to prevent any contamination.  A manufacturer is fully liable for 
the shipment of any nonsterile unit, an act that is prohibited under the FD&C Act (Section 301(a) 
21 U.S.C. 331(a)).  FDA also recognizes that there might be some scientific and technical 
limitations on how precisely and accurately process simulations can characterize a system of 
controls intended to exclude contamination. 
 
As with any process validation run, it is important to note that invalidation of a media fill run 
should be a rare occurrence.  A media fill run should be aborted only under circumstances in 
which written procedures require commercial lots to be equally handled.  Supporting 
documentation and justification should be provided in such cases.  
 
B.  
Filtration Efficacy  
 
Filtration is a common method of sterilizing drug product solutions.  A sterilizing grade filter 
should be validated to reproducibly remove viable microorganisms from the process stream, 
producing a sterile effluent.17  Currently, such filters usually have a rated pore size of 0.2 µm or 
smaller.18  Use of redundant sterilizing filters should be considered in many cases.  Whatever 
filter or combination of filters is used, validation should include microbiological challenges to 
simulate worst-case production conditions for the material to be filtered and integrity test results 
of the filters used for the study.  Product bioburden should be evaluated when selecting a suitable 
challenge microorganism to assess which microorganism represents the worst-case challenge to 
the filter.  The microorganism Brevundimonas diminuta (ATCC 19146) when properly grown, 
harvested and used, is a common challenge microorganism for 0.2 µm rated filters because of its 
small size (0.3 µm mean diameter).  The manufacturing process controls should be designed to 
minimize the bioburden of the unfiltered product.  Bioburden of unsterilized bulk solutions 
should be determined to trend the characteristics of potentially contaminating organisms.   
 
In certain cases, when justified as equivalent or better than use of B. diminuta, it may be 
appropriate to conduct bacterial retention studies with a bioburden isolate.  The number of 
microorganisms in the challenge is important because a filter can contain a number of pores 
larger than the nominal rating, which has the potential to allow passage of microorganisms.  The 
probability of such passage is considered to increase as the number of organisms (bioburden) in 
the material to be filtered increases.  A challenge concentration of at least 107 organisms per cm2 
of effective filtration area should generally be used, resulting in no passage of the challenge 
microorganism.  The challenge concentration used for validation is intended to provide a margin 
of safety well beyond what would be expected in production. 
 
 
17 This document does not address virus removal. 
 
18 0.22µ and 0.2µ are considered interchangeable nominal pore size ratings. 
 
27


--- PAGE 32 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
Direct inoculation into the drug formulation is the preferred method because it provides an 
assessment of the effect of drug product on the filter matrix and on the challenge organism.  
However, directly inoculating B. diminuta into products with inherent bactericidal activity 
against this microbe, or into oil-based formulations, can lead to erroneous conclusions.  When 
sufficiently justified, the effects of the product formulation on the membrane's integrity can be 
assessed using an appropriate alternate method.  For example, a drug product could be filtered in 
a manner in which the worst-case combination of process specifications and conditions are 
simulated.  This step could be followed by filtration of the challenge organism for a significant 
period of time, under the same conditions, using an appropriately modified product (e.g., lacking 
an antimicrobial preservative or other antimicrobial component) as the vehicle.  Any divergence 
from a simulation using the actual product and conditions of processing should be justified.   
 
Factors that can affect filter performance generally include (1) viscosity and surface tension of 
the material to be filtered, (2) pH, (3) compatibility of the material or formulation components 
with the filter itself, (4) pressures, (5) flow rates, (6) maximum use time, (7) temperature, (8) 
osmolality, (9) and the effects of hydraulic shock.  When designing the validation protocol, it is 
important to address the effect of the extremes of processing factors on the filter capability to 
produce sterile effluent.  Filter validation should be conducted using the worst-case conditions, 
such as maximum filter use time and pressure (Ref. 12).  Filter validation experiments, including 
microbial challenges, need not be conducted in the actual manufacturing areas.  However, it is 
essential that laboratory experiments simulate actual production conditions.  The specific type of 
filter membrane used in commercial production should be evaluated in filter validation studies.  
There are advantages to using production filters in these bacterial retention validation studies.  
When the more complex filter validation tests go beyond the capabilities of the filter user, tests 
are often conducted by outside laboratories or by filter manufacturers.  However, it is the 
responsibility of the filter user to review the validation data on the efficacy of the filter in 
producing a sterile effluent.  The data should be applicable to the user's products and conditions 
of use because filter performance may differ significantly for various conditions and products. 
 
After a filtration process is properly validated for a given product, process, and filter, it is 
important to ensure that identical filters (e.g., of identical polymer construction and pore size 
rating) are used in production runs.  Sterilizing filters should be routinely discarded after 
processing of a single lot.  However, in those instances when repeated use can be justified, the 
sterile filter validation should incorporate the maximum number of lots to be processed.  
Integrity testing of the filter(s) can be performed prior to processing, and should be routinely 
performed post-use.   It is important that integrity testing be conducted after filtration to detect 
any filter leaks or perforations that might have occurred during the filtration.  Forward flow and 
bubble point tests, when appropriately employed, are two integrity tests that can be used.  A 
production filter’s integrity test specification should be consistent with data generated during 
bacterial retention validation studies. 
 
C.  
Sterilization of Equipment, Containers, and Closures 
 
Equipment surfaces that contact sterilized drug product or its sterilized containers or closures 
must be sterile so as not to alter purity of the drug (211.67 and 211.113).  Where reasonable 
contamination potential exists, surfaces that are in the vicinity of the sterile product should also 
be rendered free of viable organisms.  It is as important in aseptic processing to validate the 
 
28


--- PAGE 33 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
processes used to sterilize such critical equipment as it is to validate processes used to sterilize 
the drug product and its container and closure.  Moist heat and dry heat sterilization, the most 
widely used, are the primary processes discussed in this document.  However, many of the heat 
sterilization principles discussed in this guidance are also applicable to other sterilization 
methods.   
 
Sterility of aseptic processing equipment should normally be maintained by sterilization between 
each batch.19  Following sterilization, transportation and assembly of equipment, containers, and 
closures should be performed with strict adherence to aseptic methods in a manner that protects 
and sustains the product's sterile state. 
 
1. 
Qualification and Validation 
 
Validation studies should be conducted to demonstrate the efficacy of the sterilization cycle.  
Requalification studies should also be performed on a periodic basis.  The specific load 
configurations, as well as biological indicator and temperature sensor locations, should be 
documented in validation records.  Batch production records should subsequently document 
adherence to the validated load patterns. 
 
It is important to remove air from the autoclave chamber as part of a steam sterilization cycle.  
The insulating properties of air interfere with the ability of steam to transfer its energy to the 
load, achieving lower lethality than associated with saturated steam.  It also should be noted that 
the resistance of microorganisms can vary widely depending on the material to be sterilized.  For 
this reason, careful consideration should be given during sterilization validation to the nature or 
type of material chosen as the carrier of the biological indicator to ensure an appropriately 
representative study. 
 
Potentially difficult to reach locations within the sterilizer load or equipment train (for SIP 
applications) should be evaluated.  For example, filter installations in piping can cause a 
substantial pressure differential across the filter, resulting in a significant temperature drop on the 
downstream side.  We recommend placing biological indicators at appropriate downstream 
locations of the filter.  
 
Empty chamber studies evaluate numerous locations throughout a sterilizing unit (e.g., steam 
autoclave, dry heat oven) or equipment train (e.g., large tanks, immobile piping) to confirm 
uniformity of conditions (e.g., temperature, pressure).  These uniformity or mapping studies 
should be conducted with calibrated measurement devices. 
 
Heat penetration studies should be performed using the established sterilizer loads.  Validation of 
the sterilization process with a loaded chamber demonstrates the effects of loading on thermal 
input to the items being sterilized and may identify difficult to heat or penetrate items where 
there could be insufficient lethality to attain sterility.  The placement of biological indicators at 
numerous positions in the load, including the most difficult to sterilize places, is a direct means 
of confirming the efficacy of any sterilization procedure.  In general, the biological indicator 
should be placed adjacent to the temperature sensor so as to assess the correlation between 
microbial lethality and predicted lethality based on thermal input.  When determining which 
 
19 If appropriate, alternate intervals can be defined, justified, and supported by validation studies. 
 
29


--- PAGE 34 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
articles are difficult to sterilize, special attention should be given to the sterilization of filters, 
filling manifolds, and pumps.  Some other examples include certain locations of tightly wrapped 
or densely packed supplies, securely fastened load articles, lengthy tubing, the sterile filter 
apparatus, hydrophobic filters, and stopper load. 
 
Ultimately, cycle specifications for such sterilization methods should be based on the delivery of 
adequate lethality to the slowest to heat locations.  A sterility assurance level of 10-6 or better 
should be demonstrated for a sterilization process.  For more information, please also refer to the 
FDA guidance entitled Guideline for the Submission of Documentation for Sterilization Process 
Validation in Applications for Human and Veterinary Drug Products.  
 
The sterilizer validation program should continue to focus on the load areas identified as most 
difficult to penetrate or heat.  The suitability of the sterilizer should be established by 
qualification, maintenance, change control, and periodic verification of the cycle, including 
biological challenges.  Change control procedures should adequately address issues such as a 
load configuration change or a modification of a sterilizer. 
 
2. 
Equipment Controls and Instrument Calibration  
 
For both validation and routine process control, the reliability of the data generated by 
sterilization cycle monitoring devices should be considered to be of the utmost importance.  
Devices that measure cycle parameters should be routinely calibrated.  Written procedures 
should be established to ensure that these devices are maintained in a calibrated state.  For 
example, we recommend that procedures address the following:  
 
• Temperature and pressure monitoring devices for heat sterilization should be 
calibrated at suitable intervals.  The sensing devices used for validation studies should 
be calibrated before and after validation runs. 
• Devices used to monitor dwell time in the sterilizer should be periodically calibrated. 
• The microbial count of a biological indicator should be confirmed. Biological 
indicators should be stored under appropriate conditions.   
• If the reliability of a vendor’s Certificate of Analysis is established through an 
appropriate qualification program, the D-value of a biological indicator (e.g., spore 
strips, glass ampuls) can be accepted in lieu of confirmatory testing of each lot.  
However, a determination of resistance (D-value) should be performed for any 
biological indicator inoculated onto a substrate, or used in a way that is other than 
described by the vendor.  D-value determinations can be conducted by an 
independent laboratory.   
• Where applicable, instruments used to determine the purity of steam should be 
calibrated. 
• For dry heat depyrogenation tunnels, devices (e.g. sensors and transmitters) used to 
measure belt speed should be routinely calibrated.  Bacterial endotoxin challenges 
should be appropriately prepared and measured by the laboratory. 
 
To ensure robust process control, equipment should be properly designed with attention to 
features such as accessibility to sterilant, piping slope, and proper condensate removal (as 
applicable).  Equipment control should be ensured through placement of measuring devices at 
 
30


--- PAGE 35 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
those control points that are most likely to rapidly detect unexpected process variability.  Where 
manual manipulations of valves are required for sterilizer or SIP operations, these steps should 
be documented in manufacturing procedures and batch records.  Sterilizing equipment should be 
properly maintained to allow for consistent, satisfactory function.  Routine evaluation of 
sterilizer performance-indicating attributes, such as equilibrium (come up) time is important in 
assuring that the unit continues to operate as per the validated conditions. 
 
 
X. 
