STERILITY TESTING 
 
 
21 CFR 210.3(b)(21) states that “Representative sample means a sample that consists of a number of units that are drawn 
based on rational criteria such as random sampling and intended to assure that the sample accurately portrays the material 
being sampled.”   
 
21 CFR 211.110(a) states, in part, that “To assure batch uniformity and integrity of drug products, written procedures shall 
be established and followed that describe the in-process controls, and tests, or examinations to be conducted on appropriate 
samples of in-process materials of each batch.  Such control procedures shall be established to monitor the output and to 
validate the performance of those manufacturing processes that may be responsible for causing variability in the 
characteristics of in-process material and the drug product.” 
 
21 CFR 211.160(b) states that “Laboratory controls shall include the establishment of scientifically sound and appropriate 
specifications, standards, sampling plans, and test procedures designed to assure that components, drug product containers, 
closures, in-process materials, labeling, and drug products conform to appropriate standards of identity, strength, quality, 
and purity.  Laboratory controls shall include: (1) Determination of conformance to appropriate written specifications for 
the acceptance of each lot within each shipment of components, drug product containers, closures, and labeling used in the 
manufacture, processing, packing, or holding of drug products.  The specifications shall include a description of the 
sampling and testing procedures used.  Samples shall be representative and adequately identified.  Such procedures shall 
also require appropriate retesting of any component, drug product container, or closure that is subject to deterioration.  (2) 
Determination of conformance to written specifications and a description of sampling and testing procedures for in-process 
materials.  Such samples shall be representative and properly identified. (3) Determination of conformance to written 
descriptions of sampling procedures and appropriate specifications for drug products. Such samples shall be representative 
and properly identified.  (4) The calibration of instruments, apparatus, gauges, and recording devices at suitable intervals 
in accordance with an established written program containing specific directions, schedules, limits for accuracy and 
precision, and provisions for remedial action in the event accuracy and/or precision limits are not met.  Instruments, 
apparatus, gauges, and recording devices not meeting established specifications shall not be used.”  
 
21 CFR 211.165(a) states, in part, that “For each batch of drug product, there shall be appropriate laboratory determination 
of satisfactory conformance to final specifications for the drug product, including the identity and strength of each active 
ingredient, prior to release * * *.”  
 
21 CFR 211.165(e) states that “The accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility of test methods employed by the 
firm shall be established and documented.  Such validation and documentation may be accomplished in accordance with  § 
211.194(a)(2).” 
 
21 CFR 211.167(a) states that “For each batch of drug product purporting to be sterile and/or pyrogen-free, there shall be 
appropriate laboratory testing to determine conformance to such requirements.  The test procedures shall be in writing and 
shall be followed.” 
 
21 CFR 211.180(e) states, in part, that “Written records required by this part shall be maintained so that data therein can be 
used for evaluating, at least annually, the quality standards of each drug product to determine the need for changes in drug 
product specifications or manufacturing or control procedures * * *.” 
 
21 CFR 211.192 states that “All drug product production and control records, including those for packaging and labeling, 
shall be reviewed and approved by the quality control unit to determine compliance with all established, approved written 
procedures before a batch is released or distributed.  Any unexplained discrepancy (including a percentage of theoretical 
yield exceeding the maximum or minimum percentages established in master production and control records) or the failure 
of a batch or any of its components to meet any of its specifications shall be thoroughly investigated, whether or not the 
batch has already been distributed.  The investigation shall extend to other batches of the same drug product and other drug 
products that may have been associated with the specific failure or discrepancy.  A written record of the investigation shall 
be made and shall include the conclusions and followup.” 
 
 
37


--- PAGE 42 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
                                                
 
Certain aspects of sterility testing are of particular importance, including control of the testing 
environment, understanding the test limitations, and investigating manufacturing systems 
following a positive test. 
 
The testing laboratory environment should employ facilities and controls comparable to those 
used for aseptic filling operations.  Poor or deficient sterility test facilities or controls can result 
in test failure.  If production facilities and controls are significantly better than those for sterility 
testing, the danger exists of mistakenly attributing a positive sterility test result to a faulty 
laboratory even when the product tested could have, in fact, been nonsterile.  Therefore, a 
manufacturing deficiency may go undetected.  The use of isolators for sterility testing minimizes 
the chance of a false positive test result. 
 
A.  
Microbiological Laboratory Controls  
 
Sterility testing methods are required to be accurate and reproducible, in accordance with 
211.194 and 211.165.  USP <71> “Sterility Tests” is the principal source used for sterility 
testing methods, including information on test procedures and media.21   
 
As a part of methods validation, appropriate microbiological challenge testing will demonstrate 
reproducibility of the method to reliably recover representative microorganisms.  If growth is 
inhibited, modifications (e.g., increased dilution, additional membrane filter washes, addition of 
inactivating agents) to the test method should be implemented to optimize recovery.  Ultimately, 
methods validation studies should demonstrate that the method does not provide an opportunity 
for false negatives.   
 
It is essential that the media used to perform sterility testing be rendered sterile and demonstrated 
as growth promoting.  Personnel performing sterility testing should be qualified and trained for 
the task.  A written program should be in place to maintain updated training of personnel and 
confirm acceptable sterility testing practices.  
 
B.  
Sampling and Incubation 
 
Sterility tests are limited in their ability to detect contamination because of the small sample size 
typically used.  For example, as described by USP, statistical evaluations indicate that the 
sterility test sampling plan "only enables the detection of contamination in a lot in which 10% of 
the units are contaminated about nine times out of ten in making the test" (Ref. 13).  To further 
illustrate, if a 10,000-unit lot with a 0.1 percent contamination level was sterility tested using 20 
units, there is a 98 percent chance that the batch would pass the test.   
 
It is important that the samples represent the entire batch and processing conditions.  Samples 
should be taken: 
 
• at the beginning, middle, and end of the aseptic processing operation 
• in conjunction with processing interventions or excursions 
 
. 
 
38


--- PAGE 43 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
 
Because of the limited sensitivity of the test, any positive result is considered a serious CGMP 
issue that should be thoroughly investigated.  
 
C.  
Investigation of Sterility Positives 
 
Care should be taken in the performance of the sterility test to preclude any activity that allows 
for possible sample contamination.  When microbial growth is observed, the lot should be 
considered nonsterile and an investigation conducted.  An initial positive test would be invalid 
only in an instance in which microbial growth can be unequivocally ascribed to laboratory error.  
 
Only if conclusive and documented evidence clearly shows that the contamination occurred as 
part of testing should a new test be performed.  When available evidence is inconclusive, batches 
should be rejected as not conforming to sterility requirements. 
 
After considering all relevant factors concerning the manufacture of the product and testing of 
the samples, the comprehensive written investigation should include specific conclusions and 
identify corrective actions.  The investigation's persuasive evidence of the origin of the 
contamination should be based on at least the following: 
 
1. Identification (speciation) of the organism in the sterility test   
 
Sterility test isolates should be identified to the species level.  Microbiological monitoring data 
should be reviewed to determine if the organism is also found in laboratory and production 
environments, personnel, or product bioburden.  Advanced identification methods (e.g., nucleic-
acid based) are valuable for investigational purposes.  When comparing results from 
environmental monitoring and sterility positives, both identifications should be performed using 
the same methodology. 
 
2. Record of laboratory tests and deviations 
 
Review of laboratory deviation and investigation findings can help to eliminate or implicate the 
laboratory as the source of contamination.  For example, if the organism is seldom found in the 
laboratory environment, product contamination is more likely than laboratory error.  If the 
organism is found in laboratory and production environments, it can still indicate product 
contamination. 
 
The proper handling of deviations is an essential aspect of laboratory control.  When a deviation 
occurs during sterility testing, it should be documented, investigated, and remedied.  If any 
deviation is considered to have compromised the integrity of the sterility test, the test should be 
invalidated immediately without incubation.   
 
A sterility positive result can be viewed as indicative of production or laboratory problems, and 
the entire manufacturing process should be comprehensively investigated since such problems 
often can extend beyond a single batch.  To more accurately monitor potential contamination 
sources, we recommend keeping separate trends by appropriate categories such as product, 
container type, filling line, sampling, and testing personnel.  Where the degree of sterility test 
 
39


--- PAGE 44 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
sample manipulation is similar for a terminally sterilized product and an aseptically processed 
product, a higher rate of initial sterility failures for the latter should be taken as indicative of 
aseptic processing production problems.  
 
Microbial monitoring of the aseptic area of the laboratory and personnel can also reveal trends 
that are informative.  Upward trends in the microbial load in the aseptic area of the laboratory 
should be promptly investigated as to cause, and corrected.  In some instances, such trends can 
appear to be more indicative of laboratory error as a possible source of a sterility test failure.   
 
Where a laboratory has a good track record with respect to errors, this history can lower 
suspicion of the lab as a source of contamination since chances are higher that the contamination 
arose from production.  However, the converse is not true.  Specifically, where a laboratory has a 
poor track record, firms should not assume that the contamination is automatically more 
attributable to the laboratory and consequently overlook a genuine production problem.  
Accordingly, it is essential that all sterility positives be thoroughly investigated. 
 
3. Monitoring of production area environment   
 
Trend analysis of microorganisms in the critical and immediately adjacent areas is especially 
helpful in determining the source of contamination in a sterility failure investigation. 
Consideration of environmental microbial data should not be limited to results of monitoring the 
production environment for the lot, day, or shift associated with the suspect lot.  For example, 
results showing little or no recovery of microorganisms can be misleading, especially when 
preceded or followed by a finding of an adverse trend or atypically high microbial counts.  It is 
therefore important to look at both short- and long-term environmental trend analyses. 
 
4. Monitoring Personnel   
 
The review of data and associated trends from daily monitoring of personnel can provide 
important information indicating a route of contamination.  The adequacy of personnel practices 
and training also merit significant review and consideration. 
 
5. Product Presterilization Bioburden  
 
We recommend review of trends in product bioburden and consideration of whether adverse 
bioburden trends have occurred.  
 
6. Production record review   
 
Complete batch and production control records should be reviewed to detect any signs of failures 
or anomalies that could have a bearing on product sterility.  For example, the investigation 
should include elements such as: 
 
• Events that could have impacted on the critical zone 
• Batch and trending data that indicate whether utility and/or support systems are 
functioning properly.  For instance, records of air quality monitoring for filling lines 
 
40


--- PAGE 45 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
could show a time at which there was improper air balance or an unusually high particle 
count.  
• Whether construction or maintenance activities could have had an adverse impact 
 
7. Manufacturing history  
 
The manufacturing history of a product or similar products should be reviewed as part of the 
investigation.  Past deviations, problems, or changes (e.g., process, components, equipment) are 
among the factors that can provide an indication of the origin of the problem.   
 
41


--- PAGE 46 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
 
XII. 
BATCH RECORD REVIEW: PROCESS CONTROL DOCUMENTATION 
 
 
 
21 CFR 211.100(a) states that “There shall be written procedures for production and process control designed to assure that 
the drug products have the identity, strength, quality, and purity they purport or are represented to possess.  Such procedures 
shall include all requirements in this subpart.  These written procedures, including any changes, shall be drafted, reviewed, 
and approved by the appropriate organizational units and reviewed and approved by the quality control unit.”  
 
21 CFR 211.100(b) states that “Written production and process control procedures shall be followed in the execution of the 
various production and process control functions and shall be documented at the time of performance.  Any deviation from 
the written procedures shall be recorded and justified.” 
 
21 CFR 211.186 and 211.188 address, respectively, "Master production and control records" and "Batch production and 
control records."  
 
21 CFR 211.192 states that “All drug product production and control records, including those for packaging and labeling, 
shall be reviewed and approved by the quality control unit to determine compliance with all established, approved written 
procedures before a batch is released or distributed.  Any unexplained discrepancy (including a percentage of theoretical 
yield exceeding the maximum or minimum percentages established in master production and control records) or the failure 
of a batch or any of its components to meet any of its specifications shall be thoroughly investigated, whether or not the 
batch has already been distributed.  The investigation shall extend to other batches of the same drug product and other drug 
products that may have been associated with the specific failure or discrepancy.  A written record of the investigation shall 
be made and shall include the conclusions and followup.” 
 
 
Manufacturers should build process and environmental control activities into their aseptic 
processing operation.  It is critical that these activities be maintained and strictly implemented on 
a daily basis.  The requirement for review of all batch records and data for conformance with 
written procedures, operating parameters, and product specifications prior to arriving at the final 
release decision for an aseptically processed product calls for an overall review of process and 
system performance for that given cycle of manufacture.  All in-process and laboratory control 
results must be included with the batch record documentation in accordance with section 
211.188.  Review of environmental and personnel monitoring data, as well as other data relating 
to acceptability of output from support systems (e.g., HEPA / HVAC, WFI, steam generator) and 
proper functioning of equipment (e.g., batch alarms report; integrity of various filters) are 
considered essential elements of the batch release decision. 
 
While interventions and/or stoppages are normally recorded in the batch record, the manner of 
documenting these occurrences varies.  In particular, line stoppages and any unplanned 
interventions should be sufficiently documented in batch records with the associated time and 
duration of the event.  In addition to lengthened dwell time of sterile product elements in the 
critical area, an extensive intervention can increase contamination risk.  Sterility failures have 
often been attributed to atypical or extensive interventions that have occurred as a response to an 
undesirable event during the aseptic process.  Written procedures describing the need for line 
clearances in the event of certain interventions, such as machine adjustments and any repairs, 
should be established.  Such interventions should be documented with more detail than minor 
events.  Interventions that result in substantial activity near exposed product or container closures 
 
42


--- PAGE 47 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
or that last beyond a reasonable exposure time should, where appropriate, result in a local or full 
line clearance. 
 
Any disruption in power supply, however momentary, that could affect product quality is a 
manufacturing deviation and must be included in batch records (211.100, 211.192). 
 
43


--- PAGE 48 ---

 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
 
